Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
C:1

ARTICLE 1
Short Title
§ C1-1. Short title.
This Charter shall be known as the "Charter of the City of Rye."
§ C1-1 CHARTER § C1-1
C:3

ARTICLE 2
Name and Boundaries
§ C2-1. Corporate name.
The inhabitants of the City of Rye, in the County of Westchester and State
of New York, within the corporate limits hereinafter described, or as may
hereinafter be established, shall continue to be a municipal corporation by
the name of the "City of Rye," hereinafter referred to as the "city."
§ C2-2. Boundaries.
The boundaries of said city shall continue as described in Section 11 of
Chapter 505 of the Laws of 1940.
§ C2-1 CHARTER § C2-2
C:5

ARTICLE 3
Powers of the City
§ C3-1. Powers of the city.
The city shall have all the powers granted to cities under the Constitution
and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were
specifically enumerated in this Charter.
§ C3-2. Construction.
The powers of the city under this Charter shall be construed liberally
in favor of the city, and the specific mention of particular powers in the
Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power
stated in this Article.
§ C3-1 CHARTER § C3-2
C:7

ARTICLE 4
City Officers
§ C4-1. City officers.
§ C4-2. Elected officers. [Amended 3-18-1981 by L.L. No. 1-1981]
There shall be a Mayor and six Councilmen, all of whom shall be elected by
the qualified voters of the city at large.
§ C4-3. Qualifications for office. [Amended 3-1-1989 by L.L. No.
3-1989]
§ C4-4. Terms of elected and appointed officers.
A. City officers under this Charter shall mean all of the elected and
appointed officers, including the members of the various boards and
commissions of the city established by law, this Charter, local law or
ordinance.
B. The provision of the law requiring a person to be a resident of the
municipality for which he shall be chosen or within which his official
functions are required to be exercised shall not apply to the
appointment of officers of the City of Rye by the City Manager, provided
that such appointed officers are residents of the County of Westchester
or an adjoining county within the State of New York. [Added
11-5-1980 by L.L. No. 8-1980]
A. No person shall be eligible to hold an elective office in the city unless at
the time of his election he is qualified to vote therein and shall have
resided in the city for at least one year prior to his or her election.
B. Such elective office shall be vacant if and when the incumbent ceases to
continue to qualify pursuant to the above provision.
A. The terms of office of the Mayor, Councilmen, City Judge and Acting
City Judge shall be four years. [Amended 3-18-1981 by L.L. No.
1-1981]
B. All officers appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council
may be removed from office for cause by the Mayor after a public
hearing, subject to the approval of the Council, except as otherwise
provided by law or this Charter.
C. All officers and employees appointed by the City Manager shall hold
office as provided herein.
D. The term of office of each elected officer shall commence on the first
day of January next succeeding his election; and the term of office of
each appointed officer shall commence on the date specified by the
appointing authority.
§ C4-1 CHARTER § C4-5
C:9
§ C4-5. Vacancies.
§ C4-6. Compensation of city officers and employees.
The Mayor and other members of the Council shall serve without
compensation. If a local law should provide that compensation be paid to
the Mayor or other members of the Council, or that such compensation be
increased or that this provision be amended or repealed, it shall be subject
to a mandatory referendum. All members of boards and commissions shall
serve without compensation, but such members and the members of the
Council shall be reimbursed for the actual and necessary expenses incurred
by them in the performance of their duties. Unless the compensation of
officers and employees is otherwise fixed by law, the Council shall fix
the salaries or compensation of all paid officers of the city appointed by
the Mayor or the Council; and the City Manager shall, within budgetary
limitations, fix the salaries or compensation of all other city officers and
employees.
A. If a vacancy shall occur in the office of Mayor or Councilman, the
Council shall, by a vote of a majority of the members of the Council
remaining in office, appoint a person to fill such vacancy. The person
appointed to fill such vacancy shall hold office by virtue of such
appointment until the first day of January following the first general
election after the happening of the vacancy. A vacancy occurring before
September 20 of any year in any elective office of the city shall be filled
at the general election held next thereafter, unless otherwise provided
by law, or unless previously filled at a special election. [Amended
3-18-1981 by L.L. No. 1-1981]
B. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of the term in an
appointive office having a term, it shall be filled by appointment for the
unexpired term.
§ C4-5 RYE CODE § C4-6
C:10
ARTICLE 5
Elections
§ C5-1. Qualifications for voters.
Every resident of the city who shall at the time and place of offering his
vote be qualified to vote for a member of the Assembly shall be entitled to
vote for all elective offices of the city in the district where he shall be so
qualified.
§ C5-2. City elections.
The city elections shall be held at the general elections in the odd-numbered
years as the terms of present officers and their successors expire, except
when vacancies occur as provided in § C4-5 herein. Such elections shall be
governed by the Election Law.
§ C5-3. Special elections.
Except as otherwise provided by law, whenever the Council shall call a
special election, it shall adopt a resolution at least 60 days before such
election, designating the date of election, the hours of opening and closing
the polls and the place or places of holding the election, and setting forth
the proposition or propositions to be voted upon. Each such election shall
be conducted in the manner prescribed for general elections, except as
otherwise provided by the Council.
§ C5-4. Bond referenda.
A. Qualified voters at a mandatory or permissive referendum on a bond
resolution shall be those who are qualified to vote for elective offices of
the city and who are the owners of real property in the city assessed to
such owners on the last preceding assessment roll of the city.
B. A bond resolution subject to a mandatory referendum shall be governed
by the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law.
C. A bond resolution subject to a permissive referendum shall not take
effect until at least 45 days after its adoption; nor until approved by the
affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified voters described in
Subsection A herein voting on a proposition for its approval if within 45
days after its adoption, there be filed with the City Clerk a petition
protesting against such bond resolution, signed and authenticated as
required under the Election Law, by the qualified voters of the city,
registered to vote therein at the last preceding general election, in
number equal to at least 10% of the total number of votes cast for
Governor at the last gubernatorial election in the city. If such petition
be so filed, a proposition for the approval of such bond resolution shall
be submitted at the next general election held not less than 60 days
after filing such petition, unless the petition requests and the Council
§ C5-1 CHARTER § C5-4
C:11
adopts a resolution submitting such proposition at a special election
held not less than 60 days after the adoption of the resolution.
D. Notice of a referendum shall be published in the official newspaper
once a week for two weeks preceding the date of the referendum and
shall set forth the proposition and the purpose of the proposed bond
issue.
§ C5-4 RYE CODE § C5-4
C:12
ARTICLE 6
Council
§ C6-1. Composition.
The Mayor and the Councilmen of the city shall constitute the Council
thereof and the Mayor shall be a member of the Council and a Councilman
for all the purposes of this Charter.
§ C6-2. Powers and duties. [Amended 7-15-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981;
7-9-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
A. The legislative power of the City and the determination of all matter of
policy shall be vested in the Council.
B. It shall be the duty of the Council to require that all City officers
faithfully perform their duties, maintain peace and good order within
the City, and cause the laws, local laws and ordinances to be enforced
within the City.
C. The Council shall appoint the City Manager as hereinafter provided and
shall appoint a Corporation Counsel or hire an attorney as an
independent contractor. Such Counsel or attorney shall be engaged in
the practice of law in this state for at least five years immediately
preceding his appointment or hiring. The Council shall also have
approval authority over the appointment of the Police Commissioner.
[Amended 10-9-2014 by L.L. No. 6-2014]
D. The Council shall supervise the work of the boards, commissions and
officers appointed by the Council or the Mayor with the approval of the
Council and such boards, commissions and officers shall be responsible
directly to the Council.
E. The Council may require any officer or employee to render to it a
verified account of all moneys received or disbursed by him and to
appear and submit to an examination under oath by the Council or any
committee thereof as to any matter in connection with his official
duties. A willful refusal or neglect to obey any such order shall be
deemed sufficient cause for a fine not to exceed $100, suspension
without pay for a period not exceeding two months or removal from
office or employment.
F. The Council shall award all contracts for public work and all purchase
contracts, requiring competitive bidding under the General Municipal
Law.
G. The Council shall have the authority at all times to examine the books,
papers and accounts of any board, commission, department, office or
agency of the City.
§ C6-1 CHARTER § C6-3
C:13
§ C6-3. Investigations.
The Council may make investigations into the affairs of the city and the
conduct of any board, commission, department, office or agency thereof and
for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony
and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to
obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the Council
shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not more than $100,
or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both, and such offense
shall constitute sufficient cause for suspension without pay for a period not
exceeding two months or removal from office or employment.
§ C6-4. Independent audit.
The Council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all city
accounts by a certified public accountant who has no personal interest,
direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or any of its
officers, and may provide for more frequent audits as it deems necessary.
§ C6-5. Absences of Councilman.
The Council may declare the office of any member of the Council to be
vacant if he absents himself from regularly scheduled meetings for three
months or more, but no vacancy shall be declared except by the vote of at
least five members of the Council after the delinquent member has been
heard or failed to appear on notice.
§ C6-6. Prohibitions.
§ C6-7. Procedures. [Amended 9-15-1971 by L.L. No. 3-1971;
10-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
A. Except where authorized by law, no member of the Council shall hold
the office of City Manager or any other paid city office or employment
during the term for which he was elected.
B. Except for the purposes of an official inquiry, the Council and its
members and committees shall deal with the administrative
departments and services of the city for which the City Manager is
responsible solely through the Manager, and neither the Council nor
any member or committee thereof shall give orders to, or require action
by or information from, any subordinate of the City Manager either
publicly or privately.
A. The Council shall meet at the City Hall or at such other place in the city
as the Mayor may designate at any time within the first two (2) weeks of
January in each year, and at such other times as hereinafter provided.
The Council shall hold stated meetings at least twice a month, except
that for the months of June through September only one (1) stated
meeting per month need be held. The Mayor, or any two (2)
§ C6-3 RYE CODE § C6-7
C:14
Councilmen, may call special meetings by giving at least a twenty-fourhour
written notice thereof.
B. Meetings of the Council shall be public, except when public interest
requires otherwise, but votes shall only be taken in public session. Its
records shall be open to public inspection.
C. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings, but shall have no power of
veto. Four (4) members of the Council shall constitute a quorum to do
business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and
compel the attendance of absent members. Each member present,
including the Mayor, shall have only one (1) vote. The Mayor must vote
when the votes of the other members are tied. The Deputy Mayor shall
preside at all meetings when the Mayor is absent and, in such case,
shall vote as Mayor but not as Councilman.
D. The adoption of local laws shall be governed by the provisions of the
Municipal Home Rule Law. Notice of public hearings on local laws shall
be given by publication once in the official newspaper at least five (5)
days prior to such hearing.
E. The passage of an ordinance shall require the affirmative vote of at
least four (4) members of the Council, except as otherwise provided by
law, and such vote shall be taken by roll call. No ordinance shall be
adopted on the same day it is introduced, except in an emergency. Any
ordinance imposing a penalty or forfeiture for the violation thereof shall
require a public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be given by
publication once in the official newspaper at least five (5) days prior to
such hearing, and such ordinance shall, before taking effect, be
published at least once in the official newspaper, except as hereinafter
provided. In the event of a situation requiring immediate operation of
such ordinance imposing a penalty or forfeiture for the violation
thereof, it shall take effect as soon as proclaimed by the Mayor and
posted in five (5) public places in the city. The City Clerk shall keep a
record of each ordinance, which record shall include his attestation
and, when published, a certificate of such publication. Such record or a
certified copy thereof shall be presumptive evidence of the proper
passage of the ordinance.
F. The Council shall, by resolution, designate a newspaper circulated
regularly at least once a week in the city as the official newspaper of the
city.
G. The Council may prescribe rules to govern its proceedings.
§ C6-7 CHARTER § C6-7
C:15

ARTICLE 7
Mayor
§ C7-1. Mayor.
In addition to other powers and duties provided by law, this Charter or local
law, the Mayor shall have the following powers and duties:
§ C7-2. Deputy Mayor. [Amended 10-19-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
A. He shall be the head of the city government, except as otherwise
provided herein.
B. He shall, with the approval of the Council, appoint a City Judge and an
Acting City Judge, each of whom shall have engaged in the practice of
law in this state for at least five (5) years immediately preceding his
appointment. [Amended 3-18-1981 by L.L. No. 1-1981; 7-15-1981
by L.L. No. 4-1981]
C. He shall, with respect to each board and commission appointed by him
with or without approval of the Council, designate a member thereof to
act as Chairman, except as otherwise provided by law.
D. He shall have the power to remove any member of a board commission
appointed by him without Council approval, with or without cause.
E. He may address the Council at its annual meeting in January and at
such other times as he may deem appropriate, with respect to the needs
and resources of the city government, including such programs and
proposals as he may wish to recommend.
F. He, or some other officer designated by him, shall execute on behalf of
the city all deeds, contracts and other documents to be executed as the
act of the city, except as otherwise provided by law or the Council.
G. He shall have the authority at all times to examine the books, papers
and accounts of any board, commission, department, office or agency of
the city; he may administer oaths to witnesses; and he may issue
subpoenas to compel the appearance of witnesses and the production of
books, papers and other evidence.
H. In time of riot, public danger or emergency, the Mayor may declare a
state of emergency and shall take command of the police, maintain
order and enforce the law, and notwithstanding any delegation of
powers pursuant to this Charter or otherwise, assume full executive
direction and control of the affairs of the city until he declares such
state of emergency has terminated.
A. On or before the tenth day of January following his election, and within
ten (10) days after any vacancy in the office of Deputy Mayor shall
occur, the Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Deputy
§ C7-1 CHARTER § C7-2
C:17
Mayor, to hold office as long as he remains such member and at the
pleasure of the Mayor.
B. The Deputy Mayor shall serve as Mayor during the absence or disability
of the Mayor, except that said Deputy Mayor shall not exercise any
powers of appointment or removal from office unless such absence or
disability shall have continued for a period of more than sixty (60) days.
C. In the event of the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Deputy
Mayor, or in the event that the Mayor shall fail to appoint a Deputy
Mayor or fill a vacancy in the office of Deputy Mayor within the time
provided for herein, the Council shall appoint one of its members
Deputy Mayor, to hold office at the pleasure of the Council and until
either the Mayor or the Mayor's appointee as Deputy Mayor shall
resume the duties of his office, respectively, or the Mayor shall appoint
a Deputy Mayor, as the case may be.
§ C7-2 RYE CODE § C7-2
C:18
ARTICLE 8
City Manager
§ C8-1. Appointment; qualifications. [Amended 7-16-2003 by L.L.
No. 3-20031]
§ C8-2. Powers and duties of City Manager.
A. The Council shall appoint a City Manager for an indefinite term on the
basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications. He/she
need not be a resident of the city at the time of his/her appointment, but
shall be a resident of the County of Westchester during his/her tenure of
office.
B. Purpose. The City Council finds that due to the relatively small
population of the City of Rye, it is not always possible to fill certain
appointive offices in city government requiring municipal,
administrative or financial expertise with city residents who are fully
qualified to hold such positions. The Council further finds that pursuant
to Section 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law it is authorized to
appoint qualified residents of Westchester County outside of the city to
hold the office of City Manager when a qualified person who is a city
resident is unavailable.
A. The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. He
shall be responsible to the Council for the administration of all city
affairs placed in his charge.
B. Subject to Article 12, § C12-1A, he shall appoint a City Comptroller, City
Clerk, City Engineer, City Assessor, Building Inspector, City Marshal,
Registrar of Vital Statistics and the heads of such other departments as
may hereafter be created by the Council. All such officers shall in the
performance of their duties be subject to the directions and supervision
of the City Manager. Except for the Police Department, he may also
appoint all subordinates in the departments headed by such officers, or
he may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his
direction and supervision to exercise such power, subject to his
approval, with respect to subordinates in that officer's department,
office or agency. [Amended 9-17-1980 by L.L. No. 7-1980;
10-14-1981 by L.L. No. 6-1981; 10-9-2014 by L.L. No. 6-2014]
C. Subject to Article 12, § C12-1A, he shall, when he deems it necessary
for the good of the service, suspend or remove any city officer or
employee whom he may appoint or employ, except as otherwise
provided by law.
(1) He may, during the absence or disability of the City Comptroller,
City Clerk, City Assessor or the head of any other office or
1. Editor's Note: This local law also provided that it would apply to all persons currently
holding the position of City Manager as well as any person hereafter appointed to fill such
office.
§ C8-1 CHARTER § C8-2
C:19
department under his direction and supervision, assume all the
powers of such office or department; and also, with the exception
of the Police Commissioner, he may designate one of the employees
in such office or department as a deputy who shall have the powers
and duties of the City Comptroller, City Clerk, City Assessor or the
head of such other office or department, as the case may be, during
the absence or disability of such officer or during a vacancy in such
office or department. With respect to the Police Commissioner, the
Manager shall obtain the consent of the Mayor and City Council.
[Amended 10-9-2014 by L.L. No. 6-2014]
D. He shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the
Council, subject to enforcement by him or officers subject to his
direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.
E. He shall, with the advice and assistance of the City Comptroller,
prepare and submit the annual tentative budget to the Council.
F. He shall submit to the Council within two months after the close of each
fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative
activities of the city.
G. He shall make such other reports as the Council may require
concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies
subject to his direction and supervision.
H. He shall keep the Council fully advised as to the financial condition and
future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the Council
concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable.
I. He may, during the absence or disability of the City Comptroller, City
Clerk, City Assessor or the head of any other office or department under
his direction and supervision, assume all the powers of such office or
department; and also, he may designate one of the employees in such
office or department as a deputy who shall have the powers and duties
of the City Comptroller, City Clerk, City Assessor or the head of such
other office or department, as the case may be, during the absence or
disability of such officer or during a vacancy in such office or
department.
J. He shall have control and supervision of the purchasing of supplies,
materials and equipment by any board, commission, department, office
or agency of the city, except where competitive bidding is required by
the General Municipal Law.
K. He may prescribe and enforce rules and regulations for the efficient
management of the city government not inconsistent with law, this
Charter or local law.
L. He may examine the books, papers and accounts of any department,
office or agency of the city under his direction and supervision as often
as he may deem proper.
§ C8-2 RYE CODE § C8-2
C:20
§ C8-3. Policy matters.
All matters involving policy shall be submitted by the City Manager to
the Council and the Manager shall not take a public position on any such
matters of policy unless and until the Council shall have approved the same.
§ C8-4. Removal.
The Council may remove the City Manager at any time as provided in this
section. At least thirty (30) days before such removal shall become effective,
the Council shall by a vote of at least four (4) members of the Council
adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for his removal and may
suspend the Manager from duty for a period not to exceed forty-five (45)
days. The Manager may reply in writing and may request a public hearing,
which shall be held not earlier than twenty (20) days nor later than thirty
(30) days after the filing of such request. After such public hearing, if one be
requested, and after full consideration, the Council may, by a vote of at least
four (4) members thereof, adopt a final resolution of removal. The Manager
shall continue to receive his salary for at least three (3) months after the
adoption of the preliminary resolution, except that where the removal is for
misconduct, his salary need not be paid during suspension and the payment
of his salary may terminate at any time after the adoption of the preliminary
resolution.
§ C8-5. Acting City Manager.
The City Manager shall designate a qualified city administrative officer to
exercise the powers and perform the duties of Manager during his absence
or disability. The Council may revoke such designation at any time and
appoint another officer of the city to serve until the Manager shall return or
his disability shall cease.
§ C8-6. Interim City Manager. [Added 1-19-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
In the event that the office of City Manager becomes vacant for any reason,
the Council shall designate a qualified city administrative officer to exercise
M. He may make, or in his discretion delegate the power to make, all
decisions on operating matters, subject always to budgetary limitations
and policy decisions of the Council.
N. He shall attend all meetings of the Council and Planning Commission
but may not vote. He shall be given notice of and may attend all
meetings of all other boards and commissions but may not vote.
O. He shall cooperate with all boards, commissions, departments and
officers not under his supervision and shall furnish such information as
they may reasonably request.
P. He shall perform such other duties as may be required by law, this
Charter or the Council.
§ C8-2 CHARTER § C8-6
C:21
the powers and perform the duties of Manager until the appointment of
a Manager has been made in accordance with the Charter. The person
designated to act as Manager in the interim shall be a resident of the
County of Westchester.
§ C8-6 RYE CODE § C8-6
C:22
ARTICLE 9
City Clerk
§ C9-1. City Clerk.
§ C9-2. Admissibility of certified copies.
Copies of all papers duly filed in the City Clerk's office and transcripts
thereof, and of the record of the proceedings of the Council, and copies of
the local laws and ordinances of the city, certified by him under the city seal,
shall be admissible in evidence in all courts and places with the same effect
that the originals would have if produced.
A. The City Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Council and keep the journal of
its proceedings.
B. He shall have custody of the city seal and affix it to such books, papers
and documents of the city as may be authorized by law or the Council.
C. He shall preserve and compile all local laws, ordinances and resolutions
of the Council and all other books, papers and documents required by
law or the Council.
D. He shall collect all fees fixed by law or the Council; sign all licenses and
permits as provided by local law or ordinance; keep a record of same;
and transmit to the comptroller each day the moneys so received.
E. Except as otherwise provided by the Council or the City Manager, he
shall attend to the publication of all matters requiring publication and
cause to be served all notices required by law, the Council or the City
Manager.
F. He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law, this
Charter, the Council or the City Manager.
§ C9-1 CHARTER § C9-2
C:23

ARTICLE 10
Department of Finance
§ C10-1. Head of Department.
There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the City
Comptroller.
§ C10-2. Powers and duties of City Comptroller.
A. The City Comptroller shall have charge of the administration of the
fiscal affairs of the city pursuant to law and the provisions of this
Charter.
B. He shall develop, maintain and enforce a uniform system of accounts
including forms, standards and procedures for all boards, commissions,
departments, officers and agencies of the city; he shall maintain the
city's bookkeeping and accounting records according to sound
accounting principles; and he shall install and maintain a payroll system
and all tax, retirement and insurance records for personnel of all
boards, commissions, departments, offices and agencies.
C. He shall require reports of receipts from each board, commission,
department, office and agency at such intervals as will most efficiently
protect the public interest.
D. He shall control all expenditures to assure that budget appropriations
are not exceeded and maintain such books and records as may be
required for the proper exercise of such budgetary control, including an
encumbrance system of budget administration. He shall review each
proposed expenditure and commitment to be made on behalf of any
board, commission, department, office or agency of the city, and make
certain that moneys have been appropriated and that an unexpended
and unencumbered balance is available to meet the same; and he shall
approve only such expenditures and commitments as conform with all
of the requirements of this Charter, the Council and administrative
regulations.
E. He shall audit before payment all bills, claims and demands against the
city, including payrolls, and shall require each board, commission,
department, office and agency to certify that the materials, supplies or
equipment have been received and accepted as specified and that the
services have been duly rendered; and for such purpose he shall have
the power to require the attendance of and examine under oath such
persons as he may deem necessary. [Amended 11-3-1982 by L.L. No.
9-1982]
F. He shall compile budget documents, schedules and exhibits, and make
such budget estimates as are required by the Charter and assist the
City Manager in the preparation of the tentative budget.
§ C10-1 CHARTER § C10-2
C:25
§ C10-3. Deputy Comptroller. [Added 9-10-1997 by L.L. No. 9-1997]
The City Manager may appoint a Deputy Comptroller who shall act
generally for and in behalf of the City Comptroller.
G. He shall cause notice of receipt of the tax roll and warrant for city and
school taxes to be published and shall cause tax notices to be mailed to
the owners of assessed property; and the failure to mail such tax notice,
or the failure of any such owner to receive the same, shall not in any
way affect the validity of the taxes or penalty imposed.
H. He shall receive and collect taxes, assessments, fees and other sums
due the city, except as otherwise provided by law or the Council; and in
that connection, he may install a tax card system for the recording of
payment of taxes, assessments, fees and other sums in lieu of entries of
payment on the assessment roll.
I. He shall receive all moneys collected by or paid to any board,
commission, department, office or agency and deposit all funds
received in depositories authorized by the Council.
J. He shall have custody of bonds and notes and of all investments and
invested funds of the city or in possession of the city in a fiduciary
capacity, except as otherwise provided by law, and keep such funds and
all moneys of the city not required for current operations invested in
investments authorized by law and approved by the Council or
deposited in interest-bearing bank accounts approved by the Council,
subject to such adequate requirement of security as may be required by
law or fixed by the Council.
K. He shall make disbursements of city funds as provided in Subdivision E
above, by checks signed by the City Comptroller, or, when authorized by
resolution of the Council, by checks signed with the facsimile signature
of the City Comptroller in a form approved by the Council, provided that
no claim shall be paid if the appropriation account against which the
payment is to be charged does not contain an unexpended and
unencumbered balance sufficient to satisfy the claim. [Amended
11-3-1982 by L.L. No. 9-1982]
L. He shall receive and collect school taxes when authorized by the
Council.
M. He shall submit to the Council periodic reports, as specified by the
Council, setting forth the expenditures, receipts, unencumbered
balances of appropriations and other data requested by the Council for
the period specified.
N. He shall render to the Council within two months after the close of each
fiscal year a detailed report of all revenues, receipts, disbursements
and indebtedness for the fiscal year and other data requested by the
Council and publish notice of the availability of copies of such report at
the Comptroller's office to persons applying therefor.
§ C10-2 RYE CODE § C10-3
C:26
ARTICLE 11
Department of Law
§ C11-1. Corporation Counsel; powers and duties. [Amended
3-18-1981 by L.L. No. 1-1981]
If a Corporation Counsel is appointed as an employee of the city, he shall
be appointed for an indefinite term and shall serve at the pleasure of the
Council; he shall be a resident of the County of Westchester or an adjoining
county within the State of New York; and there shall be a Department of
Law, the head of which shall be the Corporation Counsel, and he shall
supervise and direct the legal affairs of the city; provide legal advice to the
Council, Mayor, City Manager and to all boards, commissions, departments,
offices and agencies of the city concerning any matter affecting the interest
of the city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be
prescribed by law or the Council.
§ C11-1 CHARTER § C11-1
C:27

ARTICLE 12
Department of Public Safety
[Amended 7-13-2016 by L.L. No. 4-20162; 12-21-2017 by L.L. No.
1-2017]
§ C12-1. Commissioner of Public Safety.
§ C12-2. Powers and Duties of Commissioner of Public Safety.
A. There shall be a Department of Public Safety, the head of which shall be
the Commissioner of Public Safety, who shall be appointed by the City
Manager, and he/she shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager
except that the City Manager shall obtain the consent of the Mayor and
the City Council when appointing the Commissioner of Public Safety.
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall have at least the qualifications
and experience specified by the City Council. The Commissioner of
Public Safety shall report directly to the City Manager.
B. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall have charge and supervision of
the Fire and Police Departments and shall provide in all ways possible
for the safety, care, comfort and protection of the inhabitants of the City
of Rye and of their property.
A. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall have jurisdiction, supervision
and control of the government, administration, disposition and
discipline of the officers and members of the Fire and Police
Departments; and shall possess and exercise fully and exclusively all
powers and perform all duties pertaining to the government,
maintenance and direction of the Fire Department, and the apparatus
and property thereof, and buildings furnished therefor and of the Police
Department and equipment furnished therefor, and shall have the
general directions and supervision of the expenditure of all moneys
appropriated to the Department of Public Safety. He/she shall have
authority to administer oaths and take evidence, affidavits and
acknowledgements in all matters and proceedings pertaining to the
Department of Public Safety.
B. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall have the power to make rules
and regulations, approved by the City Council, in regard to the
government, administration, disposition and discipline of the members
of the Fire Department and the Police Department. Such rules and
regulations may provide for the hearing, examination, investigation,
trial and determination of charges made or prepared against any officer
or member of said department for neglect of official duty or
incompetency or incapacity to perform his official duties, or some
delinquency seriously affecting his general character or fitness for the
office, and may, in his/her discretion, punish, discipline and/or
terminate any officer or member found guilty thereof, after reasonable
2. Editor's Note: This local law passed at referendum 11-8-2016.
§ C12-1 CHARTER § C12-2
C:29
§ C12-3. Constitution of the Fire Department and the Police
Department.
The Fire Department shall be supervised by the supervisory career officers
and such other officers as the Commissioner of Public Safety shall
authorize. The Police Department shall consist of the paid division,
including the Bay Constables, and the auxiliary police division and shall be
supervised by the supervisory career officers of the Police Department and
such other officers as the Commissioner of Public Safety shall authorize.
The supervisory career officers of the Fire Department and the supervisory
career officers of the Police Department, under the direction and control
of the Commissioner of Public Safety, shall have the supervision and
management of the officers, employees and members of the respective
departments.
§ C12-4. Election and approval of officers of the Rye Volunteer Fire
Department.
The Rye Volunteer Fire Department shall be constituted of a/several
volunteer fire company(ies) and shall have the power to elect a chief, a
first assistant chief, a second assistant chief, and all company officers to
be elected from the company(ies); however, such positions shall only be
filled if such volunteers meet all of the training requirements established
notice and upon due trial by the aforesaid Commissioner of Public
Safety in the form and manner prescribed by the rules and regulations
of his Department.
C. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall have the power to appoint all
officers and members of the Fire Department, except those positions
which are elected positions by the Volunteer Fire Department and all
officers and members of the Police Department, including Bay
Constables, subject to civil service rules and regulations, to such
positions in said departments as are established by the City Council.
D. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall have general supervision over
the records of the Department of Public Safety and its officers and
employees and shall possess such other powers and perform such other
duties as may be prescribed by law or by resolution of the City Council.
E. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall be responsible for the
administration and supervision of police officers assigned to policing
and enforcing all laws and ordinances applicable to Rye Town Park and
the maintenance of order therein.
F. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall assist the City Manager in the
administration of flood, disaster and other emergency plans.
G. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall be responsible for the
administration, in coordination with other municipalities, of an
emergency ambulance service on behalf of the inhabitants of the City.
§ C12-2 RYE CODE § C12-4
C:30
by the Commissioner of Public Safety. All elected officers shall be approved
by the Commissioner of Public Safety and the City Council. The chief, first
assistant chief and second assistant chief shall work with the supervisory
career officers of the Fire Department and report directly to the
Commissioner of Public Safety. Each company shall have the power to
elect company officers as are necessary and to select members to fill any
vacancies which may occur in their ranks. The company(ies) may adopt
by-laws, subject to the approval of the Public Safety Commissioner, City
Manager and City Council, to govern the leadership, management and
direction of their respective company(ies). The Commissioner of Public
Safety may remove any member on the ground of incompetence or
misconduct after a hearing upon due notice and upon stated charges with
the right of such officer and member to a review pursuant to article seventyeight
of the civil practice law and rules.
§ C12-4 CHARTER § C12-4
C:31

ARTICLE 13
(Reserved)3
3. Editor’s Note: Former Article 13, Fire Department, as amended, was repealed 7-13-2016
by L.L. No. 4-2016, which passed at referendum 11-8-2016.
CHARTER § C12-4
C:33

ARTICLE 14
Department of Public Works
§ C14-1. Head of Department. [Amended 6-18-1980 by L.L. No.
6-1980]
There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be
such qualified person as the City Manager may appoint.
§ C14-2. Powers and duties.
§ C14-3. Certification of work. [Amended 6-18-1980 by L.L. No.
6-1980]
All public work performed pursuant to contract under the control and
supervision of the Department of Public Works shall, before it is accepted,
be certified by such qualified person or persons as the City Manager may
designate, to the effect that such work has been performed in a good and
substantial manner with the material required and in the manner directed
by the terms of the contract under which the work was done.
A. The Department of Public Works shall have control and supervision of
the construction, alteration and maintenance of the streets, highways,
sidewalks, gutters, drains, culverts, bridges, piers, seawalls, sanitary
and storm sewers, parks and public grounds of the city, and of all
buildings, structures and other public works of the city; of the planting,
preservation and care of shade trees, shrubs and plants of the city; of
the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse, and the operation,
maintenance and use of the city incinerator and city dump; and of the
maintenance of all city vehicles and equipment; except where control
and supervision is assigned to another department by the Council or
City Manager, or assigned to a board or commission by this Charter or
the Council. The Department shall perform such other duties as may be
prescribed by law, the Council or City Manager.
B. Attendance at meetings. [Repealed 6-18-1980 by L.L. No. 6-1980]
§ C14-1 CHARTER § C14-3
C:35

ARTICLE 15
Department of Buildings
§ C15-1. Head of Department.
There shall be a Department of Buildings, the head of which shall be the
Building Inspector.
§ C15-2. Powers and duties.
The Department of Buildings shall have the power to enforce such laws,
local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations as may govern the
construction, alteration, maintenance, removal, demolition, use, occupancy,
safety, sanitary conditions, mechanical equipment and inspection of
buildings, structures or premises in the city; and perform such other duties
as may be prescribed by law, the Council or City Manager.
§ C15-1 CHARTER § C15-2
C:37

ARTICLE 16
Recreation Commission and Department of Recreation
§ C16-1. Commission; appointment. [Amended 2-6-1980 by L.L. No.
1-1980; 1-18-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
There shall be a Recreation Commission to consist of nine members to
be appointed for three-year terms by the Mayor with the approval of the
Council, except that the present members of the Recreation Commission
shall continue in office as the members of the Recreation Commission,
as constituted by this Charter, until the expiration of their terms, and
thereafter, their successors shall be appointed for the term of three (3)
years from and after the expiration of the term of their predecessors in
office.
§ C16-2. Powers and duties of Commission.
§ C16-3. Department of Recreation.
There shall be a Department of Recreation, the head of which shall be the
Superintendent of Recreation.
§ C16-4. Powers and duties of Department and Superintendent.
A. The Recreation Commission shall have control of the regulation and use
of recreation programs and facilities of the city, except as otherwise
provided by the Council.
B. It shall develop and recommend plans for future recreation programs
and facilities and submit and explain such plans annually at a joint
meeting with the Council at a time specified by the Council, and at such
other times as requested by the Council.
C. It shall approve the annual budget estimates, which shall be prepared
by the Superintendent of Recreation in consultation with the
Commission, prior to the submission of such estimates to the City
Manager.
D. It may appoint such committees as it may deem necessary for the
operation of specified recreation programs and facilities.
E. The Commission shall comply with city regulations, practices and
procedures relating to administration, employees, purchasing and
accountability of city property, except as otherwise provided by the
Council.
F. A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum, and whenever its approval is necessary, the affirmative vote of
a majority of the members shall be required. [Amended 2-6-1980 by
L.L. No. 1-1980]
§ C16-1 CHARTER § C16-4
C:39
§ C16-5. Appointment of personnel.
A. The Department of Recreation shall operate and maintain all of the
recreation programs and facilities assigned to it from time to time by
the Council.
B. The Superintendent of Recreation shall have and exercise all the
administrative powers necessary to operate and maintain the
Department of Recreation, but in the performance of such duties he
shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager.
However, such administration of the Department by the Superintendent
under the direction and supervision of the Manager shall be in
accordance with policies fixed by the Commission.
C. The Superintendent shall attend all meetings of the Recreation
Commission and shall cooperate with the Commission in the
performance of its duties.
A. The Recreation Commission may recommend qualifications for
applicants for the position of Superintendent of Recreation who shall be
appointed by the City Manager subject to the approval of the
Commission.
B. The City Manager shall, within budgetary limitations, employ all other
persons as he shall deem necessary and proper for recreation programs
and facilities.
§ C16-4 RYE CODE § C16-5
C:40
ARTICLE 17
Conservation Commission
§ C17-1. Commission; appointment. [Amended 9-22-1972 by L.L.
No. 5-1977; 2-20-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991; 2-4-1998 by L.L. No.
1-1998]
There shall be a Conservation Commission to consist of not less than six nor
more than nine members to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
the Council; except that two appointments made in February 1998, shall be
for two-year terms, and one appointment made in February 1998, shall be
for three years so that term expiration of a nine-member Commission shall
be staggered with three appointments to be made each year, and thereafter
their successors shall be appointed for terms of three years from and after
the expiration of the term of their predecessors in office.
§ C17-2. Powers and duties.
A. The Conservation Commission shall have control of the regulation, use,
improvement and maintenance of conservation programs and facilities
of the city within budgetary limitations, except as otherwise provided
by the Council.
B. It shall develop and recommend plans for future conservation programs
and facilities and submit and explain such plans annually at a joint
meeting with the Council at a time specified by the Council, and at such
other times as requested by the Council.
C. It may recommend qualifications for such employees as it may deem
necessary for the operation of conservation programs and facilities who
shall, within budgetary limitations, be appointed by the City Manager
subject to the approval of the Commission.
D. It shall submit its annual budget estimates to the City Manager.
E. It may appoint such committees as it may deem necessary for the
operation of specified conservation programs and facilities.
F. The Commission shall comply with city regulations, practices and
procedures relating to administration, employees, purchasing and
accountability of city property, except as otherwise provided by the
Council.
G. A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum, and whenever its approval is necessary, the affirmative vote of
a majority of the members shall be required. [Amended 9-22-1977 by
L.L. No. 5-1977]
§ C17-1 CHARTER § C17-2
C:41

ARTICLE 18
Planning Commission
§ C18-1. Commission; appointment. [Amended 3-15-1978 by L.L.
No. 2-1978; 4-2-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
§ C18-2. Powers and duties. [Amended 8-21-1985 by L.L. No.
8-1985]
The Planning Commission shall have the power and duties granted and
imposed by the General City Law, including powers authorized by § 37, as
limited by § 197-39 of the Code of the City of Rye and such other powers and
duties as may be prescribed by law or the Council. In addition thereto, there
is specifically granted and imposed upon it all powers and duties which
under the General City Law and other statutes, as the same may from time
to time be amended, the Council is empowered to confer or impose upon the
Planning Commission, except as may otherwise be provided by the Council.
§ C18-3. Administrative procedures.
A. There shall be a Planning Commission to consist of seven members to
be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. One
member of the Commission shall be a member of the Council other than
the Mayor, and six shall be persons who are not elected or paid officers
or employees of the city. The Mayor annually shall designate a member
of said Planning Commission to act as Chairman thereof; or on the
Mayor's failure so to do, the Planning Commission shall elect a
Chairman from its own members. The Council member shall not be
Chairman of the Commission.
B. The terms of office of members of the Planning Commission shall be for
three years or the expiration of the term of their predecessors in office,
whichever occurs first, except that the Council member shall be
appointed for a term of two years or the expiration of the term of his or
her predecessor in office, whichever occurs first.
A. The City Manager may, within budgetary limitations, employ a city
planner and such other employees as he shall deem necessary and
proper for the Planning Commission, except that the employment of a
city planner shall be subject to the approval of the Planning
Commission.
B. The Planning Commission shall comply with city regulations, practices
and procedures relating to administration, employees and purchasing,
except as otherwise provided by the Council.
§ C18-1 CHARTER § C18-3
C:43

ARTICLE 19
Board of Architectural Review
§ C19-1. Board; appointment. [Amended 2-1-2006 by L.L. No.
2-2006]
§ C19-2. Powers and duties.
The Board of Architectural Review shall have the powers and duties granted
and imposed by local law and such other powers and duties as may
hereafter be prescribed by law or the Council.
A. There shall be a Board of Architectural Review to consist of seven
members (7) to be appointed for three-year terms by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council, except that one new appointment made in 2006
shall be for a two-year term, and one new appointment made in 2006
shall be for a one-year term so that term, and thereafter their
successors shall be appointed for terms of three years from and after
the expiration of the term of their predecessors in office. At least one
member of the Board shall be a registered architect of this state.
B. The successors of those now in office shall be appointed for the term of
three years from and after the expiration of the term of their
predecessors in office.
§ C19-1 CHARTER § C19-2
C:45

ARTICLE 20
Board of Appeals
§ C20-1. Board; appointment. [Amended 1-18-1984 by L.L. No.
2-1984]
§ C20-2. Powers and duties.
The Board of Appeals shall have the powers and duties granted and imposed
by the General City Law and such other powers and duties as may hereafter
be prescribed by law or the Council.
A. There shall be a Board of Appeals to consist of seven members to be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council.
B. The successors of those now in office shall be appointed for the term of
three years from and after the expiration of the term of their
predecessors in office. No Councilman or other city officer shall be
eligible for appointment to the Board.
§ C20-1 CHARTER § C20-2
C:47

ARTICLE 20A
Traffic and Pedestrian Safety Committee4
[Added 2-4-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998; amended 2-24-2010 by L.L. No.
2-2010]
§ C20A-1. Committee; intent.
There shall be a Traffic and Pedestrian Safety Committee to advise the City
Council and other entities on traffic and pedestrian safety issues in the City
of Rye.
§ C20A-2. Appointment.
The Traffic and Pedestrian Safety Committee shall consist of not less than
seven nor more than 11 members to be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council. The members shall continue in office until the
expiration of their terms, and thereafter their successors shall be appointed
for terms of three years from and after the expiration of the term of their
predecessors in office. The Mayor shall designate from amongst any of the
members the Chair of the Committee. Vacancies occurring otherwise than
by expiration of term shall be filled by the Mayor with Council approval.
The members of the Committee shall choose from their number a Vice
Chairperson and Secretary. In their work the Committee may utilize the
assistance of additional volunteers interested in traffic and transportation
issues. The City Manager, President of the Board of Education, and the
Superintendent of Schools or their representatives shall serve as ex officio
members of the Committee.
§ C20A-3. Purpose and duties.
A. The purpose and duties of the Committee shall be to:
(1) Initiate, study, develop, and make recommendations relating to the
traffic and transportation needs of the city, including but not
limited to vehicular and pedestrian traffic safety and flows,
parking, mass transportation,
(2) Audit current transportation and traffic conditions to assess
current and emerging problem areas that could impact the
community in the future.
(3) Seek public input to identify traffic and transportation issues to be
considered by the city.
(4) Promote education efforts on traffic safety and transportation
issues in Rye.
(5) Hold regular meetings and keep the City Council informed on
matters relating to traffic and transportation.
4. Editor's Note: Former Art. 20A, Traffic Safety Commission, added 12-1-1982 by L.L. No.
11-1982, as amended, was repealed 3-7-1990 by L.L. No. 4-1990.
§ C20A-1 CHARTER § C20A-3
C:49
(6) Advise and make recommendations to the City Council, the
Planning Commission, and the City Manager as it deems
appropriate with respect to traffic and transportation needs of the
city. The Committee shall receive referrals and materials from the
Planning Commission for the purpose of providing advisory
opinions.
(7) Monitor county, state, and regional transportation proposals for
their impact on Rye.
B. Nothing in this section shall reduce the authority of the City Council,
the Planning Commission, or the City Manager to make traffic and
transportation decisions under their authority.
§ C20A-3 RYE CODE § C20A-3
C:50
ARTICLE 20B
(Reserved)5
§ C20B-1. through § C20B-4. (Reserved)
5. Editor's Note: Former Art. 20B, Cable Television Company, added 6-19-1985 by L.L. No.
4-1985, was repealed 7-16-1997 by L.L. No. 7-1997.
§ C20B-1 CHARTER § C20B-1
C:51

ARTICLE 21
Financial Procedures
§ C21-1. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the City of Rye shall be the calendar year.
§ C21-2. Submission of tentative budget; budget message.
On or before November 7 of each year, the City Manager shall submit to the
Council a tentative budget for the ensuing fiscal year. In an accompanying
message, the Manager shall outline proposed financial policies of the city
for the ensuing fiscal year; describe the important features of the tentative
budget; indicate any major changes from the current year in financial
policies, expenditures and revenues together with the reasons for such
changes; summarize the city's debt position; and include such other
material as the Manager deems desirable. He shall also indicate therein
the substantial changes which he has recommended, if any, in the budget
estimates of the boards, commissions, departments, offices and agencies
not under his direction and supervision.
§ C21-3. Tentative budget.
§ C21-4. Council action on budget.
A. Each board, commission, department, office and agency of the city shall
submit to the City Manager, at a time and in such form as specified by
the Manager, the budget estimates of such board, commission,
department, office or agency for the ensuing year.
B. The tentative budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all city
funds and activities for the ensuing year and, except as required by law
or this Charter, shall be in such form as the City Manager deems
desirable or the Council may require. It shall begin with a clear general
summary of its contents; shall show in detail all anticipated revenues
and proposed expenditures, including debt service, unsatisfied
judgments, reserves for uncollected taxes and contingent purposes, the
estimated surplus or deficit and reserves as may be available at the end
of the current fiscal year, and the amount to be raised by taxation of
property for the ensuing fiscal year; and shall be presented by such
organization, program or classification system as the Manager deems
appropriate and informative or the state or Council may require, with
comparative figures of the actual and estimated income and
expenditures of one or more prior fiscal years.
A. Upon receiving the tentative budget from the City Manager and prior to
a public hearing, the Council may, by a vote of at least four members of
the Council, make any changes in the tentative budget not inconsistent
with the provisions of this section.
§ C21-1 CHARTER § C21-4
C:53
§ C21-5. Transfer of appropriations. [Amended 2-20-1991 by L.L.
No. 1-1991]
The City Manager may at any time during the fiscal year transfer part
or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs or
accounts within a department, office or agency under his supervision, and
such transfers shall be reported to the Council at or prior to the next
Council meeting. The Council may by resolution transfer part or all of
any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs or accounts
of a board or commission or within a department, office or agency, or
from one board, commission, department, office or agency to another. No
appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred, and no
appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be
appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance
thereof.
B. At any time prior to a public hearing, any board, commission,
department, office or agency not under the direction and supervision of
the City Manager may request the Council for a hearing with respect to
its budget estimates.
C. After the Council has considered the tentative budget, it shall publish a
notice stating where copies of the proposed budget are available for
inspection by the public and the time and place of the public hearing on
the proposed budget, which hearing shall be held not later than the first
Wednesday in December of the current year and upon at least 10 days'
notice. [Amended 10-19-1988 by L.L. No. 14-1988]
D. After a public hearing, the Council may adopt the proposed budget with
or without amendment. In amending the proposed budget, it may add or
increase programs or amounts, and may decrease or delete programs
or amounts, except expenditures required by law, or for debt service or
for estimated cash deficit, provided that it may not increase the
estimated revenues or the total proposed expenditures without the
affirmative vote of at least five members of the Council.
E. The Council shall adopt the proposed budget and determine the tax rate
for the ensuing year on or before December 31 of the current fiscal
year. The adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriations of the
amounts shown therein for the purposes specified and shall constitute a
levy of the property tax therein proposed. [Amended 2-1-1978 by L.L.
No. 1-1978]
F. The Council shall certify to the City Comptroller the tax rate and the
amount of the tax levy and direct him to apportion and extend against
each taxable property listed upon the assessment roll at the rate
specified the amount of tax required to produce the total sum certified
and to render tax notices for, and receive and collect, the several sums
so computed and determined.
§ C21-4 RYE CODE § C21-6
C:54
§ C21-6. Lapse of appropriations.
All appropriations shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that
they shall not have been expended or encumbered.
§ C21-7. Commitments and disbursements prohibited.
No board, commission, department, office or agency of the city government
shall expend or commit any funds of the city unless the City Comptroller
shall first certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriation
and funds available for the purpose.
§ C21-8. Capital program.
The City Manager shall submit to the Council a capital program at least
three months prior to the final date for the submission of the budget,
listing the proposed capital improvements with appropriate supporting
information, indicating the cost estimates, method of financing,
recommended time schedules for each improvement, and the estimated
annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or
acquired.
§ C21-9. Bond resolutions. [Amended 9-5-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001;
12-15-2004 by L.L. No. 4-2004; 12-7-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011;
11-2-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
A. All bond resolutions, except as hereinafter provided, authorizing the
issuance of bonds in excess of 30% of the average of the gross annual
budget of the city for the preceding three years shall be adopted by a
vote of at least five members of the council and shall be subject to the
approval of a majority of the qualified voters voting at a general or
special election.
B. The Council may, by a vote of at least five members thereof, authorize
the issuance of bonds not in excess of 30% of the average of the gross
annual budget of the city for the preceding three years, provided that
the aggregate of the proposed bond issue and the outstanding
obligations under bonds previously issued without being subject to any
referendum does not exceed 30% of such average.
C. All bond resolutions, except as hereinafter provided, authorizing the
issuance of bonds in excess of $1,000,000 for the acquisition of real
property shall be adopted by a vote of at least five members of the
council and shall be subject to the approval of a majority of the qualified
voters voting at a general or special election.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to bond resolutions
authorizing the issuance of bonds for the payment of judgment, or
compromised or settled claims against the City, or awards or sums
payable by the City pursuant to a determination by a court, or an officer,
body or agency in an administrative or quasi-judicial capacity, or any
§ C21-6 CHARTER § C21-9
C:55
capital improvement or equipment proposed to be constructed or
acquired where the expense thereof, other than operation and
maintenance, is to be borne by local assessment upon the several lots
and parcels of land which the Council shall determine and specify to be
especially benefited thereby, or capital improvements or equipment to
be constructed or acquired which have been determined by resolution
of the council to be required to implement a Federal, State or County
of Westchester mandate failure of which to comply with could, in the
judgment of the Council expressed in resolution, result in the
imposition of a fine or penalty, or authorizing the issuance of obligations
to be sold to the New York State Environmental Facilities Corporation
or any successor thereto.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to bond resolutions
authorizing the issuance of bonds for the payment of capital
improvements or equipment proposed to be constructed or acquired for
purposes determined by resolutions of the council to be required for
public safety purposes requiring urgent action, in an amount not
exceeding $1,000,000 in the aggregate in any fiscal year, and provided
that on the date of adoption of said bond resolution, the Council
determines that the aggregate of the proposed bond authorization and
the outstanding principal amount of obligations previously issued for
public safety purposes requiring urgent action in reliance on this
paragraph E does not exceed $2,500,000. In making such
determination, the Council shall disregard certain such outstanding
obligations to the extent provided below. Such determination shall be
conclusive for all purposes of this paragraph E, irrespective of whether
through inadvertence or otherwise such determination is later found to
be inaccurate. In the event that the Council determines that the
aggregate of the proposed bond authorization and the outstanding
obligations issued for public safety purposes requiring urgent action
exceeds $2,500,000, the Council may authorize a mandatory public
referendum on the question of whether such bond authorization shall
become effective. In the event of approval of such authorization at a
referendum, such authorization shall become effective and i) the
obligations issued or to be issued in reliance on such bond
authorization, and ii) the outstanding amount of obligations previously
issued or authorized for public safety purposes requiring urgent action
in reliance on this paragraph E on the date of adoption of such bond
authorization, shall be thereafter disregarded for all purposes of this
paragraph E.
F. The provisions of this section shall not apply to bond resolutions
authorizing the issuance of bonds for the payment of capital
improvements or equipment proposed to be constructed or acquired for
purposes determined by resolution of the Council to be required for
natural disaster reconstruction as a result of a natural disaster, as
declared by the Federal Government or the State government requiring
urgent action, in an amount not exceeding $2,500,000 in the aggregate
in any fiscal year, and provided that on the date of adoption of said bond
§ C21-9 RYE CODE § C21-9
C:56
resolution, the Council determines that the aggregate of the proposed
bond authorization and the outstanding principal amount of obligations
previously issued for natural disaster reconstruction purposes
requiring urgent action in reliance on this paragraph F does not exceed
$2,500,000. In making such determination, the Council shall disregard
certain outstanding obligations to the extent provided below. Such
determination shall be conclusive for all purposes of this paragraph
F, irrespective of whether through inadvertence or otherwise such
determination is later found to be inaccurate. In the event that the
Council determines that the aggregate of the proposed bond
authorization and the outstanding obligations issued for natural
disaster reconstruction purposes requiring urgent action exceeds
$2,500,000, the Council may authorize a mandatory public referendum
on the questions whether such bond authorization shall become
effective. In the event of approval of such authorization at a
referendum, such authorization shall become effective and i) the
obligations issued or to be issued in reliance on such bond
authorization, and ii) the outstanding amount of obligations previously
issued or authorized for natural disaster reconstruction purposes
requiring urgent action in reliance on this paragraph F on the date of
adoption of such bond authorization, shall be thereafter disregarded for
all purposes of this paragraph F.
G. The provisions of this section shall not apply to bond resolutions
authorizing the issuance of bonds for the payment of capital
improvements or equipment proposed to be constructed or acquired for
a purpose determined by resolution of the Council in an amount not
exceeding an amount determined by resolution of the Council in any
fiscal year if the principal of and interest on the bonds is paid first from
moneys in an enterprise fund. For purposes of this Subsection G an
enterprise fund shall be an account separate from the general fund
containing user fees or assessments paid for a service or purpose of the
City, in lieu of or in addition to real property taxes. No bonds shall be
authorized or issued pursuant to the provisions of this Subsection G
unless: 1) the Council or a committee thereof holds a public hearing
upon no less than ten (10) days' notice prior to taking action on such
bond resolution, at which hearing the object or purpose to be financed
and financial tests relating to such object or purpose are presented; and
2) the financing structure and the object or purpose to be financed with
such bonds has been approved by a majority of the Council. For the
purpose of this Subsection G, financial tests shall mean: i) financial
statements of the enterprise fund for the current and last four fiscal
years demonstrating that full coverage of operating and debt service
expenses have been paid in full from user fees or assessments in the
enterprise fund as verified by the City Comptroller and the City
Manager; ii) pro forma financial statements for the next five fiscal years
demonstrating full coverage of operating expenses, outstanding debt
service, and debt service generated from the issuance of such bonds as
verified by the City Comptroller and the City Manager; iii) a current
fiscal year reserve in the enterprise fund equal to or in excess of 10% of
§ C21-9 CHARTER § C21-9
C:57
§ C21-10. Deposits. [Added 9-17-1986 by L.L. No. 13-1986]
The City Comptroller shall require from any bank, trust company or other
depositary in which the funds of the city are deposited, whether in
certificates of deposit, time deposits or demand deposits, pledged collateral
consisting of bonds, certificates or notes of the United States of America,
or any obligation fully guaranteed or insured as to interest and principal
by the United States of America, acting through an agency, subdivision,
department or division thereof, the State of New York, or bonds or notes
of any municipal corporation, school district or district corporation of the
State of New York, as security for the funds deposited. Such bonds,
certificates or notes shall be subject to the approval of and be deposited
in such place and under such conditions as the City Comptroller may
determine.
current year operating and debt service expenses; iv) a pro forma
reserve in the enterprise fund for each fiscal year such bonds are
outstanding equal to or in excess of 10% of pro forma operating
expenses, outstanding debt service and debt service generated from
the issuance of such bonds in each such fiscal year; and v)
representations to the Council by the enterprise fund that such fund
shall establish user fees and assessments to be paid at the times and in
the amounts sufficient to satisfy the requirements of clauses ii) and iv)
of this Subsection G. [Added 9-18-2019 by L.L. No. 6-2019]
§ C21-9 RYE CODE § C21-10
C:58
ARTICLE 22
Tax Administration
§ C22-1. City Assessor; powers and duties. [Amended 5-20-1992 by
L.L. No. 10-1992; 6-28-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
§ C22-2. Board of Assessment Review. [Amended 9-15-1971 by L.L.
No. 2-1971]
A. The City Assessor shall have all of the powers conferred and duties
imposed on assessors of cities in this state under the Real Property Tax
Law.
B. The taxable status of real property shall be determined annually as of
the first day of May. All real property shall be assessed according to its
condition and the ownership as of such date. The valuation date of real
property shall be determined as of the first day of July immediately
preceding the May status date. [Amended 4-15-2009 by L.L. No.
3-2009]
C. The assessment roll shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions
of the said state law and be filed annually according to the following
schedule:
(1) Filing of the tentative roll on June 1.
(2) Filing of the final assessment roll on or before September 15.
D. For all purposes related to the implementation of Real Property Tax Law
§ 425, providing a school tax relief exemption, the last date for filing
STAR exemption applications for the 2000/2001 school year shall be the
31st day of July, 2000 and annually thereafter the last date for such
applications shall be the 1st day of May preceding the next annual
school tax levy.
A. There shall be a Board of Assessment Review to consist of five members
who shall be appointed by the Council and shall have a knowledge of
property values in the city. A majority of the Board shall consist of
members who are not officers or employees of the city. The Council may
appoint one or two Councilmen to the Board. [Amended 4-5-1972 by
L.L. No. 1-1972]
B. The terms of office of the first appointed members thereof shall be for
one, two, three, four and five years respectively. The successors thereof
shall be appointed for the term of five years from and after the
expiration of the term of their predecessors in office.
C. The Board of Assessment Review shall have the powers and duties
granted and imposed by the Real Property Tax Law and such other
powers and duties as may be prescribed by law or the Council. The
Board shall meet annually on the third Tuesday in June to hear tax
§ C22-1 CHARTER § C22-2
C:59
§ C22-3. Omitted property; correction of errors.
§ C22-4. Confirmation and lien of local assessment.
If the whole or any portion of the expenses of a public improvement be
assessed or charged upon the property affected by such improvement, such
assessment shall be confirmed by the Council, after a public hearing shall
have been had, at which any person interested may present objections to
such confirmation. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be
published in the official newspaper of the city at least 10 days prior to the
hearing.
§ C22-5. Review of assessment for local improvement.
No action or proceeding to set aside, vacate, cancel or annul any
assessment for a local improvement shall be maintained, except for total
want of jurisdiction to levy and assess the same on the part of the officers,
board or body authorized by law to make such levy or assessment or to
order the improvement on account of which the levy or assessment was
made. No action or proceeding shall be maintained to modify or reduce
any such assessment except for fraud or substantial error by reason of
which the amount of such assessment is in excess of the amount which
should have been lawfully levied or assessed. The procedure to review any
assessment for a local improvement for such total want of jurisdiction, fraud
or substantial error, shall, so far as applicable, be the same as the procedure
to review any assessment of real property.
§ C22-6. Assessments not invalidated by irregularities.
No assessment or tax shall be vacated, set aside, canceled, annulled,
reviewed or otherwise questioned or affected by reason of any error,
omission, irregularity or defect in any of the steps or proceedings required
to be had or taken as preliminary to or in the making of the assessment,
or in the levying or collection of the tax, or in relation to or in connection
with any proposal, designation of materials, contract, work or improvement
for or on account of which such assessment was made or tax imposed.
assessment complaints, pursuant to § 525 of the Real Property Tax Law.
[Amended 5-20-1992 by L.L. No. 10-1992]
A. The provisions of the Real Property Tax Law shall govern the
assessment of omitted property, correction of errors and all other
matters of assessment and collection of real property taxes not covered
by this Charter.
B. The Council shall have the same powers and duties for correction of
errors as given in like circumstances to the board of trustees of a village
as provided in Section 1412 of the Real Property Tax Law, or such other
similar provisions as may be in effect from time to time, including the
power to correct any assessment which has been fixed by fraud or other
wrongful conduct, upon similar notice as provided in said Section 1412.
§ C22-2 RYE CODE § C22-6
C:60
However, all property shall be liable to assessment and all assessments
shall be valid and of full force and effect notwithstanding any such error,
omission, irregularity or defect.
§ C22-7. Other charges on real property.
All the rights, remedies and procedures provided by this Charter for the
collection of city taxes may be used by the city, so far as applicable, in the
collection of assessments for local improvements and of other charges upon
property authorized by law, local law or ordinance.
§ C22-8. Taxes payable in installments.
§ C22-9. School district taxes; state and county taxes; levy and
collection; right of city to penalties.
A. All city taxes on real property shall become a lien on such real estate on
February 1 of each fiscal year. Such taxes may be paid in one
installment during the month of February, or during such other months
as the Council by resolution may designate, without any additional
charge. [Amended 11-17-1982 by L.L. No. 10-1982]
B. Union Free School District taxes on real property shall become a lien on
such real estate on July 1 of each fiscal year. Such taxes may be paid in
two equal installments during the months of September and November,
or during such other months as the Council by resolution may
designate, without any additional charge. [Amended 2-5-2003 by L.L.
No. 1-2003; 5-19-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004]
C. The City Comptroller shall charge and collect penalties upon the
principal amount of each installment not paid when due and payable at
the following rates consecutively thereafter, or such other rates as the
Council by resolution may prescribe: 2% if paid in the first month
thereafter; 5% if paid in the second or third month thereafter; 7% if
paid in the fourth or fifth month thereafter; 10% if paid in the sixth,
seventh or eighth month thereafter; and 12% if paid thereafter to the
date of the sale of the lien.
A. After the appropriate authority shall have certified to the City
Comptroller the amount of taxes to be raised on property within Union
Free School District No. 1 of the Town of Rye within the City of Rye, the
Council shall cause the amount of such taxes to be levied on the
property within such district in the manner herein provided for city
taxes. it shall cause a warrant to be issued to the City Comptroller and
signed by the Mayor on or before August 15 of each year. However, with
respect to property in such district lying in two municipalities, the taxes
upon the property of persons within such district shall be apportioned
to the parts lying in the respective municipalities according to the full
value of such property lying in each municipality to be determined by
the equalized rate for such municipality as fixed by the Board of
§ C22-6 CHARTER § C22-9
C:61
Supervisors for the assessment roll upon which such tax is to be
extended. [Amended 2-5-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
B. The City Comptroller shall pay to the Treasurer of Union Free School
District No. 1 of the Town of Rye on the fifth day of each month all
school district taxes on property in such district within the city
collected in the preceding month; he shall report to the Council before
February 15 of each year all such school taxes of the previous year
remaining unpaid; and the Council shall cause such school taxes to be
paid.
C. State, county and county district taxes and assessments shall become a
lien, shall be payable and shall be collected in one installment during
the month of May and in the same manner as city taxes. Any and all
penalties collected by the City Comptroller on delinquent state, county
or county district taxes shall be the property of the city. [Amended
11-17-1982 by L.L. No. 10-1982]
§ C22-9 RYE CODE § C22-9
C:62
ARTICLE 23
Miscellaneous
§ C23-1. Liability in certain actions. [Amended 9-15-1971 by L.L.
No. 4-1971]
No civil action shall be maintained against the City of Rye for damages
or injuries to person or property sustained in consequence of any street,
highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, park or other public place
being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed, or in
consequence of the existence of snow or ice thereon, unless written notice
of the defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition, or of the
existence of snow or ice, had actually been given to the Department of
Public Works prior to the happening of the event causing such damages or
injuries to person or property and there had been a failure or neglect on
the part of the city to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction
complained of, or to cause the snow or ice to be removed, or the place
otherwise made reasonably safe, within a reasonable time after the receipt
of such notice.
§ C23-2. No adverse title.
No encroachment on any sidewalk, alley, street, highway or public grounds
in the city shall operate to confer any right upon any person or corporation
adverse to the city regardless of the length of time the same may exist, and
the city may sue for its removal as a nuisance at any time.
§ C23-3. Surety bonds.
The City Comptroller, City Clerk, City Judge, Acting City Judge, City Marshal
and such other officers and employees as may be specified by the Council
shall give bond for the faithful performance of their duties. The bond shall
be in such sum and with such corporate sureties as may be approved by the
Council. The premium of all such surety bonds shall be paid by the city.
§ C23-4. Inspections.
The chairman of any board or commission or the head of any department,
office or agency of the city, or any officer or employee thereof when
authorized by the chairman of such board or commission or the head of
such department, office or agency, may for the purpose of performing his
duties, enter, examine, inspect or survey any building, structure, enclosure,
vehicle, vessel or premises, or any part thereof, or anything therein or
attached thereto, at any reasonable hour.
§ C23-5. Service of notices.
Service of a notice under this Charter, unless otherwise provided, may be
personal or by mail by depositing a copy thereof in the post office addressed
to the person to be notified at his last known place of residence, or if such
place of residence be unknown, then by publication of such notice in the
§ C23-1 CHARTER § C23-5
C:63
official newspaper of the city. The day of publication shall be deemed to
be the date of service. Whenever any property in the city shall be owned
by two or more persons jointly or as tenants in common, or otherwise, a
notice served on one of such owners shall be sufficient notice to all, for any
purpose requiring a notice under this Charter.
§ C23-6. City Court continued.
The provisions of the Charter of the City of Rye, being Chapter 505 of the
Laws of 1940, relating to the City Court are continued until duly amended
or superseded.
§ C23-7. Provisions repealed.
The Charter of the City of Rye, being Chapter 505 of the Laws of 1940, as
amended, except with respect to Article II, Section 11, and Articles XIX and
XXI thereof, is hereby repealed. All local laws, ordinances, resolutions and
regulations of this city, to the extent that they are not inconsistent with any
provisions of this Charter, shall remain in full force and effect until repealed
or amended.
§ C23-8. Separability.
If any provisions of this Charter is held invalid or inapplicable to any person
or circumstance, the other provisions of the Charter and their application to
other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
§ C23-9. Effective date.
This Charter shall take effect January 1, 1965.
§ C23-5 RYE CODE § C23-9
C:64
The Code
Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ C23-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § C23-9
1:65

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
The local laws, ordinances and resolutions of the City of Rye referred to in
§ 1-2 of this local law shall be known collectively as the "Code of the City of
Rye," and the various parts and sections of such local laws, ordinances and
resolutions shall be distributed and designated as provided and set forth in
§ 1-2 of this local law.
§ 1-2. Distribution of local laws, ordinances and resolutions.
Section numbers with asterisks in the second column have not been
repeated in the first column because they are section numbers which relate
to titles, effective dates or severability clauses, which sections are not
pertinent to the codification. For titles, refer to the first column; for
severability, refer to § 1-6 hereof.
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
Chapter 9, Continuity
of Government
L.L. No.
2-1963
4-17-63
§ 9-1 Section 1
§ 9-2 Section 2
§ 9-3 Section 3
§ 9-4 Section 4
§ 9-5 Section 5
§ 9-6 Section 6
§ 9-7 Section 7
Section 8*
§ 9-8 Section 9
Chapter 15, Ethics,
Code of
L.L. No.
1-1966
2-16-66
§ 15-1 Section 1
§ 15-2 Section 2
§ 15-3 Section 3
§ 15-4 Section 4
§ 15-5 Section 5 Amended 9-16-70 by L.L. No.
2-1970
§ 15-6 Section 6
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:67
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 15-7 Section 7
§ 15-8 Section 8
§ 15-9 Section 9
§ 15-10 Section 10
§ 15-11 Section 11
§ 15-12 Section 12
§ 15-13 Section 13
§ 15-14 Section 14 Amended 9-16-70 by L.L. No.
2-1970
§ 15-15 Section 15 Amended 9-16-70 by L.L. No.
2-1970
Section 16*
Chapter 22, Human
Relations Commission
Resolution 9-18-63
§ 22-1 1
§ 22-2 2
§ 22-3 3
§ 22-4 4
§ 22-5 5
6*
Chapter 31, Police
Pension Fund
L.L. No.
15-1942
1-21-42
§ 31-1 Section I Amended 12-21-60 by L.L. No.
1-1960
§ 31-2 Section II
§ 31-3 Section III
§ 31-4 Section IV
§ 31-5 Section V
§ 31-6 Section VI
§ 31-7 Section VII Amended 11-1-50 by L.L. No.
3-1950; 8-21-61 by L.L. No.
1-1961; 11-20-74 by L.L. No.
2-1974
§ 31-8 Section VIII
§ 31-9 Section IX
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:68
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 31-10 Section X
§ 31-11 Section XI
§ 31-12 Section XII
§ 31-13 Section XIII
§ 31-14 Section XIV
Chapter 36, Travel and
Convention Expenses
Article I L.L. No.
2-1962
5-16-62
§ 36-1 Section 1
Article II L.L. No.
1-1968
3-6-68
§ 36-2 Section 1
Section 2*
Chapter 46, Alarm
Systems
L.L. No.
4-1977
5-4-77
Section 1*
§ 46-1 3-7.1
§ 46-2 3-7.2
§ 46-3 3-7.3
§ 46-4 3-7.4
§ 46-5 3-7.5
§ 46-6 3-7.6
§ 46-7 3-7.7
§ 46-8 3-7.8
§ 46-9 3-7.9
§ 46-10 3-7.10
Section 2*
Chapter 50,
Amusements and
Exhibitions
Ord. No.
4-1962
5-15-62
Section 1*
§ 50-1 Section 3-1.1
§ 50-2 Section 3-1.2
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:69
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 50-3 Section 3-1.3
§ 50-4 Section 3-1.4
§ 50-5 Section 3-1.5
§ 50-6 Section 3-1.6
§ 50-7 Section 3-1.7
§ 50-8 Section 3-1.8
Section 2*
Chapter 53,
Architectural Review
L.L. No.
1-1965
4-21-65
§ 53-1 Section 1
§ 53-2 Section 2
§ 53-3 Section 3
§ 53-4 Section 4
§ 53-5 Section 5
§ 53-6 Section 6
§ 53-7 Section 7
Section 8*
Section 9*
Chapter 56,
Auctioneers
Article 2 of 2-4-42
Chapter 3 of
General
Ordinances
§ 56-1 3-2.1
§ 56-2 3-2.2
§ 56-3 3-2.3
§ 56-4 3-2.4
Chapter 61, Bicycles Article 5 of
Chapter 6 of
General
Ordinances
6-24-42
§ 61-1 6-5.1
§ 61-2 6-5.2
§ 61-3 6-5.3
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:70
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 61-4 6-5.4
§ 61-5 6-5.5
§ 61-6 6-5.6
§ 61-7 6-5.7
§ 61-8 6-5.8 Added 10-16-74 by Ord. No.
5-1974
§ 61-9 6-5.9 Renumbered 10-16-74 by Ord. No.
5-1974
6-5.10*
Chapter 64, Boats and
Harbors
Article I Article 1 of
Chapter 7 of
General
Ordinances
2-4-42
§ 64-1 7-1.1
§ 64-2 7-1.2
Article II Article 3 of
Chapter 7 of
General
Ordinances
7-15-59
§ 64-3 7-3.1
§ 64-4 7-3.2
§ 64-5 7-3.3
§ 64-6 7-3.4
§ 64-7 7-3.5
§ 64-8 7-3.6
§ 64-9 7-3.7
§ 64-10 7-3.8
§ 64-11 7-3.9
§ 64-12 7-3.10
§ 64-13 7-3.11
§ 64-14 7-3.12
§ 64-15 7-3.13
§ 64-16 7-3.14
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:71
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 64-17 7-3.15
§ 64-18 7-3.16
§ 64-19 7-3.17
§ 64-20 7-3.18
7-3.19*
7-3.20*
Chapter 68, Building
Construction
Ord. No.
3-1963
5-15-63
Article I Article 1
§ 68-1 8-1.1
§ 68-2 8-1.2
§ 68-3 8-1.3
§ 68-4 8-1.4
§ 68-5 8-1.5
§ 68-6 8-1.6
§ 68-7 8-1.7
§ 68-8 8-1.8
§ 68-9 8-1.9 Amended 7-15-64 by Ord. No.
12-1964
Article II Article 2
§ 68-10 8-2.1 Amended 7-19-67 by Ord. No.
2-1967
§ 68-11 8-2.2 Amended 7-19-67 by Ord. No.
2-1967
§ 68-12 8-2.3 Added 7-19-67 by Ord. No. 2-1967;
amended 1-7-76 by Ord. No.
3-1976
Chapter 71, Buildings,
Unsafe
Section 5-5.4
of Chapter 5
of General
Ordinances
10-21-64; amended 7-19-67 by
Ord. No. 2-1967
§ 71-1 (a)
§ 71-2 (b)
§ 71-3 (c)
§ 71-4 (d)
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:72
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 71-5 (e)
§ 71-6 (f)
§ 71-7 (g)
Chapter 76, Dogs Section 6-3.5
of Chapter 3
of General
Ordinances
2-4-42; amended 11-17-54
Redesignated
Section 7-4.1
3-20-63 by Ord. No. 1-1963
§ 76-1 (a)
§ 76-2 (b) (c)*
§ 76-3 (d) Amended 5-15-63 by Ord. No.
4-1963; 1-7-76 by Ord. No. 3-1976;
4-6-77 by Ord. No. 3-1977
§ 76-4 (e) Added 1-19-77 by L.L. No. 1-1977
Chapter 81, Elec-trical
Standards
Article 3 of
Chapter 8 of
General
Ordinances
6-5-63; effec-tive 7-1-63
§ 81-1 8-3.1
§ 81-2 8-3.2 Amended 7-15-64 by Ord. No.
12-1964
§ 81-3 8-3.3
§ 81-4 8-3.4
§ 81-5 8-3.5
§ 81-6 8-3.6
§ 81-7 8-3.7
§ 81-8 8-3.8
§ 81-9 8-3.9
§ 81-10 8-3.10
§ 81-11 8-3.11
§ 81-12 8-3.12
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:73
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
Chapter 87, Environmental
Quality Review
L.L. No.
3-1977 as
Article 6 of
Chapter 8 of
General
Ordinances
3-16-77
Section 1*
§ 87-1 8-6.1
§ 87-2 8-6.2
§ 87-3 8-6.3
§ 87-4 8-6.4
§ 87-5 8-6.5
§ 87-6 8-6.6
§ 87-7 8-6.7
§ 87-8 8-6.8
§ 87-9 8-6.9
§ 87-10 8-6.10
§ 87-11 8-6.11
§ 87-12 8-6.12
§ 87-13 8-6.13
§ 87-14 8-6.14
§ 87-15 8-6.15
§ 87-16 8-6.16
§ 87-17 8-6.17
§ 87-18 8-6.18
§ 87-19 8-6.19
§ 87-20 8-6.20
§ 87-21 8-6.21
Section 2*
Chapter 92, Filling and
Dredging
Ord. No.
2-1972 as
Article 4 of
Chapter 8 of
General
Ordinances
10-18-72
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:74
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 92-1 8-4.1
§ 92-2 8-4.2
Chapter 95, Firearms Article 4 of
Chapter 4 of
General
Ordinances
9-19-45
§ 95-1 4-4.1
§ 95-2 4-4.2
§ 95-3 4-4.3
§ 95-4 4-4.4
Chapter 98, Fire
Prevention
L.L No.
4-1963 as
Chapter 2 of
General
Ordinances
6-5-63
Article I Article 1
§ 98-1 Section 2-1.1
§ 98-2 Section 2-1.2
§ 98-3 Section 2-1.3
§ 98-4 Section 2-1.4
§ 98-5 Section 2-1.5
§ 98-6 Section 2-1.6
§ 98-7 Section 2-1.7
§ 98-8 Section 2-1.8
§ 98-9 Section 2-1.9
§ 98-10 Section
2-1.10
§ 98-11 Section
2-1.11
§ 98-12 Section
2-1.12
Article II Article 2
§ 98-13 Section 2-2.1
§ 98-14 Section 2-2.2
§ 98-15 Section 2-2.3
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:75
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 98-16 Section 2-2.4
Article III Article 3
§ 98-17 Section 2-3.1
§ 98-18 Section 2-3.2
§ 98-19 Section 2-3.3
§ 98-20 Section 2-3.4
Article IV Article 4
§ 98-21 Section 2-4.1
§ 98-22 Section 2-4.2
§ 98-23 Section 2-4.3
§ 98-24 Section 2-4.4
§ 98-25 Section 2-4.5
§ 98-26 Section 2-4.6
§ 98-27 Section 2-4.7
§ 98-28 Section 2-4.8
Article V Article 5
§ 98-29 Section 2-5.1
§ 98-30 Section 2-5.2
§ 98-31 Section 2-5.3
§ 98-32 Section 2-5.4
§ 98-33 Section 2-5.5
§ 98-34 Section 2-5.6
Article VI Article 6
§ 98-35 Section 2-6.1
§ 98-36 Section 2-6.2
§ 98-37 Section 2-6.3
§ 98-38 Section 2-6.4
Article VII Article 7
§ 98-39 Section 2-7.1
§ 98-40 Section 2-7.2
§ 98-41 Section 2-7.3
§ 98-42 Section 2-7.4
§ 98-43 Section 2-7.5
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:76
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 98-44 Section 2-7.6
Article VIII Article 8
§ 98-45 Section 2-8.1
Article IX Article 9
§ 98-46 Section 2-9.1
§ 98-47 Section 2-9.2
§ 98-48 Section 2-9.3
Article X Article 10
§ 98-49 Section
2-10.1
§ 98-50 Section
2-10.2
§ 98-51 Section
2-10.3
§ 98-52 Section
2-10.4
§ 98-53 Section
2-10.5
§ 98-54 Section
2-10.6
§ 98-55 Section
2-10.7
Article XI Article 11
§ 98-56 Section
2-11.1
§ 98-57 Section
2-11.2
§ 98-58 Section
2-11.3
Amended 10-6-71 by L.L. No.
5-1971; 2-5-64 by L.L. No. 1-1964
§ 98-59 Section
2-11.4
§ 98-60 Section
2-11.5
§ 98-61 Section
2-11.6
Amended 10-6-71 by L.L. No.
5-1971
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:77
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 98-62 Section
2-11.7
§ 98-63 Section
2-11.8
Amended 9-6-67 by L.L. No.
2-1967
§ 98-64 Section
2-11.9
§ 98-65 Section
2-11.10
§ 98-66 Section
2-11.11
§ 98-67 Section
2-11.12
Amended 10-6-71 by Ord. No.
5-1971
§ 98-68 Section
2-11.13
§ 98-69 Section
2-11.14
§ 98-70 Section
2-11.15
§ 98-71 Section
2-11.16
§ 98-72 Section
2-11.17
§ 98-73 Section
2-11.18
Article XII Article 12
§ 98-74 Section
2-12.1
§ 98-75 Section
2-12.2
§ 98-76 Section
2-12.3
§ 98-77 Section
2-12.4
Amended 8-20-75 by Ord. No.
4-1975
§ 98-78 Section
2-12.5
§ 98-79 Section
2-12.6
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:78
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 98-80 Section
2-12.7
Article XIII Article 13
§ 98-81 Section
2-13.1
§ 98-82 Section
2-13.2
Amended 9-6-67 by L.L. No.
2-1967
§ 98-83 Section
2-13.3
§ 98-84 Section
2-13.4
Article XIV Article 14
§ 98-85 Section
2-14.1
§ 98-86 Section
2-14.2
§ 98-87 Section
2-14.3
§ 98-88 Section
2-14.4
§ 98-89 Section
2-14.5
Article XV Article 15
§ 98-90 Section
2-15.1
§ 98-91 Section
2-15.2
§ 98-92 Section
2-15.3
§ 98-93 Section
2-15.4
§ 98-94 Section
2-15.5
§ 98-95 Section
2-15.6
§ 98-96 Section
2-15.7
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:79
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 98-97 Section
2-15.8
§ 98-98 Section
2-15.9
§ 98-99 Section
2-15.10
§ 98-100 Section
2-15.11
Article XVI Article 16
§ 98-101 Section
2-16.1
§ 98-102 Section
2-16.2
§ 98-103 Section
9-16.3
§ 98-104 Section
2-16.4
§ 98-105 Section
2-16.5
§ 98-106 Section
2-16.6
§ 98-107 Section
2-16.7
§ 98-108 Section
2-16.8
§ 98-109 Section
2-16.9
§ 98-110 Section
2-16.10
§ 98-111 Section
2-16.11
§ 98-112 Section
2-16.12
Article XVII Article 17
§ 98-113 Section
2-17.1
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:80
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 98-114 Section
2-17.2
§ 98-115 Section
2-17.3
§ 98-116 Section
2-17.4
§ 98-117 Section
2-17.5
§ 98-118 Section
2-17.6
§ 98-119 Section
2-17.7
§ 98-120 Section
2-17.8
§ 98-121 Section
2-17.9
§ 98-122 Section
2-17.10
§ 98-123 Section
2-17.11
§ 98-124 Section
2-17.12
Article XVIII Article 18
§ 98-125 Section
2-18.1
§ 98-126 Section
2-18.2
§ 98-127 Section
2-18.3
§ 98-128 Section
2-18.4
Article XIX Article 19
§ 98-129 Section
2-19.1
§ 98-130 Section
2-19.2
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:81
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 98-131 Section
2-19.3
Article XX Article 20
§ 98-132 Section
2-20.1
§ 98-133 Section
2-20.2
§ 98-134 Section
2-20.3
Article XXI Article 21
§ 98-135 Section
2-21.1
§ 98-136 Section
2-21.2
§ 98-137 Section
2-21.3
§ 98-138 Section
2-21.4
§ 98-139 Section
2-21.5
Added 9-6-67 by L.L. No. 2-1967
Article XXII Article 22
§ 98-140 Section
2-22.1
§ 98-141 Section
2-22.2
§ 98-142 Section
2-22.3
§ 98-143 Section
2-22.4
§ 98-144 Section
2-22.5
Section
2-22.6*
Chapter 102, Freshwater
Wetlands
L.L. No.
1-1976
8-25-76
§ 102-1 Section 1
Section 2*
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:82
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
Chapter 108, Housing
Standards
L.L. No.
5-1963 as
Ch. 11 of
General
Ordinances
6-5-63
Article I Article 1
§ 108-1 Section
11-1.1
§ 108-2 Section
11-1.2
Amended 9-6-67 by L.L. No.
1-1967
§ 108-3 Section
11-1.3
§ 108-4 Section
11-1.4
§ 108-5 Section
11-1.5
§ 108-6 Section
11-1.6
§ 108-7 Section
11-1.7
Article II Article 2
§ 108-8 Section
11-2.1
§ 108-9 Section
11-2.2
§ 108-10 Section
11-2.3
§ 108-11 Section
11-2.4
§ 108-12 Section
11-2.5
§ 108-13 Section
11-2.6
§ 108-14 Section
11-2.7
§ 108-15 Section
11-2.8
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:83
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 108-16 Section
11-2.9
Article III Article 3
§ 108-17 Section
11-3.1
§ 108-18 Section
11-3.2
§ 108-19 Section
11-3.3
Article IV Article 4
§ 108-20 Section
11-4.1
§ 108-21 Section
11-4.2
§ 108-22 Section
11-4.3
§ 108-23 Section
11-4.4
Article V Article 5
§ 108-24 Section
11-5.1
§ 108-25 Section
11-5.2
§ 108-26 Section
11-5.3
§ 108-27 Section
11-5.4
Amended 9-6-67 by L.L. No.
1-1967
§ 108-28 Section
11-5.5
§ 108-29 Section
11-6.6
§ 108-30 Section
11-5.7
Amended 9-6-67 by L.L. No.
1-1967
§ 108-31 Section
11-5.8
§ 108-32 Section
11-5.9
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:84
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 108-33 Section
11-5.10
§ 108-34 Section
11-5.11
§ 108-35 Section
11-5.12
§ 108-36 Section
11-5.13
Article VI Article 6
§ 108-37 Section
11-6.1
§ 108-38 Section
11-6.2
§ 108-39 Section
11-6.3
§ 108-40 Section
11-6.4
§ 108-41 Section
11-6.5
§ 108-42 Section
11-6.6
Article VII Article 7
§ 108-43 Section
11-7.1
§ 108-44 Section
11-7.2
§ 108-45 Section
11-7.3
Article VIII Article 8
§ 108-46 Section
11-8.1
§ 108-47 Section
11-8.2
§ 108-48 Section
11-8.3
§ 108-49 Section
11-8.4
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:85
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 108-50 Section
11-8.5
§ 108-51 Section
11-8.6
§ 108-52 Section
11-8.7
§ 108-53 Section
11-8.8
§ 108-54 Section
11-8.9
§ 108-55 Section
11-8.10
§ 108-56 Section
11-8.11
Amended 9-6-67 by L.L. No.
1-1967
§ 108-57 Section
11-8.12
Chapter 113, Junk
Dealers
Article 5 of
Chapter 3 of
General
Ordinances
2-4-42
§ 113-1 3-5.1
§ 113-2 3-5.2
§ 113-3 3-5.3
§ 113-4 3-5.4
§ 113-5 3-5.5
§ 113-6 3-5.6
§ 113-7 3-5.7
§ 113-8 3-5.8
§ 113-9 3-5.9
Chapter 117, Landmarks
Preservation
L.L. No.
6-1977 as
Article 5 of
Chapter 7 of
General
Ordinances
10-5-77
Section 1*
§ 117-1 7-5.1
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:86
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 117-2 7-5.2
§ 117-3 7-5.3
§ 117-4 7-5.4
§ 117-5 7-5.5
§ 117-6 7-5.6
§ 117-7 7-5.7
§ 117-8 7-5.8
§ 117-9 7-5.9 7-5.10*
Section 2*
Chapter 121, Laundromats
Article 7 of
Chapter 3 of
General
Ordinances
5-4-60
§ 121-1 § 3-7.1
§ 121-2 § 3-7.2
§ 121-3 § 3-7.3
§ 121-4 § 3-7.4
§ 121-5 § 3-7.5
§ 121-6 § 3-7.6
Chapter 125, Licenses Article 7 of
Chapter 3 of
General
Ordinances;
renumbered
Article 12 of
Chapter 3
2-4-42 5-4-60
§ 125-1 3-12.1
§ 125-2 3-12.2
§ 125-3 3-12.3
§ 125-4 3-12.4
Chapter 133, Noise Article 2 of
Chapter 4 of
General
Ordinances
2-4-42; amended 3-7-62 by Ord.
No. 1-1962
§ 133-1 4-2.1(a)
§ 133-2 (b)
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:87
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 133-3 (c)
§ 133-4 (d)
§ 133-5 (e)
§ 133-6 (f)
Chapter 138, Parking
Lots
Article 6-A of
Chapter 3 of
General
Ordinances
4-18-56
§ 138-1 Section 1
§ 138-2 Section 2
§ 138-3 Section 3
§ 138-4 Section 4
§ 138-5 Section 5 Amended 5-15-56
§ 138-6 Section 6
§ 138-7 Section 7
§ 138-8 Section 8
§ 138-9 Section 9
§ 138-10 Section 10
§ 138-11 Section 11
§ 138-12 Section 12
§ 138-13 Section 13
§ 138-14 Section 14
§ 138-15 Section 15
§ 138-16 Section 16
§ 138-17 Section 17
§ 138-18 Section 18
§ 138-19 Section 19
§ 138-20 Section 20
§ 138-21 Section 21
§ 138-22 Section 22
§ 138-23 Section 23
§ 138-24 Section 24
§ 138-25 Section 25
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:88
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 138-26 Section 26
§ 138-27 Section 27
§ 138-28 Section 28
§ 138-29 Section 29
Section 30*
§ 138-30 Section 31
Section 32*
Chapter 141, Peace and
Good Order
Various sections
of
Chapter 4 of
General
Ordinances
2-4-42
§ 141-1 4-1.1
§ 141-2 4-1.2
§ 141-3 4-1.3
§ 141-4 4-3.1
§ 141-5 4-3.2 Amended 6-16-76 by Ord. No.
7-1976
§ 141-6 4-3.3
§ 141-7 4-3.4
§ 141-8 4-3.6 Amended 11-21-56
§ 141-9 4-3.7 Added 8-16-61 by Ord. No.
12-1961
Chapter 144, Peddling
and Soliciting
Article 4 of
Chapter 3 of
General
Ordinances
2-4-42
§ 144-1 3-4.1
§ 144-2 3-4.2
§ 144-3 3-4.3
§ 144-4 3-4.4
§ 144-5 3-4.5
§ 144-6 3-4.6
§ 144-7 3-4.7
§ 144-8 3-4.8
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:89
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 144-9 3-4.9
§ 144-10 3-4.10 Added 9-17-52; amended 8-17-55
Chapter 149, Refrigerators,
Abandoned
Sections
5-5.2 and
5-5.3 of
Chapter 5 of
General
Ordinances
2-4-42
§ 149-1 5-5.2
§ 149-2 5-5.3
Chapter 157, Sani-tary
Regulations
Sanitary
Code
2-4-42 (adopted by Council acting
as a Board of Health)
Article I Article 1
§ 157-1 10-1.1 Amended 3-7-45
§ 157-2 10-1.2 Amended 3-7-45
§ 157-3 10-1.3
§ 157-4 10-1.4 Added 5-7-47
§ 157-5 10-1.5 Added 5-7-47
§ 157-6 10-1.6 Added 5-7-47
Article II Article 2
§ 157-7 10-2.1
§ 157-8 10-2.2
§ 157-9 10-2.3
§ 157-10 10-2.4
§ 157-11 10-2.5
§ 157-12 10-2.6 Amended 2-2-77 by Ord. No.
2-1977
§ 157-13 10-2.7
§ 157-14 10-2.8
§ 157-15 10-2.9
§ 157-16 10-2.10
§ 157-17 10-2.11
§ 157-18 10-2.12
§ 157-19 10-2.13
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:90
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 157-20 10-2.14
§ 157-21 10-2.15
§ 157-22 10-2.16
§ 157-23 10-2.17
§ 157-24 10-2.18
Article III Article 3
§ 157-25 10-3.1
§ 157-26 10-3.2
§ 157-27 10-3.3 Amended 6-16-76 by Ord. No.
9-1976
§ 157-28 10-3.4
§ 157-29 10-3.5 Amended 4-7-48
§ 157-30 10-3.6 Added 4-7-48
§ 157-31 10-3.7 Added 4-7-48
§ 157-32 10-3.8 Added 4-7-48; amended 2-2-77 by
Ord. No. 2-1977
Article IV Article 4
§ 157-33 10-4.1
§ 157-34 10-4.2
§ 157-35 10-4.3
§ 157-36 10-4.4
§ 157-37 10-4.5 Amended 5-7-69 by Ord. No.
2-1969; 7-16-69 by Ord. No.
3-1969; 9-16-70 by Ord. No.
7-1970; 1-19-72 by Ord. No.
1-1972; 12-20-72 by Ord. No.
5-1972; 1-7-76 by Ord. No. 2-1976;
2-2-77 by Ord. No. 2-1977
Article V Article 5
§ 157-38 10-5.1
§ 157-39 10-5.2
§ 157-40 10-5.3
§ 157-41 10-5.4
§ 157-42 10-5.5
§ 157-43 10-5.6
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:91
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 157-44 10-5.7
§ 157-45 10-5.8
§ 157-46 10-5.9
Article VI Article 6
§ 157-47 10-6.1
§ 157-48 10-6.2
§ 157-49 10-6.3
§ 157-50 10-6.4 Amended 7-20-60
§ 157-51 10-6.5 Added 8-15-62 by Ord. No. 9-1962
Article VII Article 7
§ 157-52 10-7.1
§ 157-53 10-7.2
§ 157-54 10-7.3
Article VIII Article 8
§ 157-55 10-8.1
§ 157-56 10-8.2
§ 157-57 10-8.3
§ 157-58 10-8.4
§ 157-59 10-8.5
§ 157-60 10-8.6
§ 157-61 10-8.7
§ 157-62 10-8.8
§ 157-63 10-8.9 Added 1-19-49
§ 157-64 10-8.10 Added 7-16-69 by Ord. No. 3-1969
Article IX Article 9
§ 157-65 10-9.1
10-9.2*
10-9.3*
Amended 4-1-42
Article X Article 10 Added 6-19-59
§ 157-66 10-10.1
§ 157-67 10-10.2
§ 157-68 10-10.3 Amended 8-3-67 by Ord. No.
3-1967
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:92
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 157-69 10-10.4
§ 157-70 10-10.5 Amended 8-3-67 by Ord. No.
3-1967
§ 157-71 10-10.6 Amended 8-3-67 by Ord. No.
3-1967
§ 157-72 10-10.7
§ 157-73 10-10.8
§ 157-74 10-10.9 Amended 8-3-67 by Ord. No.
3-1967
§ 157-75 10-10.10
§ 157-76 10-10.11 Amended 8-3-67 by Ord. No.
3-1967
§ 157-77 10-10.12
§ 157-78 10-10.13
§ 157-79 10-10.14
10-10.15*
10-10.16*
Article XI Article 11 Added 11-7-62 by Ord. No.
11-1962
§ 157-80 10-11.1 Amended 8-3-67 by Ord. No.
3-1967
§ 157-81 10-11.2
§ 157-82 10-11.3
§ 157-83 10-11.4
§ 157-84 10-11.5
§ 157-85 10-11.6
§ 157-86 10-11.7
§ 157-87 10-11.8
§ 157-88 10-11.9
§ 157-89 10-11.10
§ 157-90 10-11.11
§ 157-91 10-11.12
§ 157-92 10-11.13
§ 157-93 10-11.14
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:93
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 157-94 10-11.15
§ 157-95 10-11.16
§ 157-96 10-11.17
§ 157-97 10-11.18
§ 157-98 10-11.19
§ 157-99 10-11.20
§ 157-100 10-11.21
10-11.22*
10-11.23*
Chapter 161, Sewers
Article I Section 4-3.5
of Chapter 4
of General
Ordinances
9-20-50
§ 161-1 4-3.5
Article II L.L. No.
9-1963
12-18-63
§ 161-2 Section 1
§ 161-3 Section 2
§ 161-4 Section 3
§ 161-5 Section 4
Chapter 164, Shopping
Carts
Ord. No.
5-1962 as
Article 6 of
Chapter 5 of
General
Ordinances
5-2-62
§ 164-1 5-6.1
§ 164-2 5-6.2
§ 164-3 5-6.3
§ 164-4 5-6.4
§ 164-5 5-6.5
§ 164-6 5-6.6
§ 164-7 5-6.7
§ 164-8 5-6.8
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:94
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 164-9 5-6.9
§ 164-10 5-6.10
Chapter 167, Streets
and Sidewalks
Article I Article 1 and
portion of
Article 5 of
Chapter 5 of
General
Ordinances
2-4-42
§ 167-1 5-1.1
§ 167-2 5-1.2
§ 167-3 5-1.3
§ 167-4 5-1.4
§ 167-5 5-1.5
§ 167-6 5-5.1
Article II L.L. No.
1-1970 as
Article 2 of
Chapter 5 of
General
Ordinances
9-16-70
§ 167-7 5-2.1
§ 167-8 5-2.2
§ 167-9 5-2.3
§ 167-10 5-2.4 Amended 1-7-76 by Ord. No.
3-1976
§ 167-11 5-2.5
§ 167-12 5-2.6
§ 167-13 5-2.7
§ 167-14 5-2.8
§ 167-15 5-2.9
§ 167-16 5-2.10
§ 167-17 5-2.11
§ 167-18 5-2.12
§ 167-19 5-2.13
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:95
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 167-20 5-2.14
§ 167-21 5-2.15
§ 167-22 5-2.16
§ 167-23 5-2.17
§ 167-24 5-2.18
§ 167-25 5-2.19
§ 167-26 5-2.20
§ 167-27 5-2.21
§ 167-28 5-2.22
§ 167-29 5-2.23
§ 167-30 5-2.24
§ 167-31 5-2.25
§ 167-32 5-2.26
§ 167-33 5-2.27
§ 167-34 5-2.28
§ 167-35 5-2.29
§ 167-36 5-2.30
§ 167-37 5-2.31
§ 167-38 5-2.32
§ 167-39 5-2.33
§ 167-40 5-2.34
§ 167-41 5-2.35
§ 167-42 5-2.36
§ 167-43 5-2.37
§ 167-44 5-2.38
§ 167-45 5-2.39
§ 167-46 5-2.40
5-2.41*
5-2.42*
Article III Article 3 of
Chapter 5 of
General
Ordinances
2-4-42
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:96
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 167-47 5-3.1 Amended 11-17-48; 8-16-61 by
Ord. No. 11-1961
§ 167-48 5-3.2 Amended 11-17-48; 8-16-61 by
Ord. No. 11-1961
§ 167-49 5-3.3
§ 167-50 5-3.4 Added 10-21-64 by Ord. No.
14-1964
Article IV L.L. No.
2-1975
9-17-75
§ 167-51 Section 1
§ 167-52 Section 2
§ 167-53 Section 3
§ 167-54 Section 4
§ 167-55 Section 5
§ 167-56 Section 6
§ 167-57 Section 7
§ 167-58 Section 8
Section 9*
Chapter 170, Subdivision
of Land
Regulations Planning Com-mission 6-25-57;
approved by Council 7-30-57
Article I Article I
§ 170-1 Section 10 Amended 11-15-67
§ 170-2 Section 11
§ 170-3 Section 12
Article II Article II
§ 170-4 Section 20 Amended 8-21-63; 4-7-76
Article III Article III
§ 170-5 Section 30 Amended 8-21-63; 11-15-67
§ 170-6 Section 31 Amended 2-19-64; 4-7-76
§ 170-7 Section 32 Amended 8-21-63; 2-19-64; 4-7-76;
10-12-76
§ 170-8 Section 33 Amended 4-7-76; 10-12-76
§ 170-9 Section 34
§ 170-10 Section 35
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:97
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 170-11 Section 36 Added 2-19-64
Article IV Article IV
§ 170-12 Section 40
§ 170-13 Section 41
§ 170-14 Section 42
§ 170-15 Section 43 Amended 6-15-65; 4-23-75; 4-7-76
§ 170-16 Section 44 Amended 11-15-67
§ 170-17 Section 45 Amended 2-19-64; 6-15-65
§ 170-18 Section 46
§ 170-19 Section 47
Article V Article V
§ 170-20 Section 51 Amended 4-7-76
§ 170-21 Section 52 Amended 4-7-76
Chapter 173, Surface
Water Control
Ord. No.
2-1975 as
Article 5 of
Chapter 8 of
General
Ordinances
4-23-75
§ 173-1 8-5.1
§ 173-2 8-5.2
§ 173-3 8-5.3
§ 173-4 8-5.4
§ 173-5 8-5.5
§ 173-6 8-5.6
§ 173-7 8-5.7
§ 173-8 8-5.8
§ 173-9 8-5.9
Chapter 177, Taxation
Article I L.L. No.
1-1944
Article I
6-21-44
§ 177-1 Section 1
Article II,
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:98
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
Section 1
§ 177-2 1 Amended 7-18-45 by L.L. No.
1-1945; 6-19-46 by L.L. No.
2-1946; 6-18-47 by L.L. No.
2-1947; 5-19-48 by L.L. No.
1-1948; 5-18-49 by L.L. No.
1-1949; 6-21-50 by L.L. No. 1-1950
§ 177-3 2
§ 177-4 3
§ 177-5 4 Amended 7-18-45 by L.L. No.
1-1945; 6-19-46 by L.L. No.
2-1946; 6-18-47 by L.L. No.
2-1947; 5-19-48 by L.L. No.
1-1948; 5-18-49 by L.L. No.
1-1949; 6-21-50 by L.L. No. 1-1950
§ 177-6 5
§ 177-7 6
§ 177-8 7
§ 177-9 8
§ 177-10 9
§ 177-11 10
§ 177-12 11
§ 177-13 12
§ 177-14 13
§ 177-15 14
Article III,
Section 1*
Article II L.L. No.
2-1965
7-29-65
§ 177-16 Section 1
§ 177-17 Section 2
§ 177-18 Section 3
§ 177-19 Section 4
§ 177-20 Section 5
§ 177-21 Section 6
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:99
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 177-22 Section 7
§ 177-23 Section 8
Section 9*
§ 177-24 Section 10
Article III L.L. No.
1-1971
5-19-71
§ 177-25 Section 1
§ 177-26 Section 2 Amended 5-2-73 by L.L. No.
1-1973; 11-20-74 by L.L. No.
1-1974; 11-16-77 by L.L. No.
7-1977
§ 177-27 Section 3
§ 177-28 Section 4
§ 177-29 Section 5
Section 6*
Article IV L.L. No.
1-1975
4-23-75
§ 177-30 Section 1
§ 177-31 Section 2
§ 177-32 Section 3
Section 4*
Article V L.L. No.
2-1977
2-16-77
§ 177-33 Section 1
§ 177-34 Section 2
Article VI L.L. No.
8-1963
12-4-63
§ 177-35 Section 1
Chapter 180, Taxicabs Article 6 of
Chapter 3 of
General
Ordinances
2-4-42
§ 180-1 3-6.1
§ 180-2 3-6.2
§ 180-3 3-6.3
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:100
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 180-4 3-6.4
§ 180-5 3-6.5
§ 180-6 3-6.6
§ 180-7 3-6.7
§ 180-8 3-6.8
§ 180-9 3-6.9
§ 180-10 3-6.10
§ 180-11 3-6.11
§ 180-12 3-6.12
§ 180-13 3-6.13
§ 180-14 3-6.14 Amended 5-6-64 by Ord. No.
8-1964; 6-16-70 by Ord. No.
6-1970; 5-1-74 by Ord. No. 1-1974;
5-18-77 by Ord. No. 4-1977
§ 180-15 3-6.15
§ 180-16 3-6.16
§ 180-17 3-6.17
§ 180-18 3-6.18
§ 180-19 3-6.19
Chapter 183, Tax Liens,
Disposition of
L.L. No.
3-1964
11-18-64
§ 183-1 Section 1
§ 183-2 Section 2
§ 183-3 Section 3
§ 183-4 Section 4
§ 183-5 Section 5
§ 183-6 Section 6
§ 183-7 Section 7
§ 183-8 Section 8
§ 183-9 Section 9
§ 183-10 Section 10
§ 183-11 Section 11
§ 183-12 Section 12
§ 183-13 Section 13
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:101
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 183-14 Section 14
§ 183-15 Section 15
§ 183-16 Section 16
§ 183-17 Section 17
§ 183-18 Section 18
§ 183-19 Section 19
§ 183-20 Section 20
§ 183-21 Section 21
§ 183-22 Section 22
§ 183-23 Section 23
Section 24*
Section 25*
Chapter 187, Trees Article 4 of
Chapter 5 of
General
Ordinances
2-4-42
§ 187-1 5-4.1
§ 187-2 5-4.2
§ 187-3 5-4.3
§ 187-4 5-4.4
§ 187-5 5-4.5
§ 187-6 5-4.6
§ 187-7 5-4.7
§ 187-8 5-4.8
§ 187-9 5-4.9
§ 187-10 5-4.10
Chapter 191, Vehicles
and Traffic
Part 1 Chapter 6 of
General
Ordinances
2-4-42
Article I Article 1
§ 191-1 6-1.1
§ 191-2 6-1.9 Added 8-22-45
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:102
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 191-3 6-1.6
§ 191-4 6-1.7
Article II
§ 191-5 6-1.2 Amended 4-3-68 by Ord. No.
1-1968
§ 191-6 6-1.3 Amended 2-4-70 by Ord. No.
1-1970; 9-16-70 by Ord. No.
8-1970; 5-27-76 by Ord. No.
6-1976
§ 191-7 6-1.4 Amended 9-16-64 by Ord. No.
13-1964
§ 191-8 6-1.5 Amended 1-19-77 by Ord. No.
1-1977
§ 191-9 Resolution Added 4-4-62
§ 191-10 6-1.8 Added 6-16-43
§ 191-11 Regulations
§ 191-12 Regulations
Article III Article 2
§ 191-13 6-2.1
§ 191-14 6-2.2 Amended 9-16-70 by Ord. No.
8-1970
§ 191-15 6-2.3
§ 191-16 6-2.4
§ 191-17 Resolution Added 12-19-62
§ 191-18 6-2.5 Amended 5-17-61 by Ord. No.
4-1961
§ 191-19 6-2.7 Added 5-15-63 by Ord. No. 4-1963;
amended 2-19-64; 6-17-69 by Ord.
No. 3-1969; 2-4-70 by Ord. No.
1-1970; 4-15-70 by Ord. No.
4-1970; 1-7-76 by Ord. No. 3-1976;
5-27-76 by Ord. No. 6-1976;
11-17-76 by Ord. No. 13-1976;
9-22-77 by Ord. No. 5-1977
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:103
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 191-20 6-2.6 Added 5-15-63 by Ord. No. 4-1963;
amended 2-4-70 by Ord. No.
1-1970; 11-17-76 by Ord. No.
13-1976
§ 191-21 6-2.8 Added 4-4-62; amended 1-7-76 by
Ord. No. 3-1976
Article IV 6-1.10 Amended 11-17-48; 5-17-61 by
Ord. No. 3-1961; 8-21-74 by Ord.
No. 3-1974
§ 191-22 (a)
§ 191-23 (b)
§ 191-24 (c)
§ 191-25 (d)
Article V Article 3
§ 191-26 6-3.1 Reserved
§ 191-27 6-3.2
§ 191-28 6-3.3
§ 191-29 6-3.4
§ 191-30 6-1.11 Amended 8-15-62 by Ord. No.
8-1962
Article VI Article 4,
6-4.1
Amended 3-20-63; 5-15-63 by Ord.
No. 4-1963; 1-7-76 by Ord. No.
3-1976
§ 191-31 (a)
§ 191-32 (b)
§ 191-33 (c) Amended 7-21-76 by Ord. No.
11-1976
§ 191-34 (d)
§ 191-35 (e)
Part 2 Ordinance 7-21-54
Article VII
§ 191-36 Section 1 Amended 4-6-55; 5-2-56
§ 191-37 Section 2
§ 191-38 Section 3 Amended 2-18-70
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:104
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 191-39 Section 4 Amended 12-15-65 by Ord. No.
4-1965; 2-18-70
§ 191-40 Ordinance Added 5-2-56
§ 191-41 Section 5
§ 191-42 Section 6
§ 191-43 Section 7
§ 191-44 Section 9
§ 191-45 Section 10
Section 11*
Part 3 Ordinance 1-19-55
Article VIII
§ 191-46 Section 1
§ 191-47 Section 2
§ 191-48 Section 3 Amended 6-15-55; 4-18-56;
10-5-60; 12-5-62 by Ord. No.
12-1962; 12-3-69 by Ord. No.
6-1969; 3-19-75 by Ord. No.
1-1975; 1-21-76 by Ord. No.
4-1976
§ 191-49 Section 4
Section 5*
Section 6*
Chapter 194, Water
Article I Ordinance 10-21-53
§ 194-1 1 through 11
§ 194-2 12
Chapter 197, Zoning Chapter 9 of
General
Ordinances
2-7-23; re-enacted 2-4-42; revised
5-2-56
Article I Article I
§ 197-1 9-1.1 Amended 7-17-57; 1-21-59;
11-15-67 by Ord. No. 4-1967;
10-18-72 by Ord. No. 2-1972
Article II Article 2
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:105
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 197-2 9-2.1 Amended 7-17-57; 11-6-57;
10-24-63 by Ord. No. 7-1963;
7-15-64 by Ord. No. 11-1964;
6-18-68 by Ord. No. 3-1968
§ 197-3 9-2.2 Amended 7-17-57
Article III Article 3
§ 197-4 9-3.1
§ 197-5 9-3.2
§ 197-5.1 9-3.3 Added 5-3-78 by Ord. No. 1-1978
Article IV Article 4
§ 197-6 9-4.1 Amended 8-20-58
§ 197-7 9-4.2 Amended 9-21-60; 4-1-64 by Ord.
No. 3-1964; 10-18-72 by Ord. No.
2-1972; 6-16-76 by Ord. No.
8-19-76
§ 197-8 9-4.21 Amended 10-24-63 by Ord. No.
7-1963; 4-1-64 by Ord. No. 4-1964;
5-7-69 by Ord. No. 1-1969
§ 197-9 9-4.3 Amended 10-24-63 by Ord. No.
7-1963; 6-18-68 by Ord. No.
3-1968
§ 197-10 9-4.4 Amended 7-17-57; 7-20-60; 5-7-69
by Ord. No. 1-1969
§ 197-11 9-4.41 Amended 9-18-57; 7-20-60; 10-4-61
by Ord. No. 14-1961; 4-1-64 by
Ord. No. 5-1964; 8-21-74 by Ord.
No. 4-1974
§ 197-12 9-4.42 Amended 9-18-57; 7-20-60; 4-1-64
by Ord. No. 5-1964
§ 197-13 9-4.43 Added 10-24-63 by Ord. No.
7-1963
§ 197-14 9-4.5 Amended 4-21-60; 10-18-72 by
Ord. No. 3-1972
§ 197-15 9-4.6 Amended 10-18-72 by Ord. No.
3-1972
§ 197-16 9-4.61 Amended 4-17-57; 10-18-72 by
Ord. No. 3-1972
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:106
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 197-17 9-4.62 Amended 10-18-72 by Ord. No.
3-1972
§ 197-18 9-4.63 Amended 7-15-64 by Ord. No.
11-1964; 10-18-72 by Ord. No.
3-1972
§ 197-19 9-4.64 Amended 10-18-72 by Ord. No.
3-1972
§ 197-20 9-4.65 Amended 8-21-57; 9-18-57;
10-18-72 by Ord. No. 3-1972
§ 197-21 9-4.7
§ 197-22 Section
§ 197-23
9-4.72 9-4.73 Amended 11-4-70 by Ord. No.
9-1970; 10-18-72 by Ord. No.
2-1972 Amended 10-18-72 by Ord.
No. 2-1972
§ 197-24 9-4.74
§ 197-25 9-4.81
§ 197-26 9-4.82
§ 197-27 9-4.83
§ 197-28 9-4.84 Amended 2-4-59; 11-18-59;
4-21-60; 9-21-60; 4-18-62 by Ord.
No. 3-1962; 7-20-66 by Ord. No.
4-1966; 11-18-70 by Ord. No.
10-1970; 2-3-71 by Ord. No.
1-1971
§ 197-29 9-4.85
§ 197-30 9-4.86 Amended 10-3-56; 9-21-60;
10-26-63 by Ord. No. 7-1963;
4-1-64 by Ord. No. 5-1964; 7-20-66
by Ord. No. 4-1966; 6-18-68 by
Ord. No. 3-1968
§ 197-31 9-4.87 Amended 9-21-60
Article V Article 5
§ 197-32 9-5.1
§ 197-33 9-5.11
§ 197-34 9-5.12
§ 197-35 9-5.13
§ 197-36 9-5.14
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:107
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 197-37 9-5.15 Amended 10-24-63 by Ord. No.
7-1963; 7-15-64 by Ord. No.
11-1964; 6-18-68 by Ord. No.
3-1968
§ 197-38 9-5.155 Amended 9-18-72 by Ord. No.
2-1972
§ 197-39 9-5.16 Amended 6-18-75 by Ord. No.
3-1975; 7-19-78 by Ord. No.
2-1978
§ 197-40 9-5.17 Amended 7-19-61 by Ord. No.
10-1961
§ 197-41 9-5.21 Amended 11-15-67 by Ord. No.
4-1967
§ 197-42 9-5.22 Added 8-7-60; amended 11-15-67
by Ord. No. 4-1967
§ 197-43 9-5.23 Amended 11-15-67 by Ord. No.
4-1967
§ 197-44 9-5.24 Amended 11-15-67 by Ord. No.
4-1967; 6-16-76 by Ord. No.
8-1976
§ 197-45 9-5.31
§ 197-46 9-5.32 Amended 9-18-57; 4-1-64 by Ord.
No. 5-1964
§ 197-47 9-5.41
§ 197-48 9-5.42
§ 197-49 9-5.43
§ 197-50 9-5.44
§ 197-51 9-5.45
§ 197-52 9-5.46
§ 197-53 9-5.51
§ 197-54 9-5.515
§ 197-55 9-5.52
§ 197-56 9-5.53 Amended 6-18-68 by Ord. No.
3-1968
§ 197-57 9-5.54
§ 197-58 9-5.55
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-2
1:108
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 197-59 9-5.56
§ 197-60 9-5.57 Amended 7-17-57; 2-26-58; 3-5-58
§ 197-61 9-5.58
§ 197-62 9-5.59
§ 197-63 9-5.61
§ 197-64 9-5.62 Amended 9-21-60; 3-21-62 by Ord.
No. 2-1962; 10-24-63 by Ord. No.
7-1963
§ 197-65 9-5.63
§ 197-66 9-5.64
§ 197-67 9-5.65
§ 197-68 9-5.66 Amended 10-24-63 by Ord. No.
7-1963
§ 197-69 9-5.71 Amended 5-2-56; 9-21-60; 3-18-64
by Ord. No. 2-1964; 7-15-64 by
Ord. No. 11-1964; 4-7-65 by Ord.
No. 1-1965
§ 197-70 9-5.72
§ 197-71 9-5.73 Added 11-15-67 by Ord. No.
4-1967
§ 197-72 9-5.81
§ 197-73 9-5.82 Amended 10-24-63 by Ord. No.
7-1963; 6-18-68 by Ord. No.
3-1968
§ 197-74 9-5.83
§ 197-75 9-5.84
§ 197-76 9-5.85
§ 197-77 9-5.86
§ 197-78 9-5.87
Article VI Article 7
§ 197-79 9-7.2
§ 197-80 9-7.3
§ 197-81 9-7.4
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:109
Derivation Table
New Number
(chapter, title,
Article, section)
Old Number
(Source) Adoption or Amendment Date
§ 197-82 9-7.5 Amended 11-18-59; 3-21-62 by
Ord. No. 2-1962; 10-24-63 by Ord.
No. 7-1963; 4-1-64 by Ord. No.
6-1964; 6-21-76 by Ord. No.
10-1976
Article VII Article 8
§ 197-83 9-8.1
§ 197-84 9-8.2 9-8.3* Amended 3-20-57; 4-15-64 by Ord.
No. 7-1964; 10-18-72 by Ord. No.
2-1972; 1-7-76 by Ord. No. 1-1976
§ 197-85 9-8.4 9-8.5*
Article VIII Article 6
§ 197-86 9-6.0
Table A 9-6.1 Amended 4-17-57; 7-17-55;
7-20-60; 10-4-61 by Ord. No.
13-1961; 3-21-62 by Ord. No.
2-1962; 10-24-63 by Ord. No.
7-1963; 11-15-67 by Ord. No.
4-1967; 6-18-68 by Ord. No.
3-1968; 10-18-72 by Ord. No.
4-1972
Table B 9-6.2 Amended 2-20-57; 9-18-57;
1-21-59; 6-29-60; 7-20-60; 9-21-60;
3-21-62 by Ord. No. 2-1962;
3-18-64 by Ord. No. 2-1964; 4-1-64
by Ord. No. 6-1964; 4-7-65 by Ord.
No. 1-1965; 7-21-65 by Ord. No.
2-1965; 11-15-67 by Ord. No.
4-1967; 6-18-68 by Ord. No.
3-1968; 5-1-69 by Ord. No. 1-1969;
6-16-76 by Ord. No. 8-1976
§ 1-3. Repeal of local laws, ordinances and resolutions.
The local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted
or adopted by the Council of the City of Rye and not included in the Code
of the City of Rye and in force on the date of the adoption of this local
law are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this local law, except as
hereinafter provided.
§ 1-2 RYE CODE § 1-4
1:110
§ 1-4. Local laws, ordinances and resolutions saved from repeal;
matters not affected by repeal.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, resolutions,
rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 1-5. Meaning and intent of previously adopted legislation
unchanged.
In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions of
the city for publication as the Code of the City of Rye, as distributed and
designated in the table in § 1-2 hereof, no changes in the meaning or intent
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have been made.
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City of Rye prior to the effective date of this
local law, or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability.
B. An offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the City of Rye, or
any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or proceeding pending or any
judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law and
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City of Rye.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the City of Rye.
E. Any local law, ordinance or resolution of the City of Rye providing for
the laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing of grade, changing the name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the City of Rye, or any portion thereof.
F. Any ordinance or resolution of the City of Rye appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or
authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the City of Rye, or
other instruments or evidence of the city's debtedness.
G. Local laws, ordinances or resolutions authorizing the purchase, sale,
lease or transfer of property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The dedication of property.
J. Any local laws, ordinances or resolutions relating to salaries.
K. Any local laws or ordinances adopted subsequent to July 19, 1978.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:111
§ 1-6. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article or part of this local
law or of any local law or ordinance cited in the table in § 1-2 hereof
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, Article or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which
such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code of the City of Rye, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in
the office of the City Clerk of the City of Rye and shall remain there for use
and examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law;
and if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the City
Clerk of the City of Rye by impressing thereon the Seal of the City of Rye,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said City Clerk,
to be made available to persons desiring to examine same during all times
while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-8. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the City of Rye" or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions, when
enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Council
to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code
so that reference to the Code of the City of Rye shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code of the City of Rye shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter
be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book
containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-9. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the City of Rye required to be filed in
the office of the City Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said Code
and all local laws, ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City Council
subsequent to the enactment of this local law, in such form as to indicate the
intention of said City Council to be a part of said Code, shall, when finally
enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes or local laws, ordinances or resolutions until such changes
or local laws, ordinances or resolutions are printed as supplements to said
Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-6 RYE CODE § 1-10
1:112
§ 1-10. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code of the City of Rye may be
purchased from the City Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by
resolution of the City Council, which may also arrange by resolution for
procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who, without authorization from the City Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the City
of Rye, or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner whatsoever
which will cause the legislation of the City of Rye to be misrepresented
thereby, or who violates any other provision of this local law, shall be guilty
of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not
more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than 15 days, or
both.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:113

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Enforcement
§ 1-12. Definitions.
As used in this Code and in the various chapters thereof, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
BOARD OF FIRE WARDENS — The Board of Fire Wardens of the Fire
Department of the city.
CITY — The City of Rye.
CLERK — The Clerk of the city.
COMPTROLLER — The Comptroller of the city.
CORPORATION COUNSEL — The Corporation Counsel of the city.
COUNCIL — The Council of the city.
ENGINEER — The Engineer of the city.
FIRE LIMITS — The territory within the restricted fire limits as shown on
the map referred to in Chapter 68, Building Construction, § 68-10.
INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the city.
MAYOR — The Mayor or Acting Mayor of the city.
ORDINANCE — Any ordinance of the city duly passed by the Council, of
which due public notice shall have been given as required by law.
PERSON — A natural person, corporation, partnership, association, jointstock
company, society or any other entity of any kind capable of being sued.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any realty or personalty or interest therein owned
by the city, including all streets, parks and public places, lands, lands under
water, waterfront property, and every estate, interest and right, legal or
equitable, therein.
STREET — Any alley, avenue, bridge, highway, road or street.
§ 1-13. Access to buildings.
The members of the Police Department, Council and Board of Fire Wardens
and the Inspector are duly appointed the representatives of the Council for
any purpose of inspection provided in any ordinance or local law of the city
and shall be afforded at all reasonable times access to any building within
the city for the purpose of making such inspection.
§ 1-14. Interfering with public officials.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully interfere with the
performance of a duty by an official of the city or duly appointed and
properly accredited representative of the Council.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:115
§ 1-15. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any chapter or Article of the Code of the City
of Rye for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation under the Penal Law and shall
be punishable, for each offense, by a fine of not more than $250 or by
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-16. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Chapter 1 of the Code of
the City of Rye, to be entitled "General Provisions," and the sections of this
local law shall be numbered 1-1 to 1-17 inclusive.
§ 1-17. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 1-15 RYE CODE § 1-17
1:116
Chapter 9
CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT
§ 9-1. Legislative intent.
The New York State Defense Emergency Act, in Section 29-a thereof,
authorizes political subdivisions of the state to provide for the continuity
of their governments in the event of an actual or imminent attack upon
the United States by an enemy or foreign nation. The General Municipal
Law, in Section 60 thereof, authorizes political subdivisions to provide for
the continuity of their governments in the event of other public disasters,
catastrophes or emergencies. Based on the authority contained in such
laws, this local law is adopted so that on such occasions the government of
the City of Rye, New York, may continue to function properly and efficiently
under emergency circumstances.
§ 9-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ATTACK — Any attack, actual or imminent, or series of attacks by an enemy
or foreign nation upon the United States, causing or which may cause
substantial damage or injury to civilian property or persons in the United
States in any manner by sabotage or by the use of bombs, shellfire, or
nuclear, radiological, chemical, bacteriological or biological means or other
weapons or processes.
DULY AUTHORIZED DEPUTY — A person authorized to perform all the
powers and duties of a public office in the event the office is vacant or at
such times as it lacks administration due to the death, absence or disability
of the incumbent officer, where such authorization is provided pursuant to
the provisions of any general, special or local law other than this chapter.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR — A person designated pursuant to
this chapter for possible temporary succession to the powers and duties, but
not the office, of a city officer in the event that neither such officer nor any
duly authorized deputy is able, due to death, absence from the city or other
physical, mental or legal reasons, to perform the powers and duties of the
office.
PUBLIC DISASTER — A disaster, catastrophe or emergency, actual or
imminent, of such unusual proportions or extent that a substantial number
of the residents of the City of Rye either sustain injury, become ill, are
infected with disease, have their lives imperiled, are killed or die as the
result of injury, disease or exposure, or the property of a substantial number
of such residents is imperiled, damaged or destroyed, and it is necessary
and essential in the interest of public safety, health and welfare that the
continuity of the government of the City of Rye be assured in order that it
be enabled to function properly and efficiently and to exercise its essential
powers in meeting emergency conditions. Such disasters, catastrophes and
§ 1-17 CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT § 9-2
9:117
emergencies may include, but shall not be limited to, conflagrations,
explosions, earthquakes or other convulsions of nature, floods, tidal waves,
pestilence, riots, insurrections, storms, prolonged failure of electric power
or essential transportation services, or any incident or occurrence which
causes or threatens to cause danger to life, health or property from
exposure to noxious materials or radiation.
§ 9-3. Designation of emergency interim successors.
A. Elective officers. Within 30 days following the effective date of this
chapter, and thereafter, within 30 days after first entering upon the
duties of their respective offices, the Mayor and Supervisor shall, in
addition to any duly authorized deputy, designate such number of
emergency interim successors to the powers and duties of their
respective offices and specify their rank in order of succession after any
duly authorized deputy so that there will be not less than three duly
authorized deputies or emergency interim successors, or combination
thereof, to perform the powers and duties of each of said offices.
B. Appointive officers. The Mayor, Council and City Manager shall, within
the time specified in Subsection A of this section, in addition to any duly
authorized deputy, designate for each such appointive officer which
each is empowered to appoint, such number of emergency interim
successors to such officers and specify their rank in order of succession
after any duly authorized deputy so that there will be not less than
three duly authorized deputies or emergency interim successors, or
combination thereof, for each such officer. The Council shall review
and, as necessary, revise the previous designations of emergency
interim successors by such Council within 30 days after a new member
elected or appointed to such Council first enters upon the duties of his
office as a member of the Council.
C. Review of designations. The incumbent in the case of those elective
officers specified in Subsection A of this section, and the appointing
officers specified in Subsection B of this section, and the Council, shall
from time to time review and, as necessary, promptly revise the
designations of emergency interim successors to ensure that at all
times there are at least three duly authorized deputies or emergency
interim successors, or combination thereof, for each elective and
appointive officer of the city.
D. Qualifications. No person shall be designated to, nor serve as, an
emergency interim successor unless he is legally qualified to hold the
office of the person to whose powers and duties he is designated to
succeed.
E. Status of emergency interim successor. A person designated as an
emergency interim successor shall hold that designation at the pleasure
of the designator, and such a designation shall remain effective until
replaced by another by the authorized designator.
§ 9-2 RYE CODE § 9-3
9:118
§ 9-4. Assumption of powers and duties by emergency interim
successors.
If, in the event of an attack or a public disaster, an officer described in
§ 9-3A or B or his duly authorized deputy, if any, is unable, due to death,
absence from the city or other physical, mental or legal reasons, to perform
the powers and duties of the office, the emergency interim successor of
such officer highest in rank in order of succession who is able to perform
the powers and duties of the office shall, except for the power and duty
to discharge or replace duly authorized deputies and emergency interim
successors of such officer, perform the powers and duties of such officer.
An emergency interim successor shall perform such powers and duties
only until such time as the lawful incumbent officer or his duly authorized
deputy, if any, or an emergency interim successor higher in rank in order
of succession, resumes the office or undertakes the performance of the
powers and duties of the office, as the case may be, or until, where an actual
vacancy exists, a successor is duly elected or appointed to fill such vacancy
and qualifies as provided by law.
§ 9-5. Recording and publication of designations.
The name, address and rank in order of succession of each duly authorized
deputy and emergency interim successor shall be filed with the City Clerk,
and each designation, replacement or change in order of succession of any
emergency interim successor shall become effective when the designator
files with such Clerk the successor's name, address and rank in order
of succession. Such Clerk shall keep an up-to-date file of all such data
regarding duly authorized deputies and emergency interim successors and
the same shall be open to public inspection. The Clerk shall notify in writing
each designated person of the filing of his name as an emergency interim
successor and his rank in order of succession and also shall notify in writing
any person previously designated who is replaced or whose place in order
of succession is changed.
§ 9-6. Qualification for taking office.
At the time of their designation or as soon thereafter as possible, emergency
interim successors shall take such oath and do such other things, if any, as
may be required to qualify them to perform the powers and duties of the
office to which they may succeed.
§ 9-7. Quorum and vote requirements.
In the event of an attack or a public disaster, the Mayor or his duly
authorized deputy or emergency interim successor performing his powers
F. Compensation. An emergency interim successor shall serve without
salary, unless otherwise provided by local law. He shall, however, be
entitled to reimbursement for actual expense necessarily incurred in
the performance of his powers and duties.
§ 9-3 CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT § 9-7
9:119
and duties may suspend quorum requirements for the Common Council. If
quorum requirements are suspended, any local law, ordinance, resolution
or other action requiring enactment, adoption or approval by an affirmative
vote of a specified proportion of members may be enacted, adopted or
approved by the affirmative vote of the specified proportion of those voting
thereon.
§ 9-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon its adoption and the filing of one certified
copy thereof with the City Clerk, one certified copy in the office of the State
Comptroller and three certified copies in the office of the Secretary of State.
Chapter 10
COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 15. Public officers indemnification — See Ch. 145.
§ 9-7 RYE CODE § 9-8
9:120
ARTICLE I
Playland Advisory Committee6
§ 10-1. Legislative intent.
§ 10-2. Committee established; appointment of members; terms.
There shall be a permanent City of Rye Playland Advisory Committee for
the City of Rye to consist of nine members, all residents of Rye, to serve
for three-year terms; the initial appointments shall be staggered with three
one-year terms, three two-year terms, and three three-year terms; and the
members of the City of Rye Playland Advisory Committee shall be appointed
by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, and one member shall
be designated by the Mayor as Chairman.
§ 10-3. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Playland Advisory Committee shall be as
follows:
A. The City of Rye and Playland Amusement Park ("Playland") have had a
long relationship.
B. Activities, policies and practices at Playland have a significant impact
on the City of Rye.
C. The City's ability to identify, coordinate, and communicate Rye's
concerns regarding Playland was greatly enhanced by the
establishment of the Playland Neighborhood Advisory Council in 1990
and its successor, the Rye Playland Advisory Committee, which was
disbanded in 1997.
D. The City Council seeks to reestablish this advisory committee, and it is
in the best interests of the City to establish a permanent citizens'
advisory committee on Playland issues.
A. To advise the City Council on issues relating to the operation and
management of Playland as they affect the City of Rye.
B. To identify and review neighborhood issues that arise relating to
Playland.
C. To maintain communication with the Playland management and the
Westchester County Parks Board in order to stay current with policies
at Playland.
D. To monitor and anticipate new issues that may arise affecting the
quality of life in Rye as they relate to changes in practices, changes in
activities, or new uses of Playland.
6. Editor's Note: Historic note: initially established by City Council resolution 2-6-2002.
§ 10-1 CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT § 10-3
9:121
E. To keep the City Council apprised of issues and activities of concern to
Rye.
§ 10-3 RYE CODE § 10-3
9:122
ARTICLE II
Senior Advocacy Committee7
§ 10-4. Legislative intent. [Amended 3-26-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
The mission of the City of Rye Senior Advocacy Committee is to support the
concerns of Rye's elder adults, to advocate for their needs, and to seek new
models and opportunities to better accommodate Rye's older population in
order to develop and maintain a healthy, diverse populace in which citizens
of all ages have the opportunity to contribute to the strength of the Rye
community.
§ 10-5. Committee established; appointment of members; terms.
There shall be a City of Rye Senior Advocacy Committee in place of the
position of Senior Advocate, to consist of seven members, all residents of
Rye or individuals who worked for service institutions serving Rye, to serve
for three-year terms; the initial appointments shall be staggered with two
one-year terms, two two-year terms, and three three-year terms; and the
members of the Rye Senior Advocacy Committee shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, and one member shall be
designated by the Mayor as Chairman.
§ 10-6. Powers and duties.
The Committee will achieve its mission by:
A. Building its knowledge base and personal contacts with service
providers and experts who focus on senior citizen needs in health and
medical services, insurance, housing, transportation, legal and
geriatric services.
B. Establishing a resource center with reference information located
principally in the Rye Free Reading Room with satellite locations in the
Damiano Center and on the City's Web site.
C. Establishing a system for personal contacts with the Committee or its
staff.
D. Assisting seniors to gain access to the appropriate services.
E. Developing a list of volunteers who are willing and able to provide
personal assistance as appropriate.
7. Editor's Note: Historic note: initially established by City Council resolution 3-20-2002.
§ 10-4 CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT § 10-6
9:123

ARTICLE III
Youth Advisory Committee8
§ 10-7. Legislative intent.
§ 10-8. Committee established; appointment of members; terms.
There shall be the Youth Advisory Committee, to consist of no more than
25 members in grades seven through 12 at the time of appointment or
reappointment by the City Council. Members must be residents of the
City of Rye but are not required to attend school in the City. Each year,
nominations will be accepted for students interested in serving on the
Committee. A selection committee made up of one representative of the City
designated by the City Manager, the Rye YMCA, and the Rye Youth Council
will review the nominations and select students to recommend to the City
Council for appointment to the Committee. Efforts will be made to balance
the Committee regarding schools represented, grade, gender, ethnicity, etc.
Members will be officially appointed to the Youth Advisory Committee by
the City Council. The term of office for each member shall be one school
year, commencing on September 1 and ending on June 30. Members may be
reappointed but shall serve for no more than three consecutive years. The
Youth Advisory Committee shall select its own chair and vice-chair.
§ 10-9. Powers and duties.
There shall be a Youth Advisory Committee to make recommendations
on City Council agenda items or other matters affecting youth in the
community and to seek and recommend ways to interest and involve youth
in local government.
A. Many issues arise in City government and the community as a whole
that may be of interest to youth or may affect youth in the community.
B. It is beneficial for the community and the youth to develop the
citizenship skills of youth in the community by working with local
government on such issues.
C. The City government can directly benefit from the advice and efforts of
youth in the community on the issues that confront the City.
8. Editor's Note: Historic note: initially established by City Council resolution 8-13-2003.
§ 10-7 CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT § 10-9
9:125
Chapter 12
EARLY RETIREMENT INCENTIVE
§ 12-1. Legislative authority; open period; payment.
The City of Rye hereby elects to provide all of its eligible employees with
a retirement incentive program authorized by Chapter 69, Laws of 2002,
State of New York.
Chapter 15
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 15-1. Declaration of policy.
The proper operation of the City government requires that its officers and
employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that
government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the
governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain;
that public officers and employees observe in their official acts the highest
standards of morality and discharge faithfully the duties of their office
regardless of personal consideration; and that the public have confidence in
the integrity of its government and the officers and employees thereof. In
recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a Code of Ethics for
all officers of the City of Rye, as defined in its Charter, and for all employees
of such City, hereinafter referred to as the "City." In the event of any conflict
between the provisions of this/her code and the provisions of Article 18 of
the General Municipal Law, the latter shall control.
§ 15-2. Conflicts of interest. [Amended 9-11-2013 by L.L. No.
2-2013]
A. The commencement date of the retirement incentive program shall be
September 1, 2002.
B. The open period during which eligible employees may retire and
receive the additional retirement benefit shall be 90 days in length.
C. The actuarial present value of the additional retirement benefits
payable pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be paid as one
lump sum, or in five annual installments. The amount of the annual
payment shall be determined by the Actuary of the New York State and
Local Employees' Retirement System, and it shall be paid by the City of
Rye for each employee who receives the retirement benefits payable
under this chapter.
A. Unless otherwise defined herein, all terms shall have the same
meanings as set forth in the New York Public Officers Law. No elected
official, officer or employee of the City shall have any interest, financial
§ 10-9 RYE CODE § 15-2
12:126
§ 15-3. Representation of private interests before city agencies and
courts. [Amended 5-16-1984 by L.L. No. 7-1984; 5-16-1984 by L.L.
No. 8-1984]
No elected official or employee of the City shall represent private interests
before any department, office or agency of the City nor represent private
interests in any action or proceeding against the interest of the City or in
any litigation to which the City is a party. The preceding sentence shall not
preclude any Councilman from appearing in the performance of public or
civic obligations. In keeping with Article 18 of the General Municipal Law,
a nonpaid voluntary member of the City's various boards, commissions and
agencies may not appear for an applicant before the board, commission
or agency of which he or she is a member. Prohibited appearances shall
include any connection with another's application, including work prepared
by, but not identified as work of, such official. No such appearance can
be made by such member by surrogate or substitute. However, voluntary,
unpaid members of the City's various boards, commissions and agencies
may appear before a City board, commission or agency other than his
or her own, provided that he or she fully discloses his or her interest in
such application, and further provided that his or her compensation for
such appearance or application participation is not dependent or contingent
upon any action by such agency with respect to such matter.
§ 15-4. Disclosure of interest. [Amended 9-11-2013 by L.L. No.
2-2013]
A member of the Council or any officer, employee, department head, or
board or commission member who has a direct or indirect financial interest
in any matter before the Council who participates in the discussion before
or makes a recommendation to or gives an opinion to the Council on that
matter shall publicly disclose on the official record of the Council the nature
and extent of such interest and recuse himself/herself from the discussion
and from taking any action on the matter.
or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engage in any business or
transaction or professional activity or incur any obligation of any nature
which is in conflict with or might reasonably tend to conflict with the
proper discharge of his/her duties in the public interest.
B. No member of the Rye Golf Club Commission or Boat Basin Commission
shall be permitted to engage in any business or transaction with the
City for pay or for anything of value.
C. No elected official, officer, employee, department head or assistant
department head (or any spouse/domestic partner of any person
holding one of the aforementioned positions) shall be an employee,
subcontractor, agent, servant or representative, or hold any other
position with a vendor of the City.
§ 15-2 EARLY RETIREMENT INCENTIVE § 15-5
12:127
§ 15-5. Solicitation or acceptance of gifts and favors. [Amended
9-16-1970 by L.L. No. 2-1970; 9-11-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
No officer or employee shall, directly or indirectly, solicit any gift, or accept
or receive any gift having a value of $50 or more, whether in the form of
money, service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise or
in any other form, under circumstances in which it could reasonably be
inferred that the gift was intended to influence him/her or could reasonably
be expected to influence him/her in the performance of his/her official
duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on his/her part, or
grant in the discharge of his/her duties any improper favor, service or thing
of value.
§ 15-6. Disclosure of confidential information.
§ 15-7. Interests in conflict with official duties.
An officer or employee of the City shall abstain from making personal
investments in enterprises which he/she has reason to believe may be
directly involved in decisions to be made by him/her or which will otherwise
create conflict between his/her public duty and his/her private interest,
and shall refrain from passing upon any questions in which he/she or any
member of his/her immediate family has an interest which might reasonably
be deemed to create such a conflict.
§ 15-8. Incompatible employment.
No officer or employee of the City shall accept other employment which will
impair his/her independence of judgment in the exercise of his/her official
duties.
§ 15-9. Future employment.
No officer or employee of the City shall solicit, negotiate for or promise to
accept employment by any person, firm or corporation with which he/she or
his/her department, office or agency is engaged on behalf of the City in the
transaction of business which is or may be affected by his/her official action.
§ 15-10. Obligation to citizens.
A. No officer or employee of the City shall accept employment or engage in
any business or professional activity which will require him/her to
disclose confidential information which he/she has gained by reason of
his/her official position or authority.
B. No officer or employee of the City shall disclose confidential
information acquired by him/her in the course of his/her official duties
nor use such information to further his/her personal interests or the
personal interests of others.
§ 15-5 RYE CODE § 15-10
12:128
§ 15-11. Use of City employees or public property.
§ 15-12. Prohibited political activities.
No person who holds any compensated appointive City position shall solicit
or receive any contribution for any political party or any candidate for
public office or take any part in the management, affairs or political
campaign of any political party or any such candidate, nor shall any such
person make any contribution for any candidate or political party for public
office within the City, but he/she may exercise his/her right as a citizen to
express his/her opinion privately and to cast his/her vote.
§ 15-13. Board of Ethics.
A. No officer or employee of the City shall use or attempt to use his/her
official position to secure unwarranted privileges or exemptions for
himself/herself or others to grant any special consideration, treatment
or advantage to any citizens beyond that which is available to every
other citizen.
B. An officer or employee of the City should not by his/her conduct give
reasonable basis for the impression that any person can unduly
influence him/her or improperly enjoy his/her favor in the performance
of his/her official duties or that he/she is affected by the kinship, rank,
position or influence of any party or person.
A. No officer or employee of the City shall direct or cause any officer or
employee of the City to do or perform any service or work outside of
public work or employment or accept any such service or work, nor
shall any officer or employee of the City offer to do or perform any such
service or work for such officer or employee. This section shall not
preclude any officer or employee from voluntarily performing any such
service or work outside of the hours during which he/she is assigned to
perform duties for the City.
B. No officer or employee of the City shall request or permit the use of
City-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal
convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the
public generally or are provided as City policy for the use of such officer
or employee in the conduct of official business.
A. Pursuant to Section 808 of the General Municipal Law, there is hereby
created and established a Board of Ethics to consist of the City
Manager, Corporation Counsel and three public members to be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council, who shall not
hold any other City office and shall serve without compensation for a
term of three years. The Board shall elect a Chairman from among the
public members.
B. The Board shall render advisory opinions on specific situations to
officers and employees of the City with respect to Article 18 of the
§ 15-10 EARLY RETIREMENT INCENTIVE § 15-13
12:129
§ 15-14. Distribution of Code of Ethics. [Amended 9-16-1970 by L.L.
No. 2-1970]
The City Manager shall cause a copy of the Code of Ethics of the City of Rye
to be distributed to every officer and employee of the City. Each officer and
employee elected or appointed after the effective date of this chapter shall
be furnished a copy of such code before entering upon the duties of his/her
office or employment.
§ 15-15. Penalties. [Amended 9-16-1970 by L.L. No. 2-1970]
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly or intentionally violate any of the provisions of
this code may be fined, suspended or removed from office or employment in
the manner provided by law.
§ 15-16. Waiver procedure. [Added 9-11-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
Any officer, employee, department head, or board or commission member
may apply for a waiver of the prohibitions set forth in this chapter by
following the procedures outlined in Subsections A and B below.
Chapter 22
HUMAN RIGHTS, COMMISSION OF
§ 22-1. Establishment; membership; considerations.
General Municipal Law and any Code of Ethics adopted pursuant
thereto. Such advisory opinions shall be rendered pursuant to the
written request of any such officer or employee under such rules and
regulations as the Board may deem advisable and shall have the
approval of the Corporation Counsel with respect to their validity. The
Board shall publish its advisory opinions with such deletions as may
be necessary to prevent disclosure of the identity of the officer or
employee involved.
A. An employee or department head shall apply for a waiver to the City
Manager. Any applications shall be in writing. The City Manager has the
authority to condition any waiver on reasonable terms. The City
Manager shall seek an advisory opinion from the Board of Ethics if he/
she needs clarification on an issue. All waivers and advisory opinions
shall also be provided to the City Council as soon as such waiver
application is received.
B. An elected or appointed official shall apply for a waiver to the Board of
Ethics. All applications shall be in writing. The Board of Ethics has the
authority to condition any waiver on reasonable terms.
C. The City Council shall review all waivers on a monthly basis.
§ 15-13 RYE CODE § 22-1
22:130
§ 22-2. Employees; expenses.
The Commission on Human Rights hereby created shall have the power
and authority, subject to applicable civil service requirements, to employ
an executive director, a secretary and such attorneys, experts and other
employees as may be necessary, within the amount made available by the
Council of the City of Rye.
§ 22-3. General duties of Commission.
It shall be the duty of the Commission, as provided by Article 12-D of the
General Municipal Law, to:
A. A Commission on Human Rights is hereby established by the Council of
the City of Rye in accordance with Article 12-D of the General Municipal
Law, as enacted by Chapter 376 of the Laws of 1963.
B. The Commission shall consist of not more than nine members to be
appointed by the Mayor. The Mayor shall designate one of such
members to be Chairman, who shall serve as Chairman at the pleasure
of the Mayor.
C. Of the members first appointed, 1/3 shall be appointed for terms of
office of one year each, 1/3 for terms of office of two years each and 1/3
for terms of office of three years each. Thereafter, all appointments,
except to fill vacancies, shall be for terms of office of three years each.
Vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of terms of office
shall be filled for the unexpired terms of the offices so filled.
D. The members of the Commission shall serve without salary.
E. In making appointments to the Commission, the Mayor shall take into
consideration the various religious, racial, nationality and political
groups in the community.
A. Foster mutual respect and understanding among all groups in the
community. [Amended 12-18-1991 by L.L. No. 25-1991]
B. Make such studies in any field of human relationship in the community
as, in its judgment, will aid in effectuating its general purposes.
C. Inquire into incidents of tension and conflict among or between various
racial, religious and nationality groups and take such action as may be
designed to alleviate such tension and conflict.
D. Conduct and recommend such educational programs as, in its
judgment, will increase goodwill among inhabitants of the community
and open new opportunities into all phases of community life for all
inhabitants.
§ 22-1 HUMAN RIGHTS, COMMISSION OF § 22-4
22:131
§ 22-4. General obligations of Commission.
The Commission shall discharge the following obligations as provided by
Article 12-D of the General Municipal Law:
§ 22-5. Effects of statutory amendment.
In the event the provisions of General Municipal Law, Article 12-D, are
amended, such amendments shall be effective with respect to the
Commission on Human Rights created hereby.
Chapter 31
POLICE PENSION FUND
§ 31-1. Fund established; statutory provisions.
A. Receive complaints of alleged discrimination in the community, seek the
active assistance of the State Commission for Human Rights in the
solution of complaints which fall within the jurisdiction of the State
Commission and prepare its own plans in the case of other complaints,
with a view to reducing and eliminating such alleged discrimination
through the process of conference, conciliation and persuasion.
[Amended 12-18-1991 by L.L. No. 25-1991]
B. Hold conferences and other public meetings in the interest of and the
constructive resolution of any human rights issues and the prejudice
and discrimination occasioned thereby. [Amended 12-18-1991 by
L.L. No. 25-1991]
C. Issue such publication and reports of investigation as in its judgment
will tend to effectuate the purposes of Article 12-D of the General
Municipal Law.
D. Enlist the cooperation and participation of the various racial, religious
and nationality groups, community organizations, industry and labor
organizations, media of mass communication, fraternal and benevolent
associations and other groups in an educational campaign devoted to
fostering among the diverse groups of the community mutual esteem,
justice and equity.
E. Encourage and stimulate agencies under the jurisdiction of the Council
of the City of Rye to take such action as will fulfill the purposes of such
Article 12-D.
F. Submit an annual report to the Council.
A. The Police Pension Fund of the City of Rye is hereby established to
continue the Police Pension Fund of the Village of Rye, and the
provisions for maintaining, governing and administering the same are
hereby enacted.
§ 22-4 RYE CODE § 31-1
22:132
§ 31-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANNUAL SALARY OR COMPENSATION — The full current annual salary or
compensation payable to a member, as hereinafter defined, at the time of
his death, disability, retirement or dismissal from the service.
CITY — The City of Rye, New York.
COUNCIL — The Common Council of the City of Rye, New York.
FORCE — The police force of the Police Department of the City of Rye, New
York.
FUND — The Police Pension Fund of the City of Rye, New York.
MEMBER — A member of the force who is also a member of the Police
Pension Fund of the City of Rye, New York.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the City of Rye, New
York.
TRUSTEE or TRUSTEES — The Trustees of the Police Pension Fund of the
City of Rye, New York.
VILLAGE — The Village of Rye, New York, as it existed prior to January 1,
1942.
§ 31-3. Composition of fund.
B. Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 746 of the Laws of 1960, the
provisions of Section 70-a of the Retirement and Social Security Law, as
last amended by Chapter 339 of the Laws of 1960, for the purpose of
providing death benefits and pensions providing for increased takehome
pay, are made applicable to the members of the Police Pension
Fund of the City of Rye, effective for the payroll period commencing
January 1, 1961. [Added 12-21-1960 by L.L. No. 1-1960]
A. The fund shall consist of the following:
(1) The capital, interest, income, dividends, cash deposits, securities
and credits in the Police Pension Fund of the Village on the date
when this chapter takes effect.
(2) All fines or forfeitures imposed by the Council from time to time
upon or against any member or members.
(3) All rewards, fees, gifts, testimonials and emoluments that may be
presented, paid or given to any member on account of police
services, except such as have been or shall be allowed by the
Council to be retained.
(4) All lost, abandoned, unclaimed or stolen money acquired by the
Police Department of the Village on or before December 31, 1941,
§ 31-1 HUMAN RIGHTS, COMMISSION OF § 31-3
22:133
§ 31-4. Trustees and other officers of fund.
The Mayor, the Chief of Police and a member of the Council to be appointed
by the Mayor with the approval of the Council in January of each year,
except the year 1942, shall constitute the Trustees of the fund. If the Mayor
shall fail to appoint such Trustee, the Council shall do so at its first meeting
in February. As soon as the third Trustee is appointed, the Trustees shall
organize by choosing one of their number as Chairman. The City Clerk shall
which shall have been in the possession of the Village and/or City
Police Department for the space of one year after the date of
such acquisition and for which there shall have been no lawful
claimant; all moneys arising from the sale by the Police Department
of unclaimed, abandoned, lost or stolen property acquired by the
Village Police Department on or prior to December 31, 1941; and
all moneys realized, derived or received from the sale of any
condemned, unfit or unserviceable property which belonged to or
came into the possession or under the control of the Village Police
Department on or prior to said date.
(5) All moneys, pay, compensation or salary, or any part thereof,
forfeited, deducted or withheld from any member on account of
absence for any cause, lost time, sickness or other disability,
physical or mental, to be paid monthly by the Comptroller to such
fund.
(6) A sum of money equal to but not greater than 5% of the monthly
pay, salary or compensation of each member, which sum shall be
deducted monthly by the Comptroller from the pay, salary or
compensation of the members, and such Comptroller shall deduct
such sum of money and pay the same to the fund at the time of
payment of the balance to the members.
B. In case the amount derived from the different sources mentioned and
included in this section shall not be sufficient at any time to pay in full
the pensions which have been or which may hereafter be granted by the
Trustees and/or by the Trustees of the Village Police Pension Fund, it
shall be the duty of the Trustees, as hereinafter constituted each year at
the time of making up the annual City budget, to prepare a full and
detailed statement of the assets of such find and the amount which is
required to pay in full all such pensions, and to present the same to the
Council, together with a statement of the amount of money required to
enable such Trustees to pay such pensions in full. The Council shall
include annually in the budget and next annual tax levy of the City a
sum sufficient to provide for such deficiency. As the same is required,
the Comptroller shall pay the money so provided to the fund.
C. The said Trustees are authorized, empowered and entitled to take and
hold as such Trustees any and all gifts or bequests which may be made
to such fund or which may have been made to the Police Pension Fund
of the Village of Rye prior to January 1, 1942.
§ 31-3 RYE CODE § 31-4
22:134
be Secretary of the fund and keep the minutes and other records of the
Trustees. The Comptroller shall be the Treasurer of the fund and shall be
the custodian of its assets and shall receive all additions thereto and make
all payments or distributions therefrom. Before entering upon his duties,
the Treasurer shall execute and file with the City Clerk a bond of a surety
company authorized to do business in this state, in such form and amount
as the Council may fix and determine and which shall be conditioned upon
the faithful discharge of his duties as such Treasurer, and the premiums
on which shall be payable by the fund. The Trustees and other officers of
the fund shall serve without compensation for their duties as such. Unless
otherwise provided, a majority vote of the Trustees shall be required for any
action by them. For the year 1942 the appointment of the third Trustee of
the fund shall be made at the first meeting of the Common Council after this
chapter takes effect.
§ 31-5. Duties of Trustees.
A. The Trustees shall have charge of and administer the fund and from
time to time shall invest the same or any part thereof in bonds or other
obligations of the United States or of the State of New York or any
political subdivision of such state, as they may deem most beneficial to
such fund, but any investments which have been made by the Trustees
of the Village Police Pension Fund prior to the passage of this chapter,
in securities other than those enumerated herein, may be retained by
said Trustees. They are empowered to make all necessary contracts and
take all necessary and proper actions and proceedings in connection
therewith. They shall make payments of pensions from this fund,
granted pursuant to this chapter, and also all pensions legally
chargeable against the Police Pension Fund of the Village of Rye on
December 31, 1941. No payments whatever shall be allowed or made
by such Trustees from this fund as reward, gratuity or compensation to
any person for salary or services rendered to or for such Trustees. Such
Trustees may and they are authorized and empowered from time to
time to establish such rules and regulations for the disposition,
investment, preservation and administration of such fund as they may
deem best; provided, however, that all acts on the part of said Trustees
in relation to investments or placing of the funds shall be upon the
unanimous vote of said Trustees. The Comptroller shall, in the month of
December, make a report to the Council of the condition of the fund and
its receipts and disbursements during each fiscal year, and the same
shall be subject to the general audit of the City accounts as provided in
§ 135 of the Charter of the City of Rye, being Chapter 505 of the Laws of
the State of New York for the year 1940.
B. If and when the fund is terminated by the payment of all legal claims
against it, the Trustees, with the approval of the Common Council of the
City, may draw upon or use the same for any City purpose authorized by
law.
§ 31-4 HUMAN RIGHTS, COMMISSION OF § 31-6
22:135
§ 31-6. Membership in fund.
All members of the City police force who, on May 31, 1940, were members
of the Police Pension Fund of the Village of Rye as constituted under Article
7 of the General Village Law, being Chapter 64 of the Laws of the State of
New York for the year 1909, as amended, shall be members of this fund.
§ 31-7. Payments from fund.
A. Upon the death, retirement or dismissal from the Police Department of
any member thereof who shall be a member of this fund, the Trustees
shall grant, unless the grant is hereinafter specifically made
discretionary, annual pensions from the fund to such members who
have become disabled, physically or mentally, or superannuated by age
so as to be unfit for police duty, and to dependent parents or widows
and children of such members, to be paid as follows:
(1) To the dependent parent or parents or widow of any member who
has been killed while in the actual performance of duty or has died
from the effects of any injury received while in the actual discharge
of such duty, a sum of not less than 1/2 of the annual salary of such
member.
(2) To the widow of any member who has died or who shall hereafter
die after 10 years of service in the Police Department of the Village/
City while a member of such force or who shall have died having
retired upon a pension, if there be no child or children under 18
years of age of any such member, a sum of $2,841 plus the cost-ofliving
adjustment per year, beginning in the year 2012, per annum,
but if there be such child or children of such member under the age
aforesaid, then such sum may be divided between such widow,
child or children in such proportions and in such manner as the
Trustees may direct; provided, however, that if such widow did not
become the lawful wedded wife of such member prior to the
attainment of his 50th birthday and was not cohabiting with him at
the time of his death, said pension shall be payable in the discretion
of the Trustees of the fund. Any widow who shall qualify for this
payment after January 1, 2012, shall be paid the sum of $2,841 plus
the annual cost-of-living adjustments each year after January 1,
2012. [Amended 8-21-1961 by L.L. No. 1-1961; 11-20-1974 by
L.L. No. 2-1974; 10-21-1981 by L.L. No. 7-1981; 3-4-1987 by
L.L. No. 2-1987; 12-15-1999 by L.L. No. 14-1999; 10-24-2012
by L.L. No. 6-2012]
(3) To any child or children under 18 years of age of such member
killed or dying as provided in Subsection A(1) hereof and leaving no
widow, or, if such member left a widow, then after her death to such
child or children being yet under 18 years of age, a sum not less
than 1/2 the annual salary or compensation of such member.
§ 31-6 RYE CODE § 31-7
22:136
(4) To any member who, while in the actual performance of police duty
and by reason of the performance of such duty and without fault or
misconduct on his part, has become permanently disabled,
physically or mentally, so as to be unfit to perform full police duty, a
sum not less than 1/2 of the annual salary or compensation of such
member. The right of such member to the continuation of such
pension may be determined by a medical examination once each
year during the first three years following his retirement. All
medical examinations required shall be conducted by a medical
board appointed by the Council; provided, however, that any
member, within 30 days after receipt by him of a copy of the
decision of such medical board, may request in writing that the
decision of such board be reviewed by a special medical board
which shall consist of one doctor of said medical board and a doctor
selected and compensated by such member. The decision of such
special board shall supersede the decision of the medical board. In
the event that the two doctors of the special board shall disagree, a
recognized specialist on the condition, disease or injury for which
such member has been examined or for which disability is claimed
shall be selected by such doctors to be the third member of the
special board. The decision of a majority of three members of such
special board shall supersede the decision of the medical board.
The specialist selected by the two doctors of the special board shall
be compensated by the City, and his compensation shall be fixed by
the Council.
(5) To any member who, after 10 years' and less than 25 years'
membership in the Village and/or City police forces, has become
superannuated by age, permanently insane or mentally
incapacitated, or disabled physically or mentally, so as to be unfit or
unable to perform full police duty by reason of such disability or
disease contracted without misconduct on his part, a sum not to
exceed 1/2 nor less than 1/4 of the annual salary or compensation
of such member, as the Trustees may direct.
(6) To any member who has reached the age of 60 years, has
performed duty on the Village and/or City police force for a period
of 20 years and upwards, against whom no charges are pending
and who may personally make written application for retirement
and dismissal, a sum not less than 1/2 his annual salary or
compensation. In such case, the granting of the application for
retirement and dismissal shall be discretionary with the Council,
and if granted it shall fix an effective date thereof, not more than 30
days from the date of receipt of the application.
(7) To any member who has reached the age of 60 years, has
performed duty on the Village and/or City police force for a period
of 20 years and upwards, who has been certified in writing by one
or more physicians designated by the Council to be permanently
disabled, physically or mentally, so as to be unfit for duty and
§ 31-7 HUMAN RIGHTS, COMMISSION OF § 31-7
22:137
against whom no charges are pending, a sum not less than 1/2 of
his annual salary or compensation. In such case, the Council shall
retire and dismiss the member from the force and fix the effective
date thereof, not more than 30 days from the date of receipt of the
physician's certificate.
(8) To any member who shall have performed duty on the Village and/
or City police force for a period of 25 years and upwards, who may
personally apply in writing for retirement, provided no charges are
pending against him, a sum not less than 1/2 of his annual salary or
compensation. In such case, the Council must grant the application
of the member and he shall thereupon be placed upon the pension
roll of the fund.
(9) To any member who is an honorably discharged soldier or sailor
from the army or navy of the United States and who served in the
World War, who shall have reached the age of 60 years, or to any
such soldier or sailor member who has performed duty on the
Village and/or City police force for a period of 20 years, upon his
own application in writing, provided there are no charges pending
against him, a sum not less than 1/2 of his annual salary or
compensation. In such case, the Council must grant the application
of the member, and he shall thereupon be placed upon the pension
roll of the fund.
(10) To any member who has reached the age of 60 years, whom the
Council may relieve or dismiss from the service, such sum as the
Council may determine; but no member shall be eligible to
participate in the fund until he has served 10 years as a member of
the police force of the Village and/or City of Rye, except in cases
arising under Subsection A(4) of this section.
B. Credit for military service, withdrawals from funds. In determining the
term of service of any member of the Police Pension Fund of the City of
Rye for the purpose of ascertaining his eligibility for pension, any
person who performed service in World War II shall be entitled to credit
for the period so served and shall be entitled to receive, upon his
application to the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund at any
time, a certificate setting forth the allowance for World War II service
credit to which he is shown to be entitled. For the purpose of this
subsection, service in World War II shall be deemed to be military
service during the period commencing July 1, 1940, and terminating
December 31, 1946 as a member of the Armed Forces of the United
States of any person who has been honorably discharged or released
therefrom under honorable circumstances and has returned to
employment on the police force within one year following his discharge
or release or completion of advanced education provided under the
Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944. Such service shall not include
any period during which civil compensation was received by the
member under the provisions of Section 245 of the Military Law.
Contributions heretofore paid by any member in order to receive credit
§ 31-7 RYE CODE § 31-7
22:138
§ 31-8. Certificate of disability.
Members shall be granted, awarded or paid a pension on account of
physical or mental disability or disease, only if a certificate of a competent
physician or surgeon who shall have been assigned by the Council shall be
filed with the Trustees. Such certificate shall set forth the cause, nature and
extent of the disability, disease or injury of such member and shall distinctly
state whether or not such disability, disease or injury was incurred or
sustained by said member while in the performance of police duty, and such
certificate shall in each case be filed with and entered upon the minutes of
the Trustees.
§ 31-9. Accrual and payment of pensions.
All pensions granted under this local chapter shall accrue and be paid from
the date of death, disability, relief or dismissal from service or retirement,
as the case may be. They shall be paid in equal semimonthly installments,
each 1/24 in amount of the sum allowed as the annual pension.
§ 31-10. Exemption from execution and process.
The moneys, securities and effects of the fund and all pensions granted and
payable from such fund shall be and are exempt from execution and from
all process and proceedings to enjoin and recover the same by or on behalf
of any creditor or person having or asserting any claims against or debt or
liability of any pensioner of such fund.
§ 31-11. False claims.
Every person who knowingly or willfully in anywise procures the making or
presentation of any false or fraudulent affidavit or affirmation concerning
any claim for pension or payment thereof shall in every such case forfeit a
sum not exceeding $250, to be used for and recovered by and in the name of
the Trustees, which when recovered shall be paid to and thereupon become
a part of such fund. Any person who shall willfully swear falsely in any oath
or affirmation in obtaining or procuring any pension or payment thereof
under the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of perjury.
§ 31-12. Termination of certain pensions.
A pension to a widow shall terminate when the widow shall remarry, and
pensions to children shall terminate whenever the children shall
respectively marry or arrive at the age of 18 years. Pensions granted under
this chapter shall not be revoked, repealed or diminished, except that upon
recommendation of the Council, the Trustees in their discretion may order
for service in World War II as herein defined shall be treated as excess
contributions and the total of such contributions may be withdrawn
by the member at any time prior to retirement, without interest, upon
his application in writing to the Trustees of the Police Pension Fund.
[Added 11-1-1950 by L.L. No. 3-1950]
§ 31-7 HUMAN RIGHTS, COMMISSION OF § 31-12
22:139
any pension or any part thereof, granted pursuant to § 31-7A(6), (7) and (8)
hereof, to cease or be diminished. In all such cases, the Council shall file a
written statement of the causes for ordering any pension so to cease or to
be diminished with the records of the fund.
§ 31-13. Reinstatement after retirement.
A member who shall have been retired under the provisions of § 31-7 hereof,
on account of physical disability, upon his written application therefor,
may be reinstated by the Council as an active member of the police force
with the same rank and rating which he had upon his retirement if, upon
satisfactory proof presented to the Council, it shall determine that such
disability has been removed and that the applicant is physically fit for
duty in such position and rank. The applicant, if reinstated, shall file with
the Council his release, duly executed and acknowledged, or the right or
claim to any pension in the period during which he shall serve under such
reinstatement.
§ 31-14. Refund of contributions.
Chapter 32
PROCUREMENT POLICY
A. Should a member discontinue service in the Police Department except
by death, retirement or dismissal, he shall be paid the amount of the
deductions, without interest, made from his pay, salary or compensation
pursuant to § 31-3A(6) hereof.
B. In the event that a member shall die before retirement and a pension is
not paid to his widow, child or dependents by the Trustees pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter, the amount of the deductions, without
interest, made from the pay, salary or compensation of such member
pursuant to § 31-3A(6) hereof, shall be paid by such Trustees to the
beneficiary or beneficiaries whom such member shall have nominated
by written designation duly acknowledged and filed with the trustees.
Such designation shall be made within 30 days after this chapter shall
take effect, and may be changed from time to time by such member
upon filing with the Trustees a new designation duly acknowledged.
§ 31-12 RYE CODE § 31-14
22:140
ARTICLE I
Award of Contracts on Basis of Best Value
[Adopted 11-7-2018 by L.L. No. 8-2018]
§ 32-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "City of Rye Local Law Authorizing Best
Value Competitive Bidding and Procurement."
§ 32-2. Legislative intent; purpose.
The intent of this article is to allow the City of Rye the option to award
certain purchase contracts (including contracts for services) subject to
competitive bidding under § 103 of the General Municipal Law on the basis
of low bid or "best value" as defined in § 163 of the New York State Finance
Law.
§ 32-3. Legislative authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to New York State General Municipal Law
§ 103.
§ 32-4. Best value competitive bidding.
A. Authority and purpose. Section 103 of the New York General Municipal
Law allows the City to authorize, by local law, the award of certain
purchase contracts (including contracts for services) subject to
competitive bidding under General Municipal Law § 103 on the basis of
"best value" as defined in § 163 of the New York State Finance Law. The
best value option may be used, for example, if it is more cost-efficient
over time to award the goods or service to other than the lowest
responsible bidder or offerer if factors such as lower cost of
maintenance, durability, high quality and longer product life can be
documented.
B. Award based on best value. The City Council may award purchase
contracts, including contracts for services, on the basis of "best value"
as the term is defined in New York State Finance Law § 163. All
contracts or purchase orders awarded based on value shall require City
Council approval.
C. Applicability. The provisions of this article apply to City purchase
contracts, including contracts for services, involving an expenditure of
more than $20,000, but excluding purchase contracts necessary for the
completion of a public works contract pursuant to Article 8 of the New
York Labor Law and any other contract that may in the future be
excluded under state law from the best value option. If the dollar
thresholds of the New York General Municipal Law § 103 are increased
or decreased in the future by the State Legislature, the dollar
thresholds set forth herein shall be deemed simultaneously amended to
match the new General Municipal Law thresholds.
§ 32-1 HUMAN RIGHTS, COMMISSION OF § 32-4
22:141
D. Standards for best value.
(1) Goods and services procured and awarded based on the basis of
best value are those that the City Council determines optimize
quality, cost and efficiency, among responsive and responsible
bidder or offerers.
(2) Where possible, the determination shall be based on an objective
and quantifiable analysis of clearly described and documented
criteria as they apply to the rating of bids or offers. The criteria
may include, but shall not be limited to, any or all of the following:
(a) Cost of maintenance;
(b) Proximity to the contractors;
(c) Longer product life;
(d) Product performance criteria; and
(e) Quality of craftsmanship.
E. Documentation. Whenever any contract is awarded on the basis of best
value instead of lowest responsible bidder, the basis for determining
best value shall be thoroughly and accurately documented.
F. Piggybacking of purchases. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
article, the City of Rye may, for purposes of public purchases, utilize the
provisions of General Municipal Law § 103, the City of Rye may
purchase through the bids solicited by the United States government,
New York State, other U.S. states and/or any other political subdivision,
provided that those contracts clearly state that they are available for
use by other governmental entities within the requirements of General
Municipal Law § 103, Subdivision 16. Prior to such purchase, the City of
Rye will ensure that a piggyback purchase qualifies as follows:
(1) The contract involved must have been available for use by other
governmental entities through the bid solicitation process. In such
case, the City of Rye should determine that there is contained
within the bidding municipality's bid package a provision that the
bid is open to and can be used by either the City of Rye or other
municipalities. This determination should be made on a case-bycase
basis.
(2) The specific contract must have been issued in accordance with the
provisions of General Municipal Law § 103.
G. Procurement policy superseded where inconsistent. Any inconsistent
provision of the City's procurement policy, as adopted prior to the
effective date of this article by resolution of the City Council, or as
amended thereafter, shall be deemed superseded by the provisions of
this article.
§ 32-4 RYE CODE § 32-4
22:142
Chapter 34
SALE OF CITY PROPERTY
§ 34-1. Authorization for public or private sale.
Any real property belonging to the city or in the control of the city may be
leased, sold or otherwise alienated at public or private sale. No lease, sale
or other alienation at public action shall be authorized, except by a vote of
a majority of all the members of the Council, and no lease, sale or other
alienation at private sale shall be authorized except by a vote of 2/3 of all
the members of the Council.
§ 34-2. Procedure for sale at public auction.
Real property belonging to the city leased, sold or otherwise alienated by
public sale shall be at public auction by the City Comptroller to the highest
bidder after public notice published at least once a week for two successive
weeks in the official newspaper of the city. The public notice shall contain
a reservation of the right of the Council to reject any and all bids, and a
description of the property by street address, Tax Map or survey map shall
be deemed sufficient description in such public notice.
§ 34-3. Sale to governmental units.
Real property belonging to the city may be sold, transferred, leased to or
exchanged with any municipal corporation, school district or fire district
or the State of New York or the United States Government at or for such
consideration and upon such terms as the Council may determine, in its
discretion.
§ 34-4. Exclusion of certain property.
The phrase "real property belonging to the city" as used in this chapter shall
not include real property acquired by the city upon the foreclosure of any
tax or assessment lien or the transfer of such lien.
Chapter 35
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 191.
§ 35-1. Statutory authority.
The City Court of the City of Rye, New York, is hereby authorized to
establish a Traffic Violations Bureau to assist the Court in the disposition
§ 32-4 SALE OF CITY PROPERTY § 35-1
34:143
of offenses in relation to traffic violations, pursuant to Article 14-B of the
General Municipal Law.
§ 35-2. Personnel.
The City Court shall designate the person or persons who shall be in charge
of the Traffic Violations Bureau and the days and hours that the Bureau shall
be open for the transaction of its official business.
§ 35-3. Jurisdiction.
The Traffic Violations Bureau is hereby authorized to dispose of violations of
traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the City of Rye, New York,
except for speeding offenses or misdemeanors or felonies.
§ 35-4. Answering charges; fines.
§ 35-5. Form of waiver and power of attorney.
The waiver and power of attorney referred to in § 371 of the General
Municipal Law shall be in substantially the following form:
A. A person may appear in person or by written power of attorney in such
form as shall be prescribed by the City Court by paying a fine
established by the City Court and, in writing, waiving a hearing in
Court, pleading guilty of the charge and authorizing the person in
charge of the Bureau to make such a plea and pay such a fine.
B. The Bureau shall accept such designated fines and issue receipts
therefor.
C. The Bureau shall cause a complaint to be entered against each person
who does not answer within the designated time and a warrant to be
issued for his arrest and appearance before the Court.
D. Any person who shall have been, within the preceding 12 months, guilty
of a number of parking violations in excess of such maximum number as
may be designated by the court or of three or more violations other than
parking violations shall not be permitted to appear and answer to a
subsequent violation at the Traffic Violations Bureau but must appear in
Court at a time specified by the Bureau.
E. Nothing contained in this chapter shall authorize the Traffic Violations
Bureau to deprive a person of his right to counsel or to prevent him
from exercising his right to appear in Court to answer to, explain or
defend any charge of a violation of any traffic law, ordinance, rule or
regulation.
§ 35-1 RYE CODE § 35-5
35:144
I, the undersigned, hereby waive a hearing in the City Court of the City of
Rye, New York, and plead guilty to the charge specified on the reverse
side hereof. I authorize the person in charge of the Traffic Violations
Bureau to make such a plea and pay the prescribed fine in Court.
Dated the __________ day of ___________, 19______.
§ 35-6. Records and reports.
The Bureau shall keep records of all notices or summonses issued and
disposed of by said Bureau and such other information as may be prescribed
by the City Court of Rye by law.
Chapter 36
TRAVEL AND CONVENTION EXPENSES
§ 35-5 TRAVEL AND CONVENTION EXPENSES § 35-6
36:145

ARTICLE I
Conventions, Conferences and Schools
[Adopted 5-16-1962 by L.L. No. 2-1962]
§ 36-1. Manager to authorize attendance.
Pursuant to Section 77-b of the General Municipal Law, power is hereby
delegated to the City Manager to authorize city officers and employees,
including himself, to attend an official or unofficial convention or conference
of municipal officers or employees, or to attend any school conducted for
the betterment of municipal government, if in his judgment he believes it to
be of benefit to the City of Rye.
§ 36-1 TRAVEL AND CONVENTION EXPENSES § 36-1
36:147

ARTICLE II
Applicants for City Positions
[Adopted 3-6-1968 by L.L. No. 1-1968]
§ 36-2. Authorization for payment of travel expense.
The Council hereby delegates to the City Manager the power to authorize
the payment of the actual and necessary travel expenses of an applicant
relating to his interview for any city position, provided an appropriation
has been made therefor. Where such authorization shall have been granted,
no claim for expenses shall be audited, allowed or paid unless there shall
be attached thereto a travel order or similar documents signed by the City
Manager.
§ 36-2 TRAVEL AND CONVENTION EXPENSES § 36-2
36:149
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 45
AIR POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 87.
§ 45-1. Operation of motor vehicle; idling of engine restricted.
Chapter 46
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 46-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and controls of the
various types of fire, intrusion, holdup and other emergency signals from
fire and police alarm devices that require Fire Department or police
response, investigation or safeguarding of property at the location of an
event reported by a signal which is transmitted by telephone or radio or
which is otherwise relayed to the Police or Fire Department by an alarm
device requiring investigation or other action by any person acting in
response to a signal actuated by an alarm device, including such devices
already in use within the City.
§ 46-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM AGENT — Any person who is employed by any business, firm,
corporation or other commercial entity that is licensed hereunder to
A. No person shall cause or permit the engine of a motor vehicle, other
than a legally authorized emergency motor vehicle, to idle for longer
than three minutes while parking, as defined in § 129 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law, standing, as defined in § 145 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law,
or stopping, as defined in § 147 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, unless
the engine is used to operate a loading, unloading or processing device.
B. When the ambient temperature is in excess of 40º F., no person shall
cause or permit the engine of a bus, as defined in § 104 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law, to idle while parking, standing or stopping.
C. Violators of this chapter may be issued appearance tickets by police
officers of the City of Rye. Such tickets shall be returnable in Rye City
Court.
§ 36-2 RYE CODE § 46-2
45:150
conduct the business of owning, operating, maintaining, installing, leasing
or selling fire or police alarm devices, whose duties may include any of
the following: selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering,
replacing, moving or installing, in or on any building, place or premises, any
fire or police alarm device as defined in this chapter, within the City of Rye.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Any fire or police alarm device or aggregation of
fire or police alarm devices installed on or within a single building or on or
within more than one building or area adjacently located on a common site,
at a specific location.
BUSINESS LICENSES — Any business, firm, corporation or other
commercial entity which is in the business of owning, operating,
maintaining, installing, leasing or selling a fire or police alarm device or
devices or systems of fire or police alarm devices, which business, firm,
corporation or other commercial entity is, as owner, operator, provider of
maintenance service, installer, lessor or seller of said device, devices or
system of devices, subject to the license requirements of this chapter.
CENTRAL ALARM SYSTEM — Any facility operated by a private firm that
owns or leases a system of fire or police alarm devices, which facility is
manned by operators who receive, record or validate alarm signals and
relay information about such validated signals to the Police or Fire
Department when appropriate.
DIAL ALARM — Any fire or police alarm device which is a telephone
device or telephone attachment that automatically or electronically selects
a telephone line connected to a central alarm station and reproduces a
prerecorded message to report a criminal act or other emergency requiring
Police or Fire Department response.[Amended 10-3-1990 by L.L. No.
16-1990]
DIRECT ALARM — Any fire or police alarm device connected directly by
leased telephone wires from a specific location to Police Headquarters or
Fire Department.
EMERGENCY ALARM — Any fire or police alarm device designed to be
actuated by a fire, criminal act or other emergency at a specific location or
by a victim of a holdup, robbery or other emergency or criminal act at a
specific location.
FALSE EMERGENCY ALARM — Any signal actuated by an emergency alarm
to which the police or Fire Department responds, which is not the result of
a fire, holdup, robbery or other crime or emergency.
FIRE OR POLICE ALARM DEVICE — Any device which, when actuated by
a fire, criminal act or other emergency requiring Police or Fire Department
response, transmit a prerecorded message or other signal by telephone,
radio or other means to a central alarm station or directly to the Police or
Fire Department or produces an audible or visible signal designed to notify
persons within audible or visible alarm range of the signal.
§ 46-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 46-2
46:151
INTRUSION — Any entry into an area or building equipped with one or
more police alarm devices by any person or object whose entry actuates a
police alarm device.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The City Clerk of the City of Rye.
POLICE HEADQUARTERS — Police Headquarters and other enclosures
housing privately or publicly owned equipment serving the Police
Department.
§ 46-3. License required.
§ 46-4. Applications for licenses and permits.
Applications for licenses and permits shall be made as follows:
A. Unlawful to operate, maintain, install, lease or sell a fire or police alarm
device without a license. It shall be unlawful for any person, business,
firm, corporation or other commercial entity to operate, maintain,
install, lease or sell a fire or police alarm device or devices or system of
fire or police alarm devices, as defined by the terms of this chapter,
without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided.
B. Authority to grant licenses and permits.
(1) The licensing authority is hereby authorized to grant a revocable
license, upon approval of the Commissioner of Police, to any
business, firm, corporation or other commercial entity, authorizing
said business, firm, corporation or other commercial entity to do
business in the City of Rye by performing any or all of the following
functions: to own, operate, maintain, install, lease or sell a fire or
police alarm device or devices or system of fire or police alarm
devices. [Amended 10-14-1981 by L.L. No. 5-1981]
(2) The licensing authority is hereby authorized to grant a revocable
license, upon approval of the Commissioner of Police, to any alarm
agent. [Amended 10-14-1981 by L.L. No. 5-1981]
(3) The licensing authority is hereby authorized to grant a revocable
permit to any owner of property located within the City of Rye or
the lessee thereof to operate, maintain, install and modify a fire or
police alarm device.
(4) All presently existing fire or police alarm devices and systems of
fire or police alarm devices and present owners and lessees of
premises having such devices or systems must comply with all
provisions of this chapter by July 1, 1977.
A. All businesses, firms, corporations or other commercial entities which
are in the business of owning, operating, maintaining, installing,
leasing or selling a fire or police alarm device or system of fire or police
alarm devices, who desire to conduct business in the City of Rye, shall
apply to the licensing authority for a business license, on a form to be
§ 46-2 RYE CODE § 46-4
46:152
§ 46-5. License fees and use charges. [Amended 12-4-1985 by L.L.
No. 16-1985; 8-20-1986 by L.L. No. 12-1986]
License fees and use charges shall be as follows:
supplied by the licensing authority. The application shall contain
specific provisions relating to the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of
the device or system of devices owned or to be operated, maintained,
installed, leased or sold by the business licensee, testing procedures
involved and any other information the licensing authority shall
determine to be reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of this
chapter. Such business license shall be issued for a one-year period,
on a calendar year basis or part thereof, and no license shall extend
beyond December 31 of each year. Notwithstanding this provision, a
person having such business license may act as such business licensee
through January 31 of the year following expiration of his license.
B. Any person who is to be an alarm agent in the City of Rye, before acting
as such alarm agent, shall apply for and receive a revocable alarm
agent license. The application shall be made to the licensing authority
on a form to be supplied by the licensing authority. The application shall
contain specific provisions relating to the fire or police alarm device or
devices, holdup alarms, dial alarms or alarm installations which are to
be sold, leased, installed, operated or maintained by the alarm agency,
the skill and competency of the applicant as an alarm agency and such
other information as the licensing authority determines to be
reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of this chapter. Such
license shall be issued for a one-year period, on a calendar year basis or
part thereof, and no license shall extend beyond December 31 of each
year. Notwithstanding this provision, a person having an alarm agent
license may act as such alarm agent through January 31 of the year
following expiration of his license.
C. Any property owner or lessee of property in the City of Rye having on its
premises a fire or police alarm device or system or fire or police alarm
devices shall apply to the licensing authority, on a form to be supplied
by the licensing authority, for a permit to own or otherwise have such a
device on his or its premises. The application shall contain provisions
relating to the device or system of devices installed or to be installed on
the premises. Application for permits for fire or police alarm devices
existing in premises on the effective date of this chapter must be made
to the licensing authority. No such devices may be installed on the
premises of the owner or lessee, after the effective date of this chapter,
prior to the licensing authority's having issued a permit to such owner
or lessee, and no presently existing fire or police alarm device shall be
modified, after the effective date of this chapter, prior to the licensing
authority's having issued a permit to such owner or lessee. Such permit
shall be obtained on an annual basis. [Amended 11-15-1989 by L.L.
No. 11-1989]
§ 46-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 46-5
46:153
§ 46-6. Denial, suspension or revocation of license or permit.
A license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the
licensing authority, after notice and hearing by the licensing authority, for
the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any regulation or
regulations promulgated by the licensing authority pursuant to this chapter,
and any license or identification card issued hereunder shall be surrendered
immediately to the licensing authority upon suspension or revocation. No
part of a license fee shall be refunded when a license is suspended or
revoked. Any applicant whose application for a license or permit has been
denied, or any business licensee, alarm agent, owner or lessee whose
license has been suspended or revoked by the licensing authority, may
appeal such denial, suspension or revocation in writing to the City Manager
within 30 days after the date of denial or of the notice of suspension or
revocation and may appear before such City Manager, at a time and place to
be determined by the City Manager, in support of his or her or its contention
that the license should not have been denied, suspended or revoked. The
decision of the City Manager shall be final.
§ 46-7. Records.
Every business, firm, corporation or other commercial entity conducting
the business of owning, operating, installing, leasing or selling fire or
police alarm devices within the City of Rye shall maintain complete and
accurate records of all installations of alarm systems in the City of Rye and
shall produce such records for inspection by the licensing authority upon
demand.
A. Business license: $100 per calendar year or part thereof, in addition to
use charges, except those persons holding a valid alarm business
license issued by the County of Westchester, for which this fee shall be
$25.
B. Alarm agent license: $25 per calendar year or part thereof, except those
persons holding a valid alarm business license issued by the County of
Westchester, for which this fee shall be $10.
C. Owner or lessee permit: no charge, except use charge where
applicable.
D. A fee of $15 per calendar year or part thereof is established for each
signal directly connected to police headquarters or the Fire
Department, which fee shall be paid by the business licensee to the City
Comptroller during January of each year or during the first month of
operation on new installations.
E. Any owner or lessee who maintains a burglar or fire alarm shall pay a
fee of $30 per calendar year or part thereof to the City Comptroller
during January of each year or during the first month of operation on
new installations. [Amended 11-15-1989 by L.L. No. 11-1989;
12-18-1996 by L.L. No. 12-1996; 12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 7-2000]
§ 46-5 RYE CODE § 46-8
46:154
§ 46-8. General regulations.
A. Limitation. No fire or police alarm device shall be connected to or use
any telephone line connected to Police Headquarters or the Fire
Department except those lines authorized by the licensing authority.
The owner and licensee of any such fire or police alarm device which is
connected either directly or indirectly to Police Headquarters by a
telephone line which has not been authorized for use for such purpose
as aforesaid, on and after July 1, 1977, shall be in violation of this
chapter and be subject to the penalty provisions hereof.
B. Intentional false alarm. It shall be a violation of this chapter to
intentionally cause a false holdup alarm, and any person who does
intentionally cause a false holdup alarm shall be subject to the penalty
provisions hereof.
C. Emergency alarms and charges.
(1) Any owner or lessee of property having a fire or police alarm device
or system of fire or police alarm devices on his or her premises on
the effective date of this chapter, and any user of services or
equipment furnished by a licensee under this chapter, shall pay to
the City Comptroller a charge for each and every emergency alarm
to which the Police or Fire Department responds, in each calendar
year, as follows: [Amended 12-16-1992 by L.L. No. 16-1992;
12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 7-2000; 12-18-2002 by L.L. No.
8-2002]
Number of Emergency
Alarms Each Year Charge
First No charge
Second No charge
Third and fourth (each) $100.00
Over 4 (each) $200.00
(2) Such charges shall be paid to the City Comptroller upon demand by
the City. The above charges shall be waived by the City Comptroller
if it is established by the owner or lessee, to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Commissioner of Police, that the alarm to which
the Police or Fire Department responded was not a false
emergency alarm, and the said Chief so certifies to the City
Comptroller. The failure to pay any such charges shall subject the
owner, lessee or user to the penalty provisions of this chapter and
to revocation of the permit for such alarm device or devices.
[Amended 10-14-1981 by L.L. No. 5-1981]
D. Installation and maintenance. The installation and maintenance of fire
or police alarm devices permitted by this chapter, including the
connection to Police Headquarters and Fire Department, shall be made
§ 46-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 46-8
46:155
§ 46-9. Special regulations.
at no cost to the City. The owner or lessee shall be responsible for the
maintenance and service of his or its fire or police alarm equipment and
shall be responsible for all malfunctions of his or its equipment.
E. Change of location. If the location of Police Headquarters should be
changed at any time, the City shall not be responsible for any expense
incurred by the owner or lessee or business licensee or alarm agent for
moving alarm systems or reconnecting such systems to the relocated
Police Headquarters or elsewhere.
F. Removal of unlawful equipment. In addition to any other remedy
provided by law, the licensing authority, whenever it shall have
knowledge of the use of any fire or police alarm device, cabinet or
attachment or telephone terminal which is not operated or maintained
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or which is contrary to
regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, and after notice and
hearing by the licensing authority, may order the removal of the same
from Police Headquarters, and it shall be unlawful to disobey such
order.
G. Rules, regulations and enforcement. The licensing authority shall
promulgate reasonable rules, regulations and standards, which shall be
approved by the City Manager, that may reasonably be necessary for
the purpose of assuring the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of fire
or police alarm devices and alarm installations owned, operated,
maintained, installed, leased or sold by a licensee under this chapter,
and to facilitate the administration of this chapter. The licensing
authority shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
The aforesaid rules, regulations and standards shall be set forth in
writing and copies shall be available for applicants.
A. Central alarm station systems. The Commissioner of Police is hereby
authorized to prescribe the location and the manner of installation of
private or regular business telephone lines into Police Headquarters
from a central alarm station for the express purpose of providing direct
telephone communications between a central alarm station and Police
Headquarters for use in reporting holdup alarms. [Amended
10-14-1981 by L.L. No. 5-1981]
B. Direct alarm systems. The Commissioner of Police is hereby authorized
to prescribe the location and the manner of installation of all cabinets,
accessories, connections and equipment of an approved direct alarm
system within Police Headquarters or Fire Department for the purpose
of providing a direct alarm system where the visible and audible signals
therefrom may be readily seen and heard by police or fire personnel.
[Amended 10-14-1981 by L.L. No. 5-1981]
C. External alarms. Alarms which are designed to be heard outside of the
building are prohibited, except any external alarm that is installed
§ 46-8 RYE CODE § 46-9
46:156
§ 46-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation who does not pay any charge or fee
established in this chapter or who violates any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine not in excess of $250 for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs
or is committed.
Chapter 47
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 47-1. Intent.
It is the intent of the City of Rye, as an exercise of its police power,
to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents and
inhabitants of the city by enacting this chapter, since it is the finding
of the City Council of the City of Rye that the consumption of alcoholic
beverages and the possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages
by persons on certain public lands, except under controlled conditions, is
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city
in that such consumption and possession contributes to the development
of unsanitary conditions and the creation of nuisances, including but not
limited to littering and raucous or other disorderly behavior. This chapter
shall not be considered as a traffic regulation insofar as it relates to motor
vehicles or the operation thereof.
which shall be capable of and shall automatically terminate its
operation within five minutes of being activated is permitted.
D. Internal alarms. Internal alarms must be regulated and maintained so
that the sound therefrom will not cause a disturbance to the immediate
neighbors. Any audible burglar alarm that is installed shall be capable
of and shall automatically terminate its operation within 10 minutes of
its being activated.
E. Exceptions. None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to a fire or
police alarm device or devices installed in a motor vehicle or trailer, nor
to employees of a public utility company engaged in the business of
providing communication, services or facilities.
F. No person shall use or cause or permit to be used, any alarm device that
automatically selects a telephone trunk line of the Police or Fire
Department of the City of Rye and then reproduces any prerecorded
voice messages to report any robbery, burglary or fire. The use of any
dial alarm device which relays a digital coded signal to the central
alarm monitoring facility is permitted under this chapter. [Added
10-3-1990 by L.L. No. 16-1990]
§ 46-9 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 47-2
47:157
§ 47-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them. All other words shall have the meanings normally
ascribed to them in regular usage:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and
every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or
beer and capable of being consumed by a human being.
CITY — The City of Rye.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle suitable for or
used to hold any liquid.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any highway, street, sidewalk, park, playground, school
ground or city-owned open space.
§ 47-3. Restricted acts.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to:
§ 47-4. Exceptions.
§ 47-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all persons on public lands in the city except
as provided in § 47-4. This chapter shall not apply to any person drinking
an alcoholic beverage while operating a motor vehicle upon any public
highway within the city in violation of § 1227 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law
of the State of New York.
§ 47-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal
Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250.
Chapter 50
A. Consume any alcoholic beverage on any public land within the city.
B. Have in his possession any open container containing any alcoholic
beverage on any public lands within the city, with the intent to consume
such beverage.
A. The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply during the time of a fair,
picnic or other community gathering on public lands if permission to
perform the prohibited acts has been granted by the city.
B. The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply to the transportation of a
container containing any alcoholic beverage across public lands of the
city from one point to another, with no intent to consume the contents of
such container while on public lands.
§ 47-2 RYE CODE § 47-6
50:158
AMUSEMENTS AND EXHIBITIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 47.
Licenses — See Ch. 125.
Noise — See Ch. 133.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 141.
§ 50-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
CABARET — Any room, place or space in the City of Rye in which any
dancing is permitted or carried on in connection with the business of selling
to the public food or beverage of any kind.
PUBLIC DANCE HALL — Any room, place or space in the City of Rye in
which dancing is permitted or carried on and to which the public may gain
admission, either with or without the payment of a fee, excepting, however,
premises owned, occupied or used by a religious, educational or charitable
corporation or institution.
§ 50-2. License required.
§ 50-3. Application for license; issuance; expiration.
The license prescribed by this chapter shall be issued by the City Clerk.
Application for such license shall be made on a form containing such
information as may be determined by the City Clerk. Each license shall
expire on the 31st day of December.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, maintain or operate in
the City of Rye a public dance hall or cabaret unless the premises
wherein the same is conducted, maintained or operated are licensed in
the manner prescribed herein.
B. No person shall maintain, operate or conduct within the city any
theater, moving-picture house, skating rink, public hall, circus, bowling
alley, shooting gallery, miniature golf course, golf driving range or any
other exhibition, performance, device or arrangement for public
entertainment or amusement for money or hire without first obtaining a
license from the City Clerk, except that no license shall be required
where the net proceeds of such amusement, entertainment, exhibition
or performance are for the exclusive benefit of any religious,
educational or charitable purpose.
§ 47-6 AMUSEMENTS AND EXHIBITIONS § 50-4
50:159
§ 50-4. Inspection of premises. [Amended 10-14-1981 by L.L. No.
5-1981]
No license shall be issued until the application therefor is approved by
the City Manager, who shall, prior to approval, cause an inspection of the
premises to be licensed to be made by the departments of the city to
determine whether or not the said premises comply with all laws and with
the rules and regulations of the Building Department, Police Department,
Fire Department and Westchester County Health Department insofar as
the same are applicable thereto. Employees of any department of the city
assigned to make an inspection under this chapter shall be permitted to
have access to all public dance halls, cabarets and other premises at all
reasonable times. The Commissioner of Police shall cause to be made, from
time to time, such inspections as may be necessary to ascertain whether or
not the licensed premises are maintained in compliance with law.
§ 50-5. License fees. [Amended 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984;
12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 8-2000]
The following annual fees shall be paid for each license, including a license
for a portion of a year, issued pursuant to this chapter:
§ 50-6. Posting of license.
Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
shall immediately post such license and keep same posted while in force in
a conspicuous place in the premises mentioned in the application for such
license.
§ 50-7. Hours of operation. [Amended 10-14-1981 by L.L. No.
5-1981]
Premises licensed hereunder shall not be kept open for business, nor shall
the public be permitted to enter or remain therein for the purposes licensed
hereunder, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., except that
proprietors, employees and regular guests of hotels shall be permitted to
enter or remain during such hours. The Commissioner of Police, at his or
her discretion, may permit any premises licensed pursuant to this chapter
to be open to the public between such hours on special occasions.
A. Bowling alley, miniature golf course, golf driving range, moving-picture
house, skating rink, theater, circus, public hall, shooting gallery, public
dance hall or cabaret: to be set annually by resolution of the City
Council before adoption of the budget for the following year.
B. Public exhibition, performance, entertainment or amusement not
otherwise provided for: to be set annually by resolution of the City
Council before adoption of the budget for the following year.
§ 50-4 RYE CODE § 50-8
50:160
§ 50-8. Suspension or revocation of license. [Amended 10-14-1981
by L.L. No. 5-1981]
The Commissioner of Police is empowered to suspend or revoke a license
issued pursuant to this chapter, after a hearing upon notice to the licensee,
for any of the following causes:
Chapter 52
APPEARANCE TICKETS
§ 52-1. Persons authorized to issue tickets.
Pursuant to § 150.20 of the Criminal Procedure Law, the following city
officials are hereby authorized to issue appearance tickets, as defined by
§§ 1.20 and 150.10 of the Criminal Procedure Law:
§ 52-2. Enforcement responsibilities.
The above city officials shall have authority to issue appearance tickets
in relation to their enforcement responsibilities in connection with the
following Code provisions:
A. Violation by the licensee of any law or ordinance or any rule or
regulation of any agency of the state, county or city pertaining to the
operation and maintenance of the licensed premises.
B. Conviction of licensee for a felony.
C. Licensee has permitted disorderly, obscene or immoral conduct on the
premises or conduct detrimental to health and safety of others or
constituting a breach of the public peace.
A. Building Inspector.
B. Assistant Building Inspector.
C. City Engineer.
D. Assistant City Engineer.
E. Sanitation Foreman, Public Works Department.
F. Tree Foreman, Public Works Department.
G. General Foreman, Public Works Department.
H. Fire Inspector.
I. City Naturalist.
A. Building Inspector and Assistant Building Inspector: Chapters 53, 68,
71, 72, 81, 93, 98, 100, 108, 117, 121, 133, 153, 157, 170, 194 and 197
and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
§ 50-8 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 52-2
52:161
Chapter 53
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions — See Charter, Art. 19.
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Landmarks preservation — See Ch. 117.
Zoning — See Ch. 197.
§ 53-1. Legislative findings; definitions.
B. City Engineer and Assistant City Engineer: Chapters 71, 157, 167, 170,
173, 187 and 194.
C. Sanitation Foreman, Public Works Department: Chapters 108 and 157.
D. Tree Foreman, Public Works Department: Chapter 187.
E. General Foreman, Public Works Department: Chapters 108, 157 and
187.
F. Fire Inspector: Chapters 71 and 98 and the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code.
G. City Naturalist: Chapters 187 and 195.
A. The Council hereby finds that excessive uniformity, dissimilarity,
inappropriateness or poor quality of design in the exterior appearance
of structures erected, reconstructed or altered in any residential,
business and other areas in the City of Rye adversely affects the
desirability of the immediate area and neighboring areas within the
community and by so doing impairs the benefits of occupancy or use of
real property in such areas, impairs the stability and value of both
improved and unimproved real property in such areas, prevents the
most appropriate development of such areas, produces degeneration of
the property in such areas, with attendant deterioration of conditions
affecting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the community, and destroys a proper relationship
between the taxable value of real property in the community and the
cost of municipal services provided therefor. It is the purpose of this
chapter to prevent these and other harmful effects and thus to promote
and protect the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
community.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated: [Amended 5-31-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
ERECTED, RECONSTRUCTED or ALTERED — As defined in Chapter
68, Building Construction, of the Code of the City of Rye and in the
approved regulations of the Building Inspector.
§ 52-2 RYE CODE § 53-1
52:162
§ 53-2. Membership of Architectural Review Board. [Amended
2-1-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006; 3-16-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
In accordance with Article 19 of the Rye City Charter, there is hereby
created a Board of Architectural Review which shall consist of seven
members who shall serve without compensation. All members of the Board
shall be lawful residents of the City and shall be specially qualified by
reason of training or experience in architecture, land development,
community planning, real estate, landscape architecture, architectural
history, engineering, law, building construction or other relevant business
or profession, or by reason of civic interest and sound judgment to judge
the effect of a proposed erection, reconstruction or alteration of a structure
upon the desirability, property values and development or preservation of
surrounding areas and to understand and carry out the legislative findings
and policy statements of the Council set forth in § 53-1. There shall be no
requirement that a member of the Board be a citizen of the United States. At
least one member shall be a registered architect in the State of New York.
The Chair and other members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the approval of the Council, for terms of three years, with staggered
terms, such terms to be subject to renewals at the discretion of the Mayor,
subject to the approval of the Council, except that one new appointment
made in 2006 shall be for a two-year term, and one new appointment made
in 2006 shall be for a one-year term so that term, and thereafter their
successors, shall be appointed for terms of three years from and after the
expiration of the term of their predecessors in office. In the same manner,
vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose place
has become vacant.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR — As defined in Chapter
68, Building Construction, of the Code of the City of Rye and in the
approved regulations of the Building Inspector.
SMALL PROJECT — Any addition to or alteration or modification of
an existing single- or two-family residence structure:[Amended
10-24-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
STRUCTURE — Includes all buildings, accessory buildings, decks, signs
and satellite earth station dish antennas as defined by Chapter 108,
Housing Standards, and Chapter 197, Zoning, of the Code of the City of
Rye.
For which a valid certificate of occupancy exists for all structures
on the property;
(1)
Upon which property there are no open building permits and no
building permit or certificate of occupancy was issued within the
immediate past 12 months;
(2)
That does not change the appearance visible from the street of any
front or side facade or roof.
(3)
§ 53-1 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 53-3
52:163
§ 53-3. Meetings and procedures of Board. [Amended 2-1-2006 by
L.L. No. 2-2006]
A. Meetings of the Board of Architectural Review shall be held at the call
of the Chair and at such other times as the Board may determine but
shall be held within 21 days of the date of referral to the Board of any
application for building permit as required in § 53-4 of this chapter. The
Chair or, in his/her absence, the Acting Chair may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. A majority of the appointed
members of said Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and
other official actions. The Building Inspector shall act as the Secretary
of the Board and shall keep in the City Hall a comprehensive record of
all meetings and transactions by the Board. The Board shall have power
from time to time to adopt, amend and repeal rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with law or the provisions of this chapter and subject to
review of the Council, governing its procedure and the transaction of its
business and for the purpose of carrying into effect the standards
outlined in § 53-5 of this chapter.
B. Every rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof and every
order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board shall
immediately be filed with the Building Department and shall be a public
record.
C. Notice. An applicant for a building permit needing Board of
Architectural Review approval for any project, except small projects as
defined in Chapter 53, shall notify abutting property owners and
property owners across the street of the application upon its filing and
at least 14 days before the date of any Board of Architectural Review
meeting. To facilitate notification of the public, a public notification list
shall be prepared by the applicant, using the most current City of Rye
Tax Maps and Tax Assessment Roll, showing the Tax Map sheet, block
and lot number, the owner's name and owner's mailing address for each
property as described by the rules and Schedule B of the Building
Department.9 If a property within the notification area is a multifamily
dwelling, apartment building, cooperative or similar-type residential
structure, the applicant shall send the notice to the property owner of
record. Such notices shall be mailed by first-class mail and the notice
shall substantially conform to the model notice in Schedule A.10 The
applicant must obtain a certificate of mailing for every notice mailed.
All notices mailed must be sent via certified mail (no return receipt
required). All certificates of mailing must be provided to the Building
Department at least five days prior to the public hearing. [Added
3-10-2010 by L.L. No. 3-201011]
9. Editor's Note: Schedule B is on file in the Building Department.
10.Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Building Department.
§ 53-3 RYE CODE § 53-4
52:164
§ 53-4. Referrals of applications for building permits.
§ 53-5. Standards and considerations for approval.
A. Every application for a building permit for the construction of any
structure within the City of Rye or for the reconstruction or alteration of
any structure, including any addition thereto, within the City of Rye that
would affect the exterior appearance of such structure shall be referred
by the Building Inspector to the Board of Architectural review within 21
days of the date of the application, provided that it conforms in all
respects to all other applicable laws and ordinances. The term
"structure" shall be construed in accordance with the legislative
findings and definitions set forth in § 53-1 of this chapter. The
requirements of this section do not apply to "small projects" as defined
in § 53-1 of this chapter and § A201-1 of the Rules of the Building
Inspector, except for small projects that require or have been granted a
variance by the Zoning Board of Appeals; or that involve a recreational
or accessory structure or facility; or when the Building Inspector refers
the small project to the Board of Architectural Review upon finding that
the small project may meet one or more of the guidelines for such
referral as prepared by the Board of Architectural Review, thereby
having a substantial aesthetic impact upon immediately neighboring
properties. The requirements of this section do not apply to additions or
alterations that meet the requirements of § 68-5F or 197-84C(5) of this
Code. [Amended 5-31-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
B. Applications must be accompanied by plans showing all elevations of
new structures and all affected elevations in the case of reconstructions
or alterations. When required by the Building Inspector or by the Board
of Architectural Review, a site plan shall be submitted showing both
existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals, all existing trees
with a trunk diameter of four inches or more at a point three feet above
the ground level and whether such trees shall remain or be removed
and/or other topographical features.
A. Approval or disapproval of any building permit shall be by a vote of a
majority of the members of the Board of Architectural Review. In
considering an application for a permit, the Board shall take into
account natural features of the site and surroundings, exterior design
and appearances of existing structures in the area and the character of
the area and its peculiar suitability for particular purposes, with a view
to conserving the values of property, encouraging the most appropriate
use of property and preventing the harmful effects referred to in § 53-1
of this chapter.
B. Findings for approval; conditions.
(1) The Board shall, subject to the provisions of Subsection B(2) of
§ 53-5, approve any application referred to it upon finding that the
11.Editor's Note: This local law provided that it shall take effect 5-1-2010.
§ 53-4 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 53-5
52:165
structure for which the permit was requested if erected,
reconstructed or altered in accordance with the submitted plan
would be in harmony with the purpose of this chapter, would not
be visually offensive or inappropriate by reason of poor quality of
exterior design, monotonous similarity or striking visual discord in
relation to the site or surroundings, would not mar the appearance
of the area, would not impair the user enjoyment and desirability
or reduce the values of properties in the area, would not be
detrimental to the character of the neighborhood, would not
prevent the most appropriate development or preservation and/or
utilization of the site or of adjacent lands or would not adversely
affect the economic stability, health, safety and general welfare of
the community.
(2) In approving any application, the Board may impose appropriate
conditions and safeguards designed to prevent the harmful effects
set forth in § 53-1 of this chapter. The Board may also suggest
interior change(s) that would improve the exterior appearance.
C. The Board may disapprove any application for a permit, provided that
the Board has afforded the applicant an opportunity to confer upon
suggestions for change of the plan, or provided that the Board finds and
states that the structure for which the permit was requested would, if
erected, reconstructed or altered as indicated, provoke one or more of
the harmful effects set forth in § 53-1 of this chapter by reason of:
(1) Excessive similarity to any other structure or structures existing or
for which a permit has been issued or to any other structure
included in the same permit application, facing the same street and
within 500 feet of the proposed site, in respect to one or more of
the following features of exterior design and appearance:
apparently identical facade; substantially identical size and
arrangement of either doors, windows, porticoes or other openings
or breaks in the facade facing the street, including reverse
arrangements; or other significant identical features, such as but
not limited to material, roofline and height or other design
elements, provided that a finding of excessive similarity shall state
not only that such similarity exists, but further that it is of such a
nature as to be expected to provoke beyond reasonable doubt one
or more of the harmful effects set forth in § 53-1 of this chapter.
(2) Excessive dissimilarity or inappropriateness in relation to any other
structure or structures existing or for which a permit has been
issued or to any other structure included in the same permit
application, within 1,000 feet of the proposed site, in respect to one
or more of the following features: cubical contents; gross floor
area; height of building or height of roof; inappropriate relationship
to the site, its contours, shape or natural characteristics;
inappropriate location of features incorporated into the structure,
including but not limited to windows, doors, chimneys, stairs,
porches, air conditioners or air-conditioning equipment, or of
§ 53-5 RYE CODE § 53-5
52:166
features ancillary to the structure, including but not limited to
antennas, toolsheds, greenhouses, patios, decks, balconies,
garages or refuse storage areas; or other significant design
features, such as material or quality or architectural design,
provided that a finding of excessive dissimilarity or
inappropriateness exists, but further that it is of such nature as to
be expected to provoke beyond a reasonable doubt one or more of
the harmful effects set forth in § 53-1 of this chapter and that the
finding is not based on personal preference as to taste or choice of
architectural style.
D. The Board of Architectural Review shall examine, review, approve or
disapprove applications for permits for the following exterior facilities:
swimming pools, jacuzzis, hot tubs, tennis courts, paddle tennis courts
and other courts (hereinafter collectively referred to as "recreational
facility" or "recreational facilities") as to the necessary screening
required by § 197-86 of the Code of the City of Rye, Table A, Column 3,
Subsections (9)(a) and (9)(b). Approval or disapproval must be by
majority vote of the total Board. A ten-foot wide landscape strip planted
and maintained with at least a double row of alternately spaced
evergreens, with an actual height of at least six feet above the natural
grade when installed, is the preferred screening method for
recreational facilities and must be approved by the Board. However, the
Board may approve alternate screening under the following conditions:
(1) There is existing landscaping on the lot between the recreational
facility and the property line equal in effectiveness, height and
density to the required evergreen screening.
(2) There is an existing six-foot-high opaque fence or wall on the lot
between the recreational facility and the property line, which is
totally owned and controlled by the lot owner and in conformity
with the fence height regulations of this chapter, provided that the
Board further finds that the increased height of matured evergreen
screening is not necessary to screen the recreational facility from
the view of the abutting property and that the fence was installed at
least two years prior to the application for the waiver.
(3) The existing topography of the lot where the recreational facility is
to be located, relative to the topography of the abutting property, is
such that the recreational facility will not be within the view of the
abutting property, provided that the Board further finds that it is
reasonable to expect that this topographic relationship will not be
adversely altered in order to facilitate future development of either
property.
(4) The soil conditions where the landscaping strip would be required
to be installed are such that the evergreens can not be expected to
survive or to properly mature, provided that the Board further finds
the recreational facility can not be reasonably placed in another
location with suitable soil conditions, and further provided that a
§ 53-5 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 53-5
52:167
§ 53-6. Applications for sign; awning, marquee-type awning and
canopy permits. [Amended 5-1-1991 by L.L. No. 6-1991; 1-20-1999
by L.L. No. 1-1999]
The Board of Architectural Review shall have the power to examine, review
and, by majority vote of the total Board, approve or disapprove applications
for permits for signs, awnings, marquee-type awnings and canopies affixed
to any structure or erected in connection with any structure, pursuant to
§ 165-2 of the Code of the City of Rye.
six-foot-high opaque fence or wall which conforms to the fence
height regulations of this chapter will be installed between the
property line and the recreational facility in place of the
landscaping strip.
(5) Conditions do exist which are not specifically covered in Subsection
C(1) through (4) above, but which are of a similar nature, provided
that the Board further finds that approval of the waiver will not be
inconsistent with the spirit and intent of this section or less
protective of the view from the abutting properties.
(6) The approval of any alternate screening as described in Subsection
C(1) through (5) above and the acceptance of it by the owner shall
also be subject to the following limitations and conditions:
(a) A variance has not been granted by the Board of Appeals
permitting a reduction of the minimum property line setbacks
required by this chapter.
(b) The recreational facility was not constructed prior to the
application for approval, except that this limitation shall not
apply to recreational facilities constructed prior to the effective
date of the screening requirements for which an owner wishes
to seek compliance.
(c) After construction of the recreational facility, the owners of the
lot shall thereafter be required to maintain, repair and replace
such existing landscaping, fencing, walls or topographical
features which served as the basis for approval as if they were
required by this chapter in the first instance and enforced in
the same manner.
(d) The approval shall become null and void one year after its
approval by the Board of Architectural Review unless the
recreational facility has been substantially completed.
(e) The approval shall become null and void if the recreational
facility is removed.
§ 53-5 RYE CODE § 53-7
52:168
§ 53-7. Applications for dish antennas. [Amended 9-18-1996 by L.L.
No. 7-1996]
The Board of Architectural Review shall have the power to examine, review
and, by majority vote of the total Board, approve or disapprove applications
for the installation of satellite earth station dish antennas, subject to the
provisions of § 197-9D of the Code of the City of Rye. Satellite earth station
dish antennas which measure one meter or less in diameter are permitted
as of right in residential zones and are not subject to the provisions of this
section or § 197-9D. Such antennas, which measure two meters or less in
diameter, are permitted as of right in nonresidentially zoned areas.
§ 53-8. Advisory powers.
The Board of Architectural Review shall advise with respect to public
buildings and such other matters as the Council, the Planning Commission,
the Landmarks Advisory Committee (NOTE: or Landmarks Preservation
Commission, if so changed by City Council) and/or any other public agency,
Board or Commission may refer to it.
§ 53-9. Effect of disapproval or failure to act.
The Building Inspector shall refuse any building permit application
disapproved as provided in § 53-5 of this chapter. If the Board of
Architectural Review shall fail to approve or disapprove any building permit
application referred to it under § 53-4 of this chapter within 21 days of the
date of referral of such application to it, the application shall be considered
to have been approved, and the Building Inspector shall forthwith issue the
permit unless the applicant shall have agreed to an extension of time.
§ 53-10. Appeals.
Any applicant aggrieved by the action of the Board of Architectural Review
in disapproving a building permit application and of the Building Inspector
in denying such permit because of such disapproval may request the Board
to make formal findings of fact. In the event of such a request, the Board
shall make findings of fact within 30 days after the request is filed in
the office of the City Clerk, shall thereafter provide the applicant with
an opportunity to answer the findings by the submission of formal proof
and shall reconsider the application on the basis of such answer. If the
application is disapproved after such reconsideration, the applicant may
take an appeal therefrom to the duly constituted Board of Appeals of the
City of Rye. The standard of review shall be whether the decision of the
Board of Architectural Review was arbitrary, capricious and/or unsupported
by substantial evidence of record. The Board of Appeals may reverse or
affirm the action of the Board of Architectural Review and reverse or affirm
any action taken by the Building Inspector pursuant to that action of the
Board of Architectural Review.
§ 53-7 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 53-11
52:169
§ 53-11. Powers of Board under Chapter 117.
Chapter 117, Landmarks Preservation, of the Code of the City of Rye
ascribes certain responsibilities and powers to the Board of Architectural
Review, and these are hereby included in this Chapter 53.
Chapter 56
AUCTIONEERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers — See Ch. 113.
Licenses — See Ch. 125.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 144.
§ 56-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale or cause or
permit to be sold or disposed of at auction within the city any goods, wares,
merchandise or any other personal property without first obtaining a license
from the Clerk.
§ 56-2. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to judicial sales or sales
by executors or administrators, by trustees under deed of assignment, by
lienors or by public officers in the manner prescribed by law, or to sales
by local religious, educational or charitable organizations, or by bona fide
householders to dispose of their own goods.
§ 56-3. License fee. [Amended 12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 9-2000]
The annual license fee for each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be set annually by resolution of the City Council before adoption of the
budget for the following year.
§ 56-4. Restrictions.
No person shall dispose of any goods, wares or merchandise or other
personal property at auction in any street, sidewalk or other public place or
to any person who, at the time of bidding for or while examining the same,
shall be on the sidewalk or on the street.
Chapter 61
(RESERVED)
Chapter 64
§ 53-11 RYE CODE § 56-4
56:170
BOATS AND HARBORS
§ 56-4 (RESERVED) § 56-4
61:171

ARTICLE I
Boats and Docks
§ 64-1. Excursion boats.
With the exceptions set forth in § 64-1A, no person shall operate excursion
boats within the City or operate boats regularly carrying passengers or
freight, or both, without first obtaining the consent of the Council and
subject to such restrictive provisions as the Council may deem advisable,
except that this section shall not apply to boats or launches running to and
from docks of yacht clubs.
A. Boat excursions for the purposes of duck hunting, kayaking, stand-up
paddle boarding or other similar contracted-for activities shall be
permitted upon issuance of a permit by the Boat Basin Supervisor.
§ 64-1 (RESERVED) § 64-1
61:173

ARTICLE II
Harbors
§ 64-2. Title, scope and purpose.
§ 64-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BAY CONSTABLE — Seasonal employee as defined under Westchester
County Civil Service.
BOAT — Includes every kind of boat, houseboat, vessel, or floating craft,
including, but not limited to, jet skis, kayaks, paddle boards, and canoes.
BOAT BASIN SUPERVISOR — The administrative official appointed by the
City Manager to oversee the Boat Basin daily functions.
MOORING FIELD — The Rye Harbor Mooring Field is that portion or
portions of the harbor which have sufficient depth of water for the mooring
of boats, and which have proper and secure permanent moorings organized
in a safe separation pattern for the storage of boats. The mooring field shall
not include or intrude upon any portion of the navigable channels in the
harbor.
YACHT CLUB — A club organized to promote and regulate yachting and
boating.
§ 64-4. Boat identification.
A. This article shall be known as the "Harbor Ordinance of the City of Rye"
and shall apply to all boats and moorings within City-regulated
waterways, as defined in § 46-a of the Navigation Law, exempting the
areas under the jurisdiction of the Westchester County Park
Commission.
B. The general purpose of this article is to keep the harbor sanitary and
safe, make the best use of available mooring space within the City
waterways so as to accommodate more craft, avoid congestion, avoid
obstruction of the channels and regulate the operation and speed of
boats.
A. All boats anchored or moored in Rye's waterways, including docks, shall
be registered or documented in compliance with federal and state laws
and in accordance with this chapter.
B. Identification. Vessel operators shall identify themselves and produce
the vessel's registration to City, state or federal law enforcement
authorities upon request. Failure to produce such registration upon
request shall be presumptive evidence of a violation of this section.
§ 64-2 (RESERVED) § 64-5
61:175
§ 64-5. Discharges from boats.
No garbage, oil, sludge, paper, refuse, debris, sewage or waste material of
any kind shall be thrown, deposited or permitted to fall from any boat into
any part of the City waterways, except insofar as otherwise permitted in the
use of toilet facilities as provided in this article.
§ 64-6. Toilet facilities.
The owner and operator of every boatyard or marine service yard which
provides berths for boats, and the owner and operator of every yacht club,
marine service yard or any other property which provides, at such club,
yard or property, accommodations for berthing dinghies or other tenders
for boats equipped with toilets, moored or operated in City waterways, shall
maintain suitable toilet facilities on shore for the accommodation of the
users of said boats and shall post a sign clearly visible to the users of said
boats, reading in substance as follows: "The Harbor Ordinance of the City
of Rye prohibits discharging contents of toilets of boats into Milton Inner
Harbor, the areas of Mamaroneck Harbor and Port Chester Harbor within
the junction of the City of Rye and within 500 feet of any bathing beach,
and requires that when such boats are occupied, the toilets thereof shall
be rendered inoperative. The owner and person in charge of each offending
boat is liable for the penalty prescribed."
§ 64-7. Living on boats.
§ 64-8. Noise on boats.
The operation of any radio or television or the use of any musical instrument
or other sound-making instrument or device on any boat in such a manner
as to disturb the peace is prohibited, except that the transmission of audible
signals that are necessary for normal navigation or for emergency purposes
is permitted.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall live on any boat moored
or docked in a marina or in waters within 500 feet of any bathing beach.
B. No person shall live on any boat moored or docked in Milton Inner
Harbor or in the areas of Mamaroneck Harbor and Port Chester Harbor
within the jurisdiction of the City of Rye for more than 48 hours, during
which any person living on such a boat must fully comply with § 64-5
hereof.
C. Subsection B of this section shall not apply to commercial boats while
actively engaged in construction or dredging work or discharging
cargo, or to boats occupied by owners and crews only while being
repaired in a boatyard, provided that there is full compliance with
§ 64-5 hereof.
D. The use of galley stoves or other cooking or heating appliances using
gasoline for fuel on boats in Milton Inner Harbor is prohibited.
§ 64-5 RYE CODE § 64-9
61:176
§ 64-9. Moorings and floats.
Within the jurisdictional area provided by § 46-a of the Navigation Law and
§ 64-2 of this chapter, the following restrictions apply:
A. No boat shall be moored within the lines of any channel.
B. No person shall anchor or moor a vessel or float in a mooring area
without first obtaining an annual mooring permit from the Boat Basin
Supervisor. Such permit shall be applied for on forms available at the
Boat Basin and shall be accompanied by an application fee, current
inspection certificate, and proof of insurance as shall be fixed from time
to time by resolution of the City Council. The person shall file annually
with the Boat Basin a local address of an authorized agent for legal
service of process, in order to have a local contact in case of an
emergency or violation of this chapter. Upon receipt of a properly
prepared application, the Boat Basin Supervisor shall determine if the
application is complete and, if so, shall process the application. No
application shall be deemed complete until the permit fee is paid. No
permit shall be issued if the person has any unpaid dues or fees from
prior years. Any neighborhood association, yacht club, or other entity
administering the moorings of its membership which has a regular and
comprehensive mooring administration and annual maintenance
program shall submit a list of the moorings which require a permit on
an annual basis. Such list shall also include either the name of the boat
or the registration number as well as the GPS coordinates of all
moorings. The annual submission shall include the quantity of moorings
in the program, payment of the permit fee for that quantity of moorings
and a certification to the Boat Basin Supervisor that each mooring
within the program has been properly and safely maintained in
accordance with the provisions of § 64-9F. The annual submission shall
also include the name, local address, cell phone number and email
address of two authorized agents for emergency contact and legal
service of process for the moorings on the list.
C. An annual mooring permit, which contains the name of the authorized
mooring location in the City of Rye, shall be valid for a period of one
year, commencing April 1 of each year and terminating on December 1
of the same year. The number must be permanently affixed to said raft
and/or float. The Boat Basin Supervisor may promulgate regulations
governing rafts and floats, subject to the approval of the State
Commissioner of Parks, Recreations and Historic Preservation and the
City Council.
D. No boat shall be moored in such a manner as to interfere with the use of
a preexisting mooring. The right to use a mooring space shall be based
on a first-come first-served basis. A neighborhood association, yacht
club or other entity administering the moorings of its membership may
maintain lists identifying its owners and shall file copies of this
information with the Boat Basin.
§ 64-9 (RESERVED) § 64-9
61:177
E. A mooring location shall be occupied only by the vessel or float assigned
to the location, unless written consent is granted by the Boat Basin
Supervisor to use the mooring for another vessel or float. Neighborhood
associations, yacht clubs or other entities which maintain a
comprehensive mooring program may assign locations within their
mooring field to particular boats and may move boats as needed for
safety. The vessel which is assigned a location or granted written
consent shall be fully registered, and all registration and current
contact information shall be provided to the Boat Basin Supervisor.
F. Moorings top rigs must be hauled and serviced each year. A winter stick
shall be used during winter and a clearly visible float or buoy shall be
used at all other times in accordance with the Uniform State Waterway
Marking System. Failure to use a winter stick will result in a denial of a
mooring permit for the following season. A permanent mooring shall be
raised at least once every three years for inspection, at the owner's
expense. The Boat Basin Supervisor may accept a written statement
from the manager of a yacht club or other entity's mooring maintenance
program or from a contractor certifying that he/she has inspected the
mooring and that it is in safe condition. The inspection certificate shall
be dated and signed by the person who has done the inspection and
shall certify that the mooring anchor, all ground tackle, including lines,
shackles, swivels and chains, are in safe condition.
G. Unsafe moorings or abandoned moorings, which represent a hazard to
navigation, may be removed at the direction of the Boat Basin
Supervisor or the Rye Police Department. If directions given by the Boat
Basin Supervisor with respect to the removal of unauthorized moorings
or changes in location are not carried out within seven days after notice
from the Boat Basin Supervisor or the Rye Police Department in person,
or by the posting of the order in a visible location in a waterproof
envelope on the mooring device, or by regular and certified mail, if a
mailing address is known, the Boat Basin Supervisor may cause such
moorings to be removed and temporarily stored at the owner's expense.
H. After removal of any vessel or mooring device as provided in this
article, the Boat Basin Supervisor may store or cause such vessel or
mooring device to be stored in a suitable place at the expense of the
owner. Removal of vessels and moorings shall be removed by a thirdparty
contractor for the City. Such owner may redeem the same upon
payment of all City fines and fees to the City and of all expenses owed to
the person with whom such property is stored.
I. A mooring buoy shall be constructed of styrofoam, plastic, metal or
other material and be spherical, conical or cylindrical in shape and no
less than six inches or more than 24 inches in diameter. The portion
above the waters shall be no less than six inches or more than 24
inches, exclusive of whips or staffs. Each buoy shall be painted white
except portions which are painted with anti-fouling paint. The mooring
permit number shall be clearly marked on the mooring buoy and shall
be of bold, clear numerals, four inches in height, of a contrasting color,
§ 64-9 RYE CODE § 64-9
61:178
§ 64-10. Notice of removal and sale at auction.
It shall be the duty of the Boat Basin Supervisor to ascertain, to the extent
possible, the last record owner and lienholder, if any, of the vessel or
mooring and to notify such owner and lienholder, if any, by regular and
certified mail, informing them of the removal and storage of such vessel
or mooring and of the amount which will be required to redeem the same;
the amount of unpaid summonses, if any, which must be paid at the time
of redemption of the vessel or mooring; that title to such vessel shall vest
in the City of Rye; and that such vessel may be sold at public auction or
otherwise disposed at the direction of the Boat Basin Supervisor if not
redeemed within 30 days of such notice.
§ 64-11. Hazards to navigation.
Any boat, raft or float which becomes a menace to navigation or
unseaworthy or sinks, grounds or otherwise becomes disabled shall be
removed by the owner or person in charge thereof upon order of the
Police Department of the City of Rye, including Bay Constables, Boat Basin
Supervisor and any other official authorized pursuant to § 64-15 below. If
such boat is not removed within five days after an order to do so, it may
be removed by or at the discretion of the enforcement authorities at the
expense of the owner or person in charge of said boat. Such removed boats
shall be disposed of in accordance with federal, state and City rules and
regulations.
§ 64-12. Speed limit.
No motor-drive boat shall be operated at a speed exceeding five statute
miles per hour, except for boats and vessels operated by police, emergency
officials or federal enforcement officials in the line of duty or under
emergency circumstances. In addition, no vessel shall be operated by any
persons within such limits so as to make dangerous wakes that have the
potential to cause injury to persons on another vessel or to cause damage
to another vessel, structure or shoreline.
§ 64-13. Observance of navigation laws.
All provisions of the Navigation Law of the State of New York, all laws
enacted by the Congress of the United States and all rules and regulations
of the United States Coast Guard governing navigable or inland waters of
the United States, insofar as they are applicable to the City waterways, are
hereby made applicable to same.
or engraved into buoys, clearly visible. Each permanent mooring buoy
anchor shall be of mushroom type only.
§ 64-9 (RESERVED) § 64-14
61:179
§ 64-14. Power to adopt rules.
The Boat Basin Commission of the City of Rye shall have the power to adopt
rules and regulations governing the use of the City of Rye marina, subject
to the approval of the City Council.
§ 64-15. Enforcing authority.
The enforcing authority of this article shall be the Police Department of
the City of Rye or duly authorized personnel, including Bay Constables and
any other official authorized to issue summonses and appearance tickets
pursuant to Article 150 of the New York State Criminal Procedure Law.
§ 64-16. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
foregoing provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and
may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both, for each and every day in
violation.
(1) In addition, any person who has been convicted of a violation of this
chapter herein shall have any current permits revoked and may not
be permitted to apply for or to receive permits for two years.
B. Appeals. The City Manager shall be empowered to hear and decide
appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Boat Basin Supervisor with respect to the
issuance or revocation of a mooring permit.
(1) Request for hearing. Upon the denial of a permit by the Boat Basin
Supervisor in connection with the issuance of a mooring permit or
upon issuance of a notice of revocation of any such permit, the
aggrieved applicant may, within 10 days after receiving written
notice from the Boat Basin Supervisor, file an appeal, in writing, in
the office of the City Manager requesting a review of any such
determination. The City Manager shall hear and decide such
appeals and may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the determination appealed from and/or make such determination
and order which, in his or her opinion, should be made under the
circumstances.
(2) Hearing. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing as provided above,
the City Manager shall set a time and place for a hearing. Such
hearing shall commence no later than 30 days after the date on
which the request was filed, unless an extension of said time period
is agreed upon by both the City Manager and the aggrieved party.
Failure by the City Manager to commence said hearing within the
above-specified time period shall not be deemed to constitute
approval of such request if good and sufficient reason exists.
§ 64-14 RYE CODE § 64-16
61:180
§ 64-17. Disclaimer of responsibility for City.
The City assumes no responsibility for the safety of any vessel at the Boat
Basin and shall not be responsible for loss or damage or injury to persons
or property due to wind, waves, theft, collision, chafing, vandalism, fire,
ice, low water levels, or any other cause. The City shall not be liable for
any damage to the vessel occurring before, during or after a severe storm,
hurricane, or other emergency, for service performed, or for the failure
to provide services. In addition, the City shall not be responsible for any
damages incurred from the removal, towing, hauling or storage of the
vessel, mooring or any other equipment.
(3) Conduct of hearing. The applicant or his/her representative shall
be given an opportunity to show cause why such decision by the
Boat Basin Supervisor should be modified or withdrawn. The
burden of proof in this regard shall be upon said applicant or his/
her representative, who shall be required to demonstrate by a fair
preponderance of the evidence that the Boat Basin Supervisor's
decision should be withdrawn or modified.
(4) Findings. Upon consideration of the evidence presented, the City
Manager shall sustain, modify or revoke the Boat Basin
Supervisor's decision.
§ 64-16 (RESERVED) § 64-17
61:181
Chapter 68
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 52.
Architectural review — See Ch. 53.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 71.
Vacant buildings — See Ch. 72.
Coastal zone management — See Ch. 73.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 81.
Fences and walls — See Ch. 90.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 98.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 100.
Housing standards — See Ch. 108.
Storm sewer system — See Ch. 162.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 170.
Surface water control — See Ch. 173.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 174.
Zoning — See Ch. 197.
§ 68-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERATION — Any change, rearrangement or addition to a building other
than repairs; any modification in construction or in building equipment.
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls,
or within exterior and party walls, and a roof affording shelter to persons,
animals or property.
DEMOLITION — The removal of an entire structure or pool.
REPAIR — Replacement or renewal, excluding additions, of any part of a
building, structure, device or equipment with like or similar materials or
parts for the purpose of maintenance, preservation or restoration of such
building, structure, device or equipment.
SMALL PROJECTS — Any addition to or alteration or modification of an
existing single- or two-family residence structure:
For which a valid certificate of occupancy exists for all structures on
the property;
A.
Upon which property there are no open building permits and no
building permit or certificate of occupancy was issued within the
immediate past 12 months;
B.
That:
Has a gross floor area of 300 square feet or less where located in
Zoning Districts R-1, R-2 and R-3 and 200 square feet or less where
located in all other zoning districts;
(1)
C.
§ 64-17 RYE CODE § 68-1
61:182
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials, forming a construction framed of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings.
§ 68-2. Building Inspector.
The Office of Building Inspector is hereby created and shall be filled by
an appointment by the City Manager. The Building Inspector shall possess
background experience related to building construction or fire prevention
and shall, within the time constraints prescribed by law, obtain such
training as the State of New York shall required for code enforcement
personnel.
§ 68-3. Acting Building Inspector; Fire Inspector.
§ 68-4. Appointment of subordinates.
The City Manager may appoint one or more subordinates, as the need
may appear, to act under the supervision and direction of the Building
Inspector and to exercise any portion of the powers and duties of the
Building Inspector as directed by him.
§ 68-5. Restrictions on employees.
No officer or employee of the Department of Buildings shall engage in any
activity inconsistent with his duties or with the interest of such Department;
nor shall he, during the term of his employment, be engaged directly or
indirectly in any building business; in the furnishing of labor, materials or
appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building
or the preparation of plans or specifications thereof within the City of
Rye, except that this provision shall not prohibit any employee from such
activities in connection with the construction of a building or structure
owned by him and not constructed for sale.
Does not create a second story if none previously existed on the
structure; and
(2)
(3) Is less than 15% of the existing floor area of the structure; and
That does not substantially change the appearance visible from the
street of any front or side facade or roof.
D.
A. In the absence of the Building Inspector, or in the case of his inability to
act for any reason, the City Manager shall have the power to designate
a person to act on behalf of the Building Inspector and to exercise all
the powers conferred upon him by this chapter.
B. Fire Inspector. The Office of Fire Inspector is hereby created and shall
be filled by an appointment by the City Manager. The Fire Inspector
shall possess background experience related to building construction or
fire prevention and shall, within the time constraints prescribed by law,
obtain such training as the State of New York shall require for fire code
enforcement personnel.
§ 68-1 (RESERVED) § 68-6
61:183
§ 68-6. Compensation.
The compensation for the Building Inspector, acting Building Inspector(s),
Fire Inspector and subordinates shall be fixed and adjusted as needed by
the City Manager.
§ 68-7. Duties and Powers of Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
the Uniform Code and the provisions of this chapter, including receiving
building permit applications; reviewing plans and specifications; conducting
inspections; issuing permits for the erection, alteration, relocation,
addition, repair and/or demolition of buildings and structures; issuing
certificates of occupancy; collecting fees as set forth by the City Council
and maintaining and filing all records necessary for the administration of
the office to the satisfaction of the City Council. The Building Inspector is
authorized to pursue administrative actions and, in consultation with the
Corporation Counsel, legal action as necessary to abate conditions not in
compliance with the Uniform Code, this chapter or other laws, rules or
regulations of the City of Rye or of the State of New York.
§ 68-8. Building and demolition permits.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, no person, firm, corporation,
association or partnership shall commence the construction,
enlargement, alteration, improvement, removal, relocation or
demolition of any building or structure or any portion thereof, or install
a solid-fuel-burning heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling
unit without first having obtained a permit from the Building
Department. Other examples of buildings, structures and activities
requiring the issuance of a building permit are:
(1) Erection of a deck or open porch or the expansion of decks or
porches.
(2) Window, door or other changes that increase the thermal
conductivity.
(3) The installation of solid-fuel devices, fireplaces and stoves.
(4) Placing a roof over a deck, a terrace or entry door.
(5) Finishing or making improvements in a basement or cellar to
provide recreation space, living area, or toilet.
(6) Finishing attic space for any type of occupancy.
(7) Changing exits or reducing required natural light or ventilation.
(8) Erection of lawn storage buildings, with or without foundations, if
any dimension is eight feet or larger.
§ 68-6 RYE CODE § 68-8
61:184
(9) Erection of any type of in-ground/aboveground receptacle for water
where the depth exceeds 24 inches.
(10) Public or private utility structures.
(11) Changes in use or occupancy.
(12) Tennis courts and other recreational facilities.
(13) Retaining walls of four feet in height measured along the face of
the wall.
(14) Freestanding walls of four feet in height, measured from grade.
B. No permit shall be required for:
(1) Necessary repairs which do not materially affect structural
features;
(2) Alterations to existing buildings, provided that the alterations:
(a) Do not materially affect structure features; and
(b) Do not affect firesafety features such as smoke detectors,
sprinklers, required fire separations and exits; and
(c) Do not involve the installation or extension of electrical
systems; and
(d) Do not include the installation of solid-fuel-burning heating
appliances and associated chimneys and flues.
(3) Residential storage sheds where all dimensions are less than eight
feet which are not intended for use by one or more persons as
quarters for living, sleeping, eating or cooking; for example, a small
storage building.
(4) Nonresidential farm buildings, including barns, sheds, poultry
houses and other buildings used directly and solely for agricultural
purposes.
(5) Retaining walls less than four feet in height and terraces (may be
subject to other permit requirements).
(6) Interior decorations that do not involve structural changes,
including light, ventilation or systems alterations, such as changing
kitchen cabinets, closet alterations or bath modernization,
provided that plumbing is not moved and replacement is performed
by a licensed plumber.
(7) Exterior improvements that do not materially change the
appearance of the building and are not structural in nature,
including resurfacing deteriorated walls and replacing windows
and doors.
§ 68-8 (RESERVED) § 68-8
61:185
(8) Adding a new roof covering, provided that the resulting dead load
does not exceed the design capacity of the roof framing.
(9) Painting.
(10) Any structure not intended to be occupied that will not be above
the surface of the ground.
C. Application for a permit.
(1) The application for a building or demolition permit, and its
accompanying documents, shall contain sufficient information to
permit a determination that the intended work accords with the
requirements of all local, county, and state building codes.
(2) The form of the permit and application therefor shall be prescribed
by the Building Inspector. The application shall be signed by the
owner (or his authorized agent) of the building and shall contain at
least the following:
(a) Full name and address of the owner and, if by a corporation,
the name and address of the responsible officials;
(b) Identification and/or description of the land on which the work
is to be done;
(c) Description of use or occupancy of the land and existing or
proposed building;
(d) Description of the proposed work;
(e) Four sets of plans and specifications for the proposed work,
including a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the location and
size of all proposed new construction, showing the first floor
elevation with respect to mean sea level, and all existing
structures on site. If necessary, the Building Inspector may
require details of structural, mechanical and electrical work;
(f) The information provided on the site plan shall be based on a
survey prepared within the last two years of the submission
date. A copy of the survey must be submitted along with the
site plan.
(g) The required fee; and
(h) Such other information as may reasonably be required by the
Building Inspector to establish compliance of the proposed
work with the requirements of the applicable building laws,
ordinances and regulations.
(3) Applicant shall notify the Building Inspector of any changes in the
information contained in the application during the period for
which the permit is in effect. A permit will be issued when the
application has been determined to be complete and when the
§ 68-8 RYE CODE § 68-8
61:186
proposed work has been determined to conform to the
requirements of all local, county, and state building codes. The
authority conferred by such permit may be limited by conditions, if
any, contained therein. Amendments, if any, to the application or to
the plans and specifications accompanying the same shall be filed
with the Building Inspector and approval shall be received from the
Building Inspector and/or Board of Architectural Review prior to
the commencement of such change of work.
(4) Plans and specifications shall bear the signature of the person
responsible for the design and drawings and, where required by
§ 7302 of the New York State Education Law, the seal of a licensed
architect or a licensed professional engineer.
(5) The Building Inspector may waive the requirement for filing plans
and specifications for minor alterations.
D. General requirements.
(1) The Building Inspector shall examine or cause to be examined all
applications for permits and the plans, specifications and
documents filed herewith. He shall approve or disapprove the
application within a reasonable time. Such applications may only
be approved by the Building Inspector. Any building or demolition
permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be prominently
displayed on the property or premises to which it pertains.
(2) Upon approval of a building permit application and if the Board of
Architectural Review shall approve or fail to act on such application
within the time specified in Chapter 53 of the Rye City Code, the
Building Inspector shall approve the issuance of a building permit
to the applicant upon the form prescribed by him. Upon approval of
the application, the plans and specifications shall be endorsed with
the word "approved" and shall be initialed by the Building
Inspector. One set of such approved plans and specifications shall
be retained in the files of the Building Department and the other
sets shall be returned to the applicant together with the building
permit.
(3) The issuance of a building or demolition permit shall constitute
authority to the applicant to proceed with the work in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications and in accordance with
the applicable building laws, ordinances or regulations. All work
shall conform to the approved application, plans and specifications.
(4) All building and demolition permits shall be prominently displayed
on the job site at all times during the progress of construction or
demolition so as to be readily seen from adjacent thoroughfares. A
set of approved drawings shall be kept on site in a four-inch
diameter PVC pipe four feet long and shall be securely attached to
a post.
§ 68-8 (RESERVED) § 68-8
61:187
(5) An application for change in plans or work in the building or upon
the property must be made by the owner or his agent and a written
permit obtained before any part of the change is commenced. The
Building Inspector shall issue a permit for such change.
(6) All work covered by the Westchester County home improvement
licensing requirements must be performed by contractors holding a
current home improvement license issued by the County.
(7) All contractors or homeowners, if they as homeowners are the
applicants, are required to produce, by certificate of insurance
naming the City of Rye as additional insured, proof of liability
insurance in the amount of $500,000 and proof of workers'
compensation and disability insurance as required by law.
(8) After completion of footings and establishing forms' first course of
the foundation walls or equivalent structure, the owner shall notify
the Building Department. If required by the Building Inspector, the
owner shall cause a survey to be made by a licensed land surveyor,
showing the true location of such foundation walls with respect to
the lot lines of the lot and the top of foundation elevation in respect
to mean sea level, and a copy of such survey shall be filed with the
Building Inspector before construction is continued.
(9) Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the owner shall
provide a final survey in regards to the true location of the
structure with respect to the lot lines, if required by the Building
Inspector.
(10) A building or demolition permit issued pursuant to this chapter
shall expire one year from the date of issuance or upon the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. The permit
may, upon written request, be renewed for successive one-year
periods provided that:
(a) The permit has not been revoked or suspended at the time the
application for renewal is made;
(b) The relevant information in the application is up-to-date; and
(c) The renewal fee is paid.
(11) Buildings, construction and improvements requiring building
permits, as provided by § 68-8A of this chapter, shall include all
conditions and building occupancy classifications listed in Part 701
of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code
(9 NYCRR 701).12 Those building classifications are:
(a) One and two-family residences.
(b) Multiple dwellings.
12.Editor's Note: See now Title 19 of NYCRR.
§ 68-8 RYE CODE § 68-8
61:188
(c) Business occupancies.
(d) Mercantile occupancies.
(e) Industrial occupancies.
(f) Storage occupancies.
(g) Assembly occupancies.
(h) Institutional occupancies.
(i) Miscellaneous occupancies.
E. Revocation of building/demolition permit. The Building Inspector may
revoke a permit heretofore issued in the following instances:
(1) Where he finds that there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application, plans or
specifications on which the building permit was based.
(2) Where he finds that the permit was issued in error and should not
have been issued in accordance with the applicable law.
(3) Where he finds that work performed under the permit is not being
prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of the application,
plans or specifications.
(4) Where the person to whom a permit has been issued fails or refuses
to comply with a stop-work order issued by the Building Inspector.
F. Expedited issuance.
(1) The Building Inspector may issue a building permit on an expedited
basis for additions and alterations existing as of May 17, 1995, to
one and two-family residential properties upon submission, in form
and substance satisfactory to the Building Inspector, of the
following documentation:
(a) Plans signed and sealed by a New York State licensed architect
or engineer.
(b) A representation by that architect or engineer that the plans as
submitted conform in all respects to all applicable state and
local building, fire and zoning codes and that the work was
completed in accordance with the submitted plans.
(c) An agreement personally signed by each owner and the
architect or engineer agreeing to:
[1] Use of this expedited procedure;
[2] Indemnify and hold harmless the City, its agents and
employees for any claims arising out of the issuance of the
building permit;
§ 68-8 (RESERVED) § 68-8
61:189
§ 68-9. Department records and reports.
§ 68-10. Cooperation of other departments.
The Building Inspector may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of
the Police and Fire Departments and of all municipal officials exercising
any jurisdiction over the construction, use or occupancy of buildings or the
installation of equipment herein.
§ 68-11. Plumbing and drainage.
[3] Release and waive all rights against the City, its officers,
agents and employees from all claims arising out of the
issuance of the building permit and any certificate of
occupancy based upon the building permit; and
[4] Permit the City to inspect the premises at any time to
determine that the work was done in compliance with the
plans and the law.
(d) Payment of appropriate fees and penalties, if applicable.
(2) Every building permit issued under this expedited procedure and
any certificate of occupancy issued based upon that building permit
shall contain a notation thereon indicating that it was issued
pursuant to this section and was based upon the representations
and agreements made in order to obtain the building permit.13
A. The Building Inspector shall keep permanent official records of all
transactions and activities conducted by him, including all applications
received, permits and certificates issued, fees charged and collected,
inspection reports, and notices and orders issued. All such records shall
be public records open to public inspection during business hours.
B. The Building Inspector shall annually submit to the City Manager a
written report and summary of all business conducted by the Building
Department, including permits and certificates issued, fees collected,
orders and notices promulgated, inspections and tests made and
appeals or litigation pending.
A. No person shall make any connection with the public sewer or drain
without a permit being issued in accordance with Chapter 162 of the
City Code. No permit shall be issued to connect to a public sewer or
drain unless such person holds a Westchester County plumbing license.
B. Plans, including a riser diagram and specifications of all plumbing and
drainage work, except the mere removal of obstructions or the
13.Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Notice, which immediately followed this subsection,
was repealed 3-10-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010. This local law also provided that it shall take
effect 5-1-2010.
§ 68-8 RYE CODE § 68-11
61:190
§ 68-12. Oil or gas heating equipment; permit requirements.
§ 68-13. Fees.
repairing of leaks or such replacement of old or broken fixtures as does
not involve any change in piping or traps, together with an application,
signed by the owner or his agent, for a permit, must be submitted to the
Building Inspector for approval, and a permit must be obtained before
any such work is commenced within any building or upon any property.
The Building Inspector shall issue the permit.
C. A peppermint test will be performed on all waste and vent piping with a
combined developed length greater than 10 feet.
A. No such permit shall be issued unless the applicant has submitted proof
that the installation work shall be done or directly supervised by a
licensed plumber, or by a person who has successfully completed an
examination conducted by the former Examining Board of Installers of
Mechanical Equipment of the City of Rye, or by a person who has
successfully completed a comparable examination conducted by at least
one other municipality located in Westchester or Putnam Counties and
has demonstrated competence to perform all necessary functions of
installing oil-burning equipment. If the applicant has contracted with a
partnership or corporation for performance of the installation, at least
one partner or officer must be either a licensed plumber or person who
successfully completed the required proficiency test.
B. All electrical work associated with the installation of any oil or gas
heating equipment shall be performed by a licensed master electrician.
A master electrician shall have passed an examination conducted by
Westchester County to determine his or her competence to perform the
functions of a master electrician properly.
C. No alteration in existing oil or gas heating installation, HVAC or an
electrical installation, for which a permit has been issued, shall be made
without the inspection and approval of the Building Inspector. Where a
replacement of another oil or gas heating unit is made, application must
be made as if the installation is a new one.
A. Upon the filing of any application for a building-related permit or
license, fees shall be payable in connection with the following:
(1) Plumbing, oil heating, gas heating or electric certificate of
competency.
(2) Building permits.
(3) Plumbing permit for changes in plumbing that do not require a
building permit in existing buildings.
(4) Oil or gas heating permits in existing buildings where a building
permit is not required.
§ 68-11 (RESERVED) § 68-13
61:191
§ 68-14. Certificate of occupancy.
(5) Electrical permits in existing buildings where a building permit is
not required.
(6) Certificate of occupancy.
B. A fee schedule shall be established, and changed as needed, by
resolution of the City Council.
C. In the event that an application for a building permit is not approved,
the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of 50% of the fee paid,
provided that no construction has been commenced. If construction
work has been started and the application is not approved, the fees
shall not be refunded.
D. Due to the large additional administrative and inspection expenses
incurred by the City, an additional application fee of $1,000 shall be
payable when construction work has been commenced prior to the
issuance of the building permit or when, as determined by the Building
Inspector acting reasonably, construction work has been done in a
manner not substantially consistent with a prior approval by the Board
of Architectural Review or when, as determined by the Building
Inspector acting reasonably, construction work has been done in a
manner not in substantial compliance with the requirements of a
building permit.
A. No building erected subject to the Uniform Code shall be used or
occupied, except to the extent authorized hereunder, until a certificate
of occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector.
B. No building similarly enlarged, extended, or altered, or upon which
work has been performed which requires the issuance of a building
permit shall be occupied unless a certificate of occupancy has been
issued.
C. No change shall be made in the nature of the occupancy of an existing
building unless a certificate of occupancy authorizing the change has
been issued by the Building Inspector.
D. The owner or his agent shall submit an application for a certificate of
occupancy. Accompanying this application and before the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, there shall be filed with the Building Inspector
an affidavit of the registered architect or licensed professional engineer
who supervised the construction of the work or of the superintendent of
construction who supervised the work and who, by reason of his
experience, is qualified to supervise the work for which the certificate
of occupancy is sought. This affidavit shall state that the deponent has
examined the approved plans of the structure for which a certificate of
occupancy is sought, that the structure has been erected in accordance
with approved plans and, as erected, complies with the law governing
§ 68-13 RYE CODE § 68-14
61:192
§ 68-15. Issuance of certificate of occupancy.
§ 68-16. Inspection.
building construction except insofar as variances therefrom have been
legally authorized. Such variances shall be specified in the affidavit.
E. All applications for a certificate of occupancy are to be accompanied by
a certification of the actual cost of the work, inclusive of professional
fees and contractor profit. Any additional fees are due prior to the
issuance of a certificate.
F. When electrical work is performed as part of a building permit, a
certificate of compliance from the electrical inspection agency shall be
submitted prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued.
A. When, after final inspection, it is found that the proposed work has been
completed in accordance with the applicable building laws, ordinances
and regulations and also in accordance with the application, plans and
specifications filed in connection with the issuance of the building
permit, the Building Inspector shall approve the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy upon the form provided by him. If it is found
that the proposed work has not been properly completed, the Building
Inspector shall refuse to approve the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy and shall order the work completed in conformity with the
building permit and in conformity with the applicable building
regulations.
B. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued, where appropriate, within 30
days after application therefor is made.
C. The certificate of occupancy shall certify that the work has been
completed and that the proposed use and occupancy is in conformity
with the provisions of the applicable building laws, ordinances and
regulations and shall specify the use or uses and the extent thereof to
which the building or structure or its several parts may be put.
A. Inspections during construction.
(1) Work for which a building permit has been issued hereunder shall
be inspected for approval prior to enclosing or covering any portion
thereof and upon completion of each stage of construction,
including, but not limited to, building location, site preparation,
site drainage, excavation, foundation, framing, superstructure,
electrical, plumbing, and heating and air conditioning. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner, applicant, or his agent to inform the
inspector that the work is ready for inspection and to schedule such
inspection.
(2) Work which requires special inspections during construction shall
be the responsibility of the owner, applicant, or his agent to provide
a list at their expense. A statement of the special inspections,
§ 68-14 (RESERVED) § 68-16
61:193
§ 68-17. Tests.
Whenever there are reasonable grounds, the Building Inspector may
require material, construction equipment or assemblies to be subjected to
tests in order to furnish proof of compliance with the reference standards
of the Uniform Code.
including a complete list of materials and work requiring such
inspections, and a list of the individuals and approved agencies
shall be provided to the Building Inspector for the permit
application file. The reports of such special inspections shall be
provided to the Building Inspector for the permanent record.
(3) If entrance to make an inspection is refused or cannot be obtained,
the City Council, after being notified by the inspector of the
situation, may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for an
order to make an inspection.
B. Fire prevention and property maintenance inspections.
(1) Multiple dwellings shall be inspected for the purpose of
determining compliance with fire prevention and property
maintenance requirements of the Uniform Code at least once in
every 36 months. Inspections of such buildings shall include the
common areas such as halls, foyers, staircases, etc. and vacant
dwelling units. Where the tenants of occupied dwelling units allow,
the inspection may include such units.
(2) Firesafety inspections of buildings or structures having "areas of
public assembly," defined as all buildings or portions of buildings
used for gathering together 50 or more persons for amusement,
athletic, civic, dining, educational, entertainment, patriotic,
political, recreational, religious, social, or similar purposes, the
entire fire area of which they are a part, and the means of egress
therefrom," shall be performed at least once in every 12 months.
(3) All other buildings, uses and occupancies (except one- or twofamily
dwellings) shall be inspected at least once in every 24
months.
(4) An inspection of a building or dwelling unit may also be performed
at any other time upon:
(a) The request of the owner, authorized agent, or tenant;
(b) Receipt of a written statement alleging that conditions or
activities failing to comply with the Uniform Code exist; or
(c) Other reasonable and reliable information that such a violation
exists.
(5) Enforcement/inspection of the fire prevention and property
maintenance inspections shall be performed by the Fire Inspector.
§ 68-16 RYE CODE § 68-18
61:194
§ 68-18. Penalties for offenses.
§ 68-19. Abatement of violations.
Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken at law or in equity to
prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation
or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to
prevent illegal acts, conduct or business in or about any premises; and these
remedies shall be in addition to the penalties prescribed in the preceding
section.
§ 68-20. Conflict with other codes, rules or regulations.
If there is any conflict with other codes, rules or regulations, the most
restrictive provisions shall apply.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct,
alter, repair, move, remove, demolish, equip, use or maintain any
building or structure or portion thereof in violation of any provision of
this chapter or to fail, in any manner, to comply with a notice, directive
or order of the Building Inspector or to construct, alter or use and
occupy any building or structure or part thereof in a manner not
permitted by an approved building permit or certificate of occupancy.
B. Any person who shall fail to comply with a written order of the Building
Department, within the time fixed for compliance therewith, and any
owner, builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor,
construction superintendent or their agents or any other person taking
part or assisting in the construction or use of any building who shall
knowingly violate any of the applicable provisions of this chapter or any
lawful order, notice, directive, permit or certificate of the Building
Department made thereunder shall incur a penalty of not more than
$250 or 15 days imprisonment, or both. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. This section shall not apply to violations of the provisions of the Uniform
Code punishable under § 385 of the Executive Law14 of the State of New
York nor to violations of the provisions of the Multiple Residence Law
punishable under § 304 of the Multiple Residence Law of the State of
New York.
14.Editor's Note: Section 385 of the Executive Law was repealed by L. 1981, c. 707, § 12. See
now § 382 of the Executive Law.
§ 68-18 (RESERVED) § 68-20
61:195
Chapter 69
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Housing standards — See Ch. 108.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 170.
Zoning — See Ch. 197.
§ 69-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to require the clear display of house or
building numbers (hereinafter "house numbers") from public streets for all
properties that contain a principal building within the City of Rye in order
to assist the general public or the authorities in identifying any property
in case of an emergency as well as for the welfare of the general public in
conducting its normal affairs.
§ 69-2. Applicability; display of numbers.
§ 69-3. Number specifications and placement.
In order to comply with this chapter, house numbers shall be arabic in
design, shall have a minimum height of two inches and shall be mounted
in a secure fashion to the building's front wall or to a porch or other fixed
appurtenance in front of the building in the general vicinity of the main
entryway or main path of travel which leads to the main entrance from a
public or private street, or otherwise separately mounted in an approved
manner upon the face of a wall or upon a post in the front yard of the
premises. Auxiliary numbers shall be mounted a height between four feet
and 10 feet above the adjacent grade for exterior landing directly beneath
but never higher than 15 feet above the adjoining grade. They shall be
sufficiently legible as to contrasting background, arrangement, spacing,
size and uniformity of integers so that the numbers may be read with ease
during the daylight hours by a person possessing at least 20/40 vision as
he views the numbers from the center line of the facing street and at an
A. This chapter shall apply to all properties within the City of Rye that
contain a principal building thereon, whether or not said building is
occupied.
B. Such premises shall bear and display at least one set of house numbers,
which shall be assigned by the City Assessor. Buildings facing two or
more public roadways shall be required to display auxiliary numbers as
necessary, to pass the visibility test (as hereinafter set forth) when
viewed from those points in the center line of the public roadway
opposite those points where regularly used pedestrian or vehicular
passageways enter the public roadway.
§ 68-20 RYE CODE § 69-3
69:196
elevation of five feet above the finished surface thereof. The numbers shall
be so placed that trees, shrubs or other obstructions do not block the line of
the numbers from the center of the street to any appreciable degree.
§ 69-4. Preexisting numbers.
Existing numbers used on premises which essentially comply with numbers
officially assigned by the City Assessor, at least to the extent that each
number or numbers are in logical sequence with number or numbers
assigned to properties on either side which are located on the same side of
the street, shall be considered as bearing the correct number or numbers
for the purposes of this chapter. Existing installations which essentially
meet the requirements and/or spirit of these regulations, including numbers
presently on or attached to a mailbox, may be granted approval by the City
Assessor without further alteration.
§ 69-5. Penalties for offenses.
The absence of house numbers or the insecure fastening or absence of any
integer thereof or the use of any number out of logical sequence for the
street toward which it faces or the failure of a number to meet the elevation
requirement or the visibility requirements shall be considered a violation
of this chapter. Failure on the part of the property owner to comply with
the provisions of this chapter within the period of 15 days from the date
of issuance of a notice of violation shall be sufficient cause for the City
Assessor or such representative as he may choose to proceed with carrying
out the provisions of this chapter and assess any costs incurred to the
property owner concerned, with a minimum charge of $20 for each property
in violation.
§ 69-6. Designation by Assessor.
The final authority for determining and assigning the number or numbers
to be used upon any particular property shall be the Assessor of the City of
Rye.
Chapter 71
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Filling and dredging — See Ch. 92.
Housing standards — See Ch. 108.
§ 69-3 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 71-1
71:197
§ 71-1. Buildings or conditions endangering life or property.
The owner of a building or structure shall at all times maintain and keep
the same in a safe condition. Any building or structure which is structurally
unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitutes a fire
hazard or hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, abandonment or any other cause, or is otherwise dangerous
to human life, is, for the purpose of this chapter, an unsafe building or
structure. A building or structure or part thereof or any excavation or
accumulation of material that is unsafe, dangerous or hazardous or
endangers the health, safety or welfare of the public in any manner shall be
repaired, demolished, removed or otherwise made safe.
§ 71-2. Inspections by Building Inspector; reports.
The Building Inspector shall inspect or cause an inspection to be made of
any unsafe condition and shall prepare a report of such inspection.
§ 71-3. Notice of unsafe condition.
When it shall be determined by the Building Inspector that a condition is
unsafe, dangerous or hazardous or endangers the health, safety or welfare
of the public in any manner, he shall serve a notice upon the owner and
other persons having any interest in such building or structure, either
personally or by registered mail, addressed to his last known address as
shown on the assessment roll of the City of Rye, containing a description
of the premises, a statement of the particulars in which the building or
structure is unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, an order of the Building
Inspector requiring the specified particulars to be repaired, demolished,
removed or otherwise made safe and the time within which such work
shall be commenced and completed. If the service of the notice is made
by registered mail, a copy of such notice shall be posted on the premises.
A copy of such notice or the amended notice, if modified as hereinafter
provided, shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the County of
Westchester in the same manner as a notice of pendency pursuant to Article
65 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, except such notice shall not be filed
if the building or structure is vacated as hereinafter provided.
§ 71-4. Buildings in danger of collapse.
If the Building Inspector finds that there is an actual and immediate danger
of the failure or collapse of a building or structure so as to endanger
life, the notice shall also require that the building or structure or portion
thereof be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the requirements of
the notice are completed. The Building Inspector shall cause to be posted
at each entrance to such building or structure a notice reading as follows:
THIS BUILDING IS UNSAFE AND ITS USE OR OCCUPANCY HAS BEEN
PROHIBITED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF BUILDINGS. Such notice shall
remain posted until the requirements of the notice are completed. It shall
be unlawful for any person to remove such notice without the written
§ 71-1 RYE CODE § 71-4
71:198
permission of the Building Inspector or for any person to enter the building
or structure except for the purpose of complying with the requirements of
the notice.
§ 71-5. Emergency situations.
In cases of emergency which, in the opinion of the Building Inspector,
involve imminent danger to human life or health, he shall promptly cause
such building, structure or portion thereof to be made safe or to be
removed. For this purpose he may immediately enter such building or
structure or the abutting premises with such assistance and at such cost
as may be necessary. He may vacate the building or structure or adjacent
premises and protect the public by appropriate barricades or such other
means as may be necessary, and for this purpose may close a public or
private way.
§ 71-6. Hearing before City Manager.
The notice aforementioned shall also contain the time and place at which
a hearing will be granted before the City Manager, to the owner and such
other persons having an interest in the building or structure described in
the notice, at which time and place the owner and such other persons
having an interest in the building or structure shall be afforded the
opportunity to be heard with reference to those particulars contained in the
notice. The time of said hearing shall be specified on a date no sooner than
five days after the service of the notice. If the owner or any person having
an interest in the building or structure submits evidence at such hearing
before the City Manager, the City Manager shall thereafter make a further
determination, which shall affirm, modify or vacate the said notice of the
Building Inspector. In the event that the City Manager shall affirm or modify
such notice, notice thereof, which shall include the time of compliance
therewith, shall be served upon those who appeared at the hearing, and
the order to repair, demolish, remove or otherwise make safe in the notice
issued by the Building Inspector shall remain in full force and effect, subject
to those specifications which may be modified pursuant to this section.
§ 71-7. Failure to comply with notice.
If the owner or such other person having an interest in the building or
structure fails to comply with the requirements of the original notice or such
notice as may be modified by the City Manager within the time required,
the Building Inspector shall cause the building or structure or portion of
the premises to be repaired, demolished, removed or otherwise made safe.
The costs and expenses incurred by the City of Rye in connection with the
proceedings to abate the unsafe, dangerous or hazardous conditions shall
become a lien on the premises where such conditions existed. The amount
of such costs and expenses shall be certified to the City Assessor, who
shall assess such amount upon the said premises, and the same shall be
levied, corrected, enforced and collected in the same manner, by the same
proceedings, at the same time, under the same penalties and having the
§ 71-4 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 71-7
71:199
same lien upon the premises assessed as the general city tax and as a part
thereof. The City of Rye may also bring a civil action against the owner
and such other persons having an interest in such premises to recover the
amount of the aforesaid costs and expenses.
Chapter 72
BUILDINGS, VACANT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 71.
§ 71-7 RYE CODE § 71-7
72:200
ARTICLE I
Vacant Stores
[Adopted 3-7-1990 as L.L. No. 5-1990]
§ 72-1. Covering required.
When a commercial or retail establishment in the City of Rye becomes
vacant and remains vacant for a period in excess of 30 days, the owner,
lessee or other responsible individual or entity shall place a covering in the
storefront to block the view of the interior of the premises to public view.
The covering shall be of such material as provided below.
§ 72-2. Covering specifications.
The covering referred to in § 72-1 shall have at least a Class C flame-spread
rating as defined in § 772.2 of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code, and it may not consist of any substance sprayed on or
adhered to store front windows. The covering may consist of:
§ 72-3. Maintenance of window display areas.
Any and all window display areas shall be kept clean, free of hazard and
free of debris. Further, cracked or broken glass display windows shall be
replaced with glass.
§ 72-4. Penalties for offenses.
Violation of this Article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $250 and/
or by imprisonment for no more than 15 days. Each day such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Venetian or similar blind;
B. Drapes, curtains or shades; or
C. Such other covering as approved by the Building Inspector.
§ 72-1 BUILDINGS, VACANT § 72-4
72:201
Chapter 73
COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT WATERFRONT
CONSISTENCY REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 87.
Filling and dredging — See Ch. 92.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 100.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 170.
Surface water, erosion and sediment
control — See Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 197.
§ 73-1. Title.
This chapter will be known as "Chapter 73, Coastal Zone Management
Waterfront Consistency Review, of the Code of the City of Rye."
§ 73-2. Authority and purpose.
A. This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Municipal Home Rule
Law and the Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act of the
State of New York (Article 42 of the Executive Law).
B. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a framework for agencies of
the City of Rye to consider the policies and purposes contained in the
Local Waterfront Revitalization Program when reviewing applications
for actions or direct agency actions located in the coastal area and to
ensure that such actions and direct actions are consistent with said
policies and purposes.
C. It is the intent of the City of Rye that the preservation, enhancement
and utilization of the natural and man-made resources of the unique
coastal area of the city take place in a coordinated and comprehensive
manner to ensure a proper balance between natural resources and the
need to accommodate population growth and economic development.
Accordingly, this chapter is intended to achieve such a balance,
permitting beneficial use of the coastal resources while preventing loss
of living estuarine resources and wildlife; diminution of open space
areas or public access to the waterfront; erosion of the shoreline;
impairment of scenic beauty; losses due to flooding, erosion and
sedimentation; or permanent adverse changes to the ecological
systems.
D. The substantive provisions of this chapter shall only apply while there is
in existence a City of Rye Local Waterfront Revitalization Program
which has been adopted in accordance with Article 42 of the Executive
Law of the State of New York.
§ 72-4 RYE CODE § 73-3
73:202
§ 73-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words and
their derivations shall have the following meanings given herein:
ACTIONS — Either Type I or unlisted actions, as defined in SEQRA
regulations (6 NYCRR 617.2), which are undertaken by an agency and
which include:
AGENCY — Any board, agency, department, office, other body or officer of
the City of Rye.
COASTAL AREA — That portion of the New York State coastal waters and
adjacent shorelands as defined in Article 42 of the Executive Law which is
located within the boundaries of the City of Rye, as shown on the Coastal
Area map on file in the Office of the Secretary of State and as delineated in
the City of Rye Local Waterfront Revitalization program.
COASTAL ASSESSMENT FORM (CAF) — The form contained in Appendix
D used by an agency to assist it in determining the consistency of an action
with the Local Waterfront Revitalization Program. 15
CONSISTENT — That the action will fully comply with the LWRP policy
standards and conditions and, whenever practicable, will advance one or
more of them.
DIRECT ACTIONS — Actions planned and proposed for implementation
by an agency, such as but not limited to a capital project, rule making,
procedure making and policymaking.
LOCAL WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION PROGRAM (LWRP) — The Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program of the City of Rye, approved by the
Secretary of State pursuant to the Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal
Projects or physical activities, such as construction or other activities
that may affect the environment by changing the use, appearance or
condition of any natural resource or structure, that:
(1) Are directly undertaken by an agency;
(2) Involve funding by an agency; or
Require one or more new or modified approvals from an agency or
agencies.
(3)
A.
Agency planning and policy-making activities that may affect the
environment and commit the agency to a definite course of future
decisions.
B.
Adoption of agency rules, regulations and procedures, including local
laws, codes, ordinances, executive orders and resolutions, that may
affect the environment.
C.
D. Any combinations of the above.
15.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the city offices.
§ 73-3 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 73-3
73:203
Resources Act (Executive Law Article 42), and from time to time amended,
a copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Rye.
§ 73-4. Review of actions.
§ 73-5. Application for determination of consistency.
A. Whenever a proposed action is located in the city's Coastal Area, an
agency shall, prior to funding or directly undertaking the action, refer
the action to the Rye City Planning Commission for a determination that
it is consistent with the LWRP policy standards and conditions set forth
in § 73-5D herein.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, a determination of consistency by the
Rye City Planning Commission shall not be required for the following
actions:
(1) Excluded, exempt and Type II actions as defined by Chapter 87,
Environmental Quality Review, of the Code of the City of Rye and
the State Environmental Quality Review Act, and as amended.
(2) Approval of an application to implement any part of an action or
approval of an action which was previously determined by the Rye
City Planning Commission to be consistent with the Rye City Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program, except when the determination
was made in connection with an amendment to the Code of the City
of Rye, including but not limited to an amendment to the Zoning
Map of the City of Rye or to Chapter 197, Zoning, of the Code of the
City of Rye.
(3) The approval of applications for any action involving the
construction or alteration of a single-family or two-family residence
and its accessory buildings and appurtenances.
(4) Appellate and interpretative jurisdiction of the Rye City Board of
Appeals pursuant to § 197-80 and 197-81 of the Rye City Code.
(5) Rye City Planning Commission Local Waterfront Revitalization
Program determinations of consistency.
(6) Legislative action taken by the City Council.
A. For actions to be directly undertaken by the City of Rye, the agency
proposing the action shall, as early as possible in the formulation of the
action, refer the proposed action to the Planning Commission for a
determination of consistency and shall not implement such action until
the Planning Commission has issued such determination of consistency.
B. For applications by persons, firms and corporations to a city agency for
approval, the applicant, when making the application to such agency,
shall simultaneously apply to the Planning Commission for a
determination of consistency. The applicant shall prepare a Coastal
§ 73-3 RYE CODE § 73-5
73:204
Assessment Form (CAF) to assist with the consistency review. In the
case of application processes which require preliminary and final
applications, the application for a determination of consistency shall
be made with the application for preliminary approval and need not
be reapplied for at the time of making a final application unless the
scope of the project for which final approval is sought is substantially
different from that of the application for preliminary approval, which
determination shall be made by the agency to which the application is
being made.
C. Except as provided for below, the Planning Commission shall make the
determination of consistency based on the CAF and such other
information as is deemed to be necessary in its determination. The
Planning Commission shall issue its determination following the next
regularly scheduled meeting. The Planning Commission shall have the
authority, in its finding of consistency, to impose practicable and
reasonable conditions on an action to ensure that it is carried out in
accordance with this chapter. Where the agency is the City Council or,
in consideration of applications for use and area variances, the Board of
Appeals, the determination of the Planning Commission shall be
advisory. The consistency of an action involving the City Council or the
Board of Appeals shall be determined by these Boards in the process of
reviewing the proposed action. However, both Boards shall obtain the
recommendations of the Planning Commission, as provided in this
chapter, prior to reaching a decision. Both Boards shall have the
authority, in their findings of consistency, to impose practicable and
reasonable conditions on an action to ensure that it is carried out in
accordance with this chapter. The Planning Commission shall be the
agency authorized to make final consistency determinations for all
other actions by agencies of the City of Rye.
D. Actions to be undertaken within the Coastal Area shall be evaluated for
consistency in accordance with the following LWRP policy standards
and conditions, which are derived from and further explained and
described in Section III of the Rye City LWRP, a copy of which is on file
in the City Clerk's office and available for inspection during normal
business hours. In the case of direct actions, the agency shall also
consult with Section IV of the LWRP in making its consistency
determination. The action shall be consistent with the policy to:
(1) Revitalize deteriorated and under utilized waterfront areas (Policy
1).
(2) Retain and promote recreational water-dependent uses (Policy 2).
(3) Strengthen the economic base of smaller harbor areas by
encouraging traditional uses and activities (Policy 4).
(4) Ensure that development occurs where adequate public
infrastructure is available to reduce health and pollution hazards
(Policy 5).
§ 73-5 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 73-5
73:205
(5) Streamline development permit procedures (Policy 6).
(6) Protect significant and locally important fish and wildlife habitats
from human disruption and chemical contamination (Policies 7, 7A,
7B and 8).
(7) Maintain and expand commercial fishing facilities to promote
commercial and recreational fishing opportunities (Policies 9 and
10).
(8) Minimize flooding and erosion hazard through nonstructural
means, carefully selected long-term structural measures and
appropriate siting of structures (Policies 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17 and
28).
(9) Safeguard economic, social and environmental interests in the
Coastal Area when major actions are taken (Policy 18).
(10) Maintain and improve public access to the shoreline and to waterrelated
recreational facilities while protecting the environment
(Policies 2, 19, 19A, 19B, 20, 21 and 22).
(11) Protect and restore historic and archaeological resources (Policy
23).
(12) Protect and upgrade scenic resources (Policy 25).
(13) Site and construct energy facilities in a manner which will be
compatible with the environment and contingent upon the need for
a waterfront or water location (Policies 27, 29 and 40).
(14) Prevent ice management practices which could damage significant
fish and wildlife and their habitats (Policy 28).
(15) Protect surface and groundwaters from direct and indirect
discharge of pollutants and from overuse (Policies 30, 31, 32, 33,
34, 35, 36, 37 and 38).
(16) Perform dredging and dredge spoil disposal in a manner protective
of natural resources (Policies 15 and 35).
(17) Handle and dispose of hazardous wastes and effluents in a manner
which will not adversely affect the environment nor expand existing
landfills (Policy 39).
(18) Protect air quality (Policies 41, 42 and 43).
(19) Protect tidal and freshwater wetlands (Policy 44).
E. Special exceptions.
(1) If it is determined that the action would not be consistent with one
or more of the LWRP policy standards and conditions, such action
§ 73-5 RYE CODE § 73-5
73:206
§ 73-6. Fees and consultants. [Amended 12-18-1991 by L.L. No.
24-1991; 12-16-1992 by L.L. No. 18-1992; 10-8-1997 by L.L. No.
16-1997]
shall not be undertaken unless the determining agency makes a
written finding with respect to the proposed action that:
(a) No reasonable alternatives exist which would permit the action
to be undertaken in a manner which would not substantially
hinder the achievement of such LWRP policy standards and
conditions.
(b) The action would be undertaken in a manner which will
minimize all adverse effects on such LWRP policy standards
and conditions.
(c) The action will advance one or more of the other LWRP policy
standards and conditions.
(d) The action will result in an overriding city, regional or statewide
public benefit.
(2) Such a finding shall constitute a determination that the action is
consistent with the LWRP policy standards and conditions.
F. The Rye City Planning Commission shall maintain a file for each action
made the subject of a consistency determination. The Planning
Commission shall issue a resolution of consistency for each approved
action. Such files shall be made available for public inspection upon
request.
A. Upon the filing of an application for a determination of consistency,
excluding reviews of federal and state agency actions and actions
proposed to be directly undertaken by an agency of the City of Rye, an
application fee shall be payable. The City Council shall set the fee
annually by resolution before adoption of the budget. [Amended
12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 11-1998]
B. The Planning Commission in the review of any application may refer
such application to such engineering, planning, legal, technical or
environmental consultant or other professionals, hereinafter referred
to as "consultant or consultants," as it deems reasonably necessary to
enable it to review such application as required by law, provided that
the required expertise is not available from city staff, and subject to the
following:
(1) The detailed statement of the consulting services to be provided by
the consultant shall include the consultant's fees for said services
and a statement by the consultant that the applicant, not the city,
shall be ultimately responsible to the consultant for the services
provided. The detailed statement shall be sent to the applicant by
the City Planner via certified mail, return receipt requested.
§ 73-5 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 73-6
73:207
§ 73-7. Enforcement.
The City Building Inspector shall be responsible for enforcing this chapter.
No work or activity on a project in the Coastal Area which is subject to
review under this chapter shall be commenced or undertaken until the
Building Inspector has been presented with a Resolution of Consistency
from the Rye City Planning Commission. In the event that an activity is
not being performed in accordance with this chapter or any condition
imposed thereunder, the Building Inspector shall issue a stop-work order,
and all work shall immediately cease. No further work or activity shall be
undertaken on the project so long as the stop-work order is in effect.
§ 73-8. Penalties for offenses.
(2) If the applicant wishes to review the services and the costs with the
Planning Commission, the request for a review shall be in writing
and mailed to the City Planner via certified mail, return receipt
requested, within seven days of the applicant's receipt of the
service and cost statement provided by the City Planner. The
Planning Commission shall review the services and costs with the
applicant at its next regular meeting following receipt of the
request.
(3) The City Planner shall authorize the consultant to proceed if he/she
has not received a written request for a review of the consultant's
services and costs from the applicant within seven days of the
applicant's receipt of the City Planner's transmittal. The receipt
date is the date shown as received on the return receipt card
returned by the post office.
(4) The applicant shall pay the consultant's fee upon receipt of the
consultant's detailed statement for the services provided. The
statement will be forwarded to the applicant by the City Planner.
(5) Payment of the consultant's fees shall be required in addition to any
and all other fees required by this or any other section of this
chapter or any other city law or regulation.
(6) The Planning Commission document taking final action on the
application shall not be issued until all consultant's fees charged in
connection with the review of the applicant's project have been
paid. Payment of the consultant's fees shall be by check made
payable to the consultant and shall be submitted to the City Planner
for transmittal to the consultant.
(7) This Subsection B shall expire two years after the date of its
adoption, unless specifically reenacted by the City Council.
A. A person who violates any of the provisions of or who fails to comply
with any condition imposed by this chapter shall have committed a
violation, punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 for a conviction of a
§ 73-6 RYE CODE § 73-8
73:208
§ 73-9. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision of this chapter
is found invalid, such finding shall not affect the validity of this chapter as
a whole or any part or provision hereof other than the provision so found to
be invalid.
Chapter 74
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION (ENERGY) PROGRAM
§ 74-1. Legislative findings; intent and purpose; statutory authority.
first offense and punishable by a fine of $1,000 for a conviction of
a second or subsequent offense. For the purpose of conferring
jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers, each week of the
continuing violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
B. The City Corporation Counsel is authorized and directed to institute any
and all actions and proceedings necessary to enforce this chapter. Any
civil penalty shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any criminal
prosecution and penalty.
A. It is the policy of both the City of Rye and the State of New York to
reduce costs and provide cost certainty for the purpose of economic
development, to promote deeper penetration of energy efficiency and
renewable energy resources such as wind and solar, and wider
deployment of distributed energy resources as well as to examine the
retail energy markets and increase participation of and benefits for
residential and small commercial customers in those markets. Among
the policies and models that may offer benefits in New York is
community choice aggregation (CCA), which allows local governments
to determine the default supplier of electricity and natural gas on
behalf of its residential and small commercial customers.
B. The purpose of this CCA Program is to allow participating local
governments, including the City of Rye, to procure energy supply
service for their residential and small commercial customers, who will
have the opportunity to opt out of the procurement, while maintaining
transmission and distribution service from the existing distribution
utility. This chapter establishes a program that will allow the City of Rye
to put out for bid the total amount of natural gas and/or electricity being
purchased by local residential and small commercial customers.
Bundled customers will have the opportunity to have more control to
lower their overall energy costs, to spur clean energy innovation and
investment, to improve customer choice and value, and to protect the
environment, thereby fulfilling the purposes of this chapter and
fulfilling an important public purpose.
§ 73-8 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 74-1
73:209
§ 74-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, and unless otherwise expressly stated or
unless the context otherwise requires, the terms in this chapter shall have
the meanings employed in the State of New York Public Service
Commission's Uniform Business Practices or, if not so defined there, as
indicated below:
BUNDLED CUSTOMERS — Residential and small commercial customers of
electricity or natural gas ("fuels") who are purchasing the fuels from the
distribution utility.
SMALL COMMERCIAL — Nonresidential customers as permitted by the
Order.
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION PROGRAM or CCA PROGRAM —
A municipal energy procurement program, which replaces the incumbent
utility as the default supplier for all bundled customers within the City of
Rye.
DISTRIBUTION UTILITY — Owner or controller of the means of distribution
of the natural gas or electricity that is regulated by the Public Service
Commission.
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION — New York State Public Service
Commission.
SUPPLIERS — Energy service companies (ESCOs) that procure electric
power and natural gas for bundled customers in connection with this
C. The City of Rye is authorized to implement this Community Choice
Aggregation (Energy) Program pursuant to § 10, Subdivision 1(ii)a(12),
of the New York Municipal Home Rule Law; and State of New York
Public Service Commission Case No. 14-M-0564, Petition of Sustainable
Westchester for Expedited Approval for the Implementation of a Pilot
Community Choice Aggregation Program within the County of
Westchester, Order Granting Petition in Part (issued February 26, 2015)
as may be amended, including subsequent orders of the Public Service
Commission issued in connection with or related to Case No. 14-M-0564
(collectively, the "Order"). "Order" shall also mean orders of the Public
Service Commission related to State of New York Public Service
Commission Case No. 14-M-0224, Proceeding on Motion of the
Commission to Enable Community Choice Aggregation Programs
(issued December 15, 2014) to the extent that orders related to Case
No. 14-M-0224 enable actions by the City of Rye not otherwise
permitted pursuant to orders related to Case No. 14-M-0564; provided,
however, that in the event of any conflict between orders from Case No.
14-M-0564 and orders from Case No. 14-M-0224, orders from Case No.
14-M-0564 shall govern the CCA Program.
D. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Community
Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program Law of the City of Rye."
§ 74-1 RYE CODE § 74-2
73:210
chapter, or alternatively, generators of electricity and natural gas or other
entities who procure and resell electricity or natural gas.
SUSTAINABLE WESTCHESTER, INC. — A not-for-profit organization
comprised of member municipalities in Westchester County, New York.
§ 74-3. Establishment of a program.
§ 74-4. Procedures for Eligibility; Customer Data Sharing.
A. A Community Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program is hereby
established by the City of Rye, whereby the City of Rye shall work
together with Sustainable Westchester to implement the CCA Program
to the full extent permitted by the Order, as set forth more fully herein.
The City of Rye role under the CCA Program involves the aggregating of
the electric and/or gas supply of its residents and the entering into a
contract with one or more suppliers for supply and services. Under the
CCA Program, the operation and ownership of the utility service shall
remain with the distribution utility.
B. The City of Rye participation in a CCA Program constitutes neither the
purchase of a public utility system nor the furnishing of utility service.
The City of Rye will not take over any part of the electric or gas
transmission or distribution system and will not furnish any type of
utility service but will instead negotiate with suppliers on behalf of
participating residential and small commercial customers.
C. In order to implement the CCA Program, the City of Rye will adopt one
or more resolutions that outline the process of and conditions for
participation in the CCA Program, including but not limited to signing a
contract for a compliant bid with one or more suppliers, all as
consistent with the local law and the Order.
D. The Public Service Commission supervises retail markets and
participants in these markets through legislative and regulatory
authority and the Uniform Business Practices, which includes rules
relating to the eligibility of participating ESCOs, the operation by which
ESCOs provide energy services and the terms on which customers may
be enrolled with ESCOs.
A. As permitted by the Order, the City of Rye may request from the
distribution utilities aggregated customer information by fuel type and
service classification on a rolling basis.
B. Sustainable Westchester, on behalf of the City of Rye, shall issue one or
more requests for proposals to suppliers to provide energy to
participants and may then award a contract in accordance with the CCA
Program.
C. Sustainable Westchester or the City of Rye, if the City of Rye so
chooses, will then request individual customer data from the
distribution utility in accordance with the CCA Program.
§ 74-2 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 74-4
73:211
§ 74-5. Choice of energy supplier; opt-out notice and procedure.
§ 74-6. Verification and reporting.
Sustainable Westchester shall be responsible for filing an annual report
with the Public Service Commission that identifies the number of customers
enrolled in the CCA Program by municipality and customer class, the
number of customers who returned to utility service or service with another
supplier during the reporting period, and the average cost of commodity
supply by month for the reporting period.
D. Sustainable Westchester or the City of Rye, if the City of Rye so
chooses, and the selected supplier will then notify bundled customers of
the contract terms and their opportunity to opt out of the CCA Program.
E. In accordance with and for purposes of the Order, Con Ed will provide
to Sustainable Westchester aggregate and customer-specific data
(including usage data, capacity tag obligations, account numbers, and
service addresses) of all bundled customers in the City of Rye not
currently enrolled with an individually chosen ESCO.
F. Sustainable Westchester and the City of Rye will protect customer
information as required by law, subject to the Order and the limitations
of the New York State Freedom of Information Law.
A. The City of Rye, or in conjunction with the ESCO, will notify its
residential and small commercial customers, by letter notice, of the City
of Rye to establish the CCA Program, of the contract terms with an
ESCO, and of the opportunity to opt out of the CCA Program.
B. The letter notice will be sent to each customer at the address provided
by the distribution utility and explain the CCA Program and the
material provisions of the ESCO contract, identify the methods by
which the customer can opt out of the CCA Program, and provide
information on how the customer can access additional information
about the CCA Program.
C. The opt-out period shall be at least 20 days.
D. CCA Program bundled customers, upon enrollment, will receive a
welcome letter that will explain the customers' options for canceling
the enrollment if they believe they were enrolled incorrectly or
otherwise decide to withdraw from the CCA Program in favor of another
supplier. The welcome letter also will explain that residential customers
are entitled to the added protection of the mandated three-day
rescission period as detailed in Section 5(B)(3) of the Uniform Business
Practices.
§ 74-4 RYE CODE § 74-6
73:212
Chapter 76
DOGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 157, Art. I.
§ 76-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the licensing and identification
of dogs, the control and protection of the dog population and the protection
of persons, property, domestic animals and deer from dog attack damage.
§ 76-2. Certain dogs exempt.
Any dog harbored within the City of Rye which is owned by a resident of
New York City or licensed by the City of New York, or which is owned by
a nonresident of New York State and licensed by a jurisdiction outside the
State of New York, shall for a period of 30 days be exempt from the licensing
and identification provisions of this chapter.
§ 76-3. License fees.
All licensing fees are set forth in the Fee Schedule adopted by the City
Council. Excepted from payment of the license fee are applications
submitted for a dog license for any guide, hearing, service, war, working
search, detection, police and therapy dogs. In addition, dogs owned by one
or more seniors, 65 years of age or older, shall be exempt from the City's
licensing fees. All dog licenses shall carry with them an additional fee of $10
as authorized by § 110-4(a) of the New York State Agriculture and Markets
Law.
A. All dogs in the City of Rye must be licensed by the City Clerk by the age
of four months and the owner(s) of such dog(s) must present a current
certificate of rabies vaccination at the time of licensing or the renewal
of an existing license. In the alternative, the owner must submit a
statement from a licensed veterinarian that such vaccination would
endanger the dog's life, in which case vaccination shall not be required.
B. All dog licenses will be for a period of one year and will expire at the
end of the month one year from the date of issue. Licenses are not
transferable.
C. Fees and requirements for licensing of dogs:
(1) The fee for a spayed or neutered dog shall be set by the City
Council in the Fee Schedule. It shall include a state assessment
pursuant to § 110-3 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets
§ 74-6 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 76-3
73:213
§ 76-4. Redemption of dogs seized.
The owner of any dog impounded shall be entitled to redeem that dog within
five business days, excluding the day the dog is impounded, provided that
the owner produces proof the dog is licensed and identified and pays fees
as set forth in the Fee Schedule adopted by the City Council.
§ 76-5. Running at large prohibited; exceptions. [Amended
10-22-2014 by L.L. No. 8-2014]
Law, and additional funds for enumeration as provided for by
§ 110-4(a).
(2) The fee for an unspayed or unneutered dog shall be set by the City
Council in the Fee Schedule. It shall include a state assessment
pursuant to § 110-3 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets
Law, and additional funds for enumeration as provided for by
§ 110-4(a).
(3) Enumeration fee: If the City Council determines the need for a dog
enumeration, a fee set by the City Council in the Fee Schedule shall
be assessed to all dogs found unlicensed or not renewed at the time
enumeration is conducted.
(4) The City of Rye does not allow the licensing of dogs by a shelter.
The shelter must notify the adoptive owners of their responsibility
to license any dog who will be living within the City of Rye. The
shelter must provide the City of Rye with a list of adoptive owners
monthly.
(5) All dogs must wear identification at all times. Show dogs are
exempted from the identification requirement of § 111 of the New
York State Agriculture and Markets Law during participation.
(6) Notification of a change in dog ownership or that a dog has been
lost or stolen must be given to the City of Rye within 30 days of
such event.
A. Except as permitted in § 76-5B, no person owning, harboring or having
the custody and control of a dog shall permit such dog to be at large in
the City of Rye, elsewhere than on the premises of the owner, except if
it is on the premises of another person with the knowledge and assent
of such other person.
B. During the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., the owner, harborer or
person having the custody and control of a dog visiting the designated
areas in § 76-5F shall control such dog at all times, but need not
restrain such dog by a chain or leash. The maximum number of dogs offleash
that any one person shall have custody and control over is three.
After 9:00 a.m., all dogs must be leashed or chained in accordance with
this chapter.
§ 76-3 RYE CODE § 76-5
73:214
§ 76-6. When leash required. [Amended 10-22-2014 by L.L. No.
8-2014]
Except as set forth in § 76-5B above, the owner, harborer or person having
the custody and control of a dog in the City of Rye which is not on the
premises of the owner or upon the premises of another person with the
knowledge and consent of such person shall control and restrain such dog
by a chain or leash not exceeding eight feet in length.
§ 76-7. Removal of feces left by dog.
Any person who owns, harbors or has the custody of any dog shall remove
promptly any feces left by such dog at any place within the city except upon
private property with the consent of the owner of such property; provided,
however, that this provision is not applicable to a blind person while actually
using a guide dog licensed as such pursuant to the Agriculture and Markets
Law. In no event shall any feces be deposited in storm or sanitary sewers or
drains.
§ 76-8. Penalties for offenses.
Every person found to have violated this chapter shall be liable for a
civil penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $50; for a second such
determination within one year after the date of the prior violation, such
person shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $50 nor more than
$75; and upon a third or subsequent determination within one year after the
date of first violation, such person shall be punished by a penalty of not less
than $75 nor more than $100.
C. Any person wishing to allow his/her dog(s) to run at large without being
restrained by a chain or leash shall register his/her dog(s) with the Rye
City Clerk annually. Any dog at large must have a valid registration tag
affixed to his/her collar at all times when the dog(s) are at large.
D. Any violation of this chapter may result in a fine of up to $250 per
violation and/or suspension or termination of the off-leash registration.
E. The registration fee will be set annually by the Rye City Council.
F. The designated areas within the City where dogs are permitted to run
at large from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. are:
(1) Rye Town Park in the grass area bounded by the walking path,
Forest Avenue, Rye Beach Avenue and the duck pond (see annexed
map16).
16.Editor's Note: See 76 Attachment 1, Designated Dog Areas.
§ 76-5 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 76-8
73:215
Chapter 81
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 98.
Housing standards — See Ch. 108.
§ 81-1. Conformance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install any electric
wiring or equipment, or to alter, extend, maintain or use any existing
electric wiring or equipment, except in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter and such rules and regulations, consistent with the
requirements of this chapter, as may be promulgated by the Building
Inspector with the approval of the Common Council. (The term "equipment"
shall include material, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures, apparatus and
the like, used as a part of or in connection with an electrical installation.)
§ 81-2. Permit required. [Amended 7-15-1964 by Ord. No. 12-1964;
4-19-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995; 6-14-2006 by L.L. No. 6-2006]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install electric
wiring or equipment, or to alter or extend any existing electrical wiring
or equipment, without first having obtained a permit from the City
Clerk, who shall issue such a permit upon approval of the Building
Inspector, except that no permit shall be required for a replacement of
lamps or fuses, the connection of portable devices to suitable
permanently wired receptacles or for any maintenance or emergency
repair work, nor shall any permit be required for any electrical
installation which is an integral part of a system under the control of a
public utility in rendering its duly authorized service, nor shall a permit
be required for any electrical work costing less than $500, except that
contracts for such work shall not be split to avoid the requirements of
this section.
B. No permit shall be issued except to a licensed master electrician.
Except as otherwise provided herein, a master electrician shall have
passed an examination conducted by at least one other Westchester or
Putnam County municipality, to determine his or her competence to
perform the functions of a master electrician properly. In case of a firm
or corporation, said organization may be represented by one or more
members of said firm or by an officer of the corporation.
C. An application for a permit shall be made to the Building Inspector on
forms supplied by him/her.
§ 76-8 RYE CODE § 81-3
73:216
§ 81-3. Compliance with other regulations.
Installations, alterations, extensions and repairs of any electric wiring or
equipment shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and in
conformity with the applicable requirements of the State Building
Construction Code, Fire Prevention Code and Housing Code of this City,17
this chapter, and rules, regulations and orders issued by the Building
Inspector.
§ 81-4. Compliance with National Electrical Code.
Except as may be otherwise provided for in § 81-3 hereof, all electric wiring
and equipment shall be designed, installed, altered, extended, maintained
and used in accordance with nationally recognized good practice.
Compliance with the standard of the National Board of Fire Underwriters
for electric wiring and apparatus, known as the "National Electrical Code,"
shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of compliance with nationally
recognized good practice.
§ 81-5. Administration by Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall administer and enforce all of the provisions of
this chapter. He/she shall have the power to adopt rules, regulations and
supplemental requirements, with the consent of the Common Council, to
secure the intent and purposes of this chapter.
§ 81-6. Inspections. [Amended 8-18-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
A. The Building Inspector and any other approved agency or authorized
person(s) are hereby authorized and deputized as agents of the City of
Rye to make inspections and reinspections of all electrical installations
hereafter described, and to approve or disapprove the same. In no
event, however, will the cost or expense of such inspections and
reinspections be a charge against the City of Rye.
B. Any person desiring to be an Inspector must register with the Building
Department of the City of Rye to perform electrical inspections by
providing the following information and documentation to the Building
Inspector or his or her designee for review and determination as to its
acceptability:
(1) A copy of a valid and substituting certificate from the International
Association of Electrical Inspectors and/or National Fire Protection
Association to perform inspections of one- and two-family homes
and/or commercial establishments. The original certificate must be
displayed to the Building Inspector or his or her designee.
(2) Such person's address and telephone contact information and email
address, if available.
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 68, Building Construction; Ch. 98, Fire Prevention; and Ch. 108,
Housing Standards.
§ 81-3 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 81-6
73:217
§ 81-7. Reinspections.
The Building Inspector shall make or cause to be made a reinspection of
an electrical installation whenever he/she deems it necessary in the interest
of public safety. If an electrical installation upon reinspection is found to
be defective or unsafe, the Building Inspector shall revoke all certificates
in effect at that time relating to such installation, and the use of such
installation shall be discontinued until it has been made to conform to this
chapter and a new certificate has been issued by the Building Inspector.
§ 81-8. Certificates.
Upon the filing of his or her report, or the report of the person authorized
by him/her to make the inspection, that the electric wiring and equipment
is installed, altered or extended in full compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, the Building Inspector shall issue a certificate to that effect. A
certificate of approval issued by the New York Board of Fire Underwriters
for such electrical installation and countersigned by the Building Inspector
shall be deemed sufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 81-9. Temporary permission for use.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use or permit the
use of any electric wiring or equipment unless the required certificate of
inspection and approval has been issued, except that the Building Inspector
(3) Proof of insurance, showing worker's compensation, general
liability, and other coverage naming the City of Rye as an insured
and agreement to indemnify the City of Rye in each case in such
scope and amount as the City Council shall set by resolution.
(4) If such person is a firm, corporation or other entity, the subject
certificate must be provided for each employee for whom
authorization is sought to perform electrical inspections.
(5) A fee schedule for charges to be incurred by a property owner for
the inspection.
C. The Building Inspector shall, during the installation of electric wiring or
equipment, make or cause to be made inspections to assure compliance
with this chapter.
D. No work in connection with an electrical installation shall be covered or
concealed until it has been inspected as prescribed herein and
permission to do so has been given by the Building Inspector.
E. The Building Inspector shall, within a reasonable time after notice of
the completion of any electrical installation which comes under the
provisions of this chapter, make or cause to be made an inspection of
such work and such tests as may be necessary to determine that it
conforms to this chapter.
§ 81-6 RYE CODE § 81-9
73:218
may, in his or her discretion, give temporary permission for the use of
electric wiring and equipment for a reasonable time before such installation
has been fully completed.
§ 81-10. Disconnection.
When, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, Fire Inspector or the Chief
of the Fire Department, any electric current is dangerous to life or property
or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department, any one of them may
disconnect or cause to be disconnected said current.
§ 81-11. Liability for damages.
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person, firm or corporation owning, operating,
controlling or installing any electric wiring or equipment for damages to
person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the City be held
as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein
or the certificate of approval issued or countersigned as herein provided.
§ 81-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or fail, neglect or refuse
to comply with any provision of this chapter or any rule, regulation or order
duly made thereunder, or who shall install, alter or extend any electric
wiring or equipment in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted
and approved thereunder or a permit or certificate issued thereunder,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than
$100 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
Chapter 83
ENERGY CONSERVATION FINANCING: PACE PROGRAM
§ 83-1. Legislative findings; intent and purpose; statutory authority.
A. It is the policy of both the City of Rye and the State of New York to
achieve energy efficiency and renewable energy goals, reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, mitigate the effect of global climate change,
and advance a clean energy economy. The City finds that it can fulfill
this policy by providing property-assessed clean energy financing to
property owners for the installation of renewable energy systems and
energy efficiency measures. This chapter establishes a program that
will allow the Energy Improvement Corporation (EIC), a local
development corporation, acting on behalf of the City, to make funds
available to qualified property owners that will be repaid by such
property owners through charges on the real properties benefited by
§ 81-9 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 83-1
73:219
§ 83-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, and unless otherwise expressly stated or
unless the context requires, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The New York State Energy Research and Development
Authority, as defined by Subdivision 2 of § 1851 of the Public Authorities
Law, or its successor.
EIC — The Energy Improvement Corporation, a local development
corporation, duly organized under § 1411 of the Not-for-Profit Corporation
Law, authorized hereby on behalf of the City of Rye to implement the
Energize NY Benefit Financing Program by providing funds to qualified
property owners (as defined in this chapter) and providing for repayment
of such funds from monies collected by the City Comptroller as a charge to
be levied on the real property and collected in the same manner and same
form as the City taxes.
ENERGY AUDIT — A formal evaluation or "assessment" of the energy
consumption of a permanent building or structural improvement to real
property, conducted by a contractor certified by the Authority, or certified
by a certifying entity approved by the Authority, for the purpose of
identifying appropriate energy efficiency improvements that could be made
to the property.
ENERGY EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENT — Any renovation or retrofitting
of a building to reduce energy consumption, such as window and door
replacement, lighting, caulking, weatherstripping, air sealing, insulation,
and heating and cooling system upgrades, and similar improvements,
determined to be cost effective pursuant to criteria established by the
Authority, not including lighting measures or household appliances that are
not permanently fixed to real property.
QUALIFIED PROPERTY OWNER — An owner of residential or commercial
real property located within the boundaries of the City of Rye that is
determined to be eligible to participate in the Energize NY Benefit
Financing Program under the procedures for eligibility set forth under this
chapter.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM — An energy-generating system for the
generation of electric or thermal energy, to be used primarily at such
property, by means of solar thermal, solar photovoltaic, wind, geothermal,
such funds, thereby fulfilling the purposes of this chapter and fulfilling
an important public purpose.
B. The City of Rye is authorized to implement this Energize NY Benefit
Financing Program pursuant to Article 5-L of the New York General
Municipal Law.
C. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Energize NY
Benefit Financing Program Law of the City of Rye."
§ 83-1 RYE CODE § 83-2
73:220
anaerobic digester gas-to-electricity systems, fuel cell technologies, or
other renewable energy technology approved by the Authority, not including
the combustion or pyrolysis of solid waste.
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM FEASIBILITY STUDY — A written study,
conducted by a contractor certified by the Authority, or certified by a
certifying entity approved by the Authority, for the purpose of determining
the feasibility of installing a renewable energy system.
§ 83-3. Establishment of program.
§ 83-4. Procedures for eligibility.
A. An Energize NY Benefit Financing Program is hereby established by the
City of Rye, whereby EIC, acting on its behalf, may provide funds to
qualified property owners in accordance with the procedures set forth
under this chapter to finance the acquisition, construction and
installation of renewable energy systems and energy efficiency
improvements and the verification of the installation of such systems
and improvements.
B. The funds provided shall not exceed the lesser of 10% of the appraised
value of the real property where the renewable energy systems and/or
energy efficiency improvements will be located, or the actual cost of
installing the renewable energy systems and/or energy efficiency
improvements, including the costs of necessary equipment, materials,
and labor and the cost of verification of such systems and
improvements.
A. Any property owner in the City may submit application to EIC on such
forms as have been prepared by EIC and made available to property
owners on the website of EIC and at the City Clerk's office.
B. Every application submitted by a property owner shall be reviewed by
EIC, acting on behalf of the City, which shall make a positive or negative
determination on such application based upon the criteria for making a
financing enumerated in Subsection A of § 83-5 of this chapter. EIC may
also request further information from the property owner where
necessary to aid in its determination.
C. If a positive determination on an application is made by EIC, acting on
behalf of the City, the property owner shall be deemed a qualified
property owner and shall be eligible to participate in the Energize NY
Benefit Financing Program in accordance with the procedure set forth
under § 83-6 of this chapter, provided that in no case shall a property
owner that has received funds from another municipal corporation for
the acquisition, construction and installation of energy efficiency
improvements and/or renewable energy systems be deemed a qualified
property owner.
D. At no one time shall the total of all payments being collected for this
program by the City exceed $50,000 per annum.
§ 83-2 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 83-5
73:221
§ 83-5. Application criteria.
§ 83-6. Energize finance agreement.
§ 83-7. Energy audit; renewable energy system feasibility study.
A. Upon the submission of an application, EIC, acting on behalf of the City,
shall make a positive or negative determination on such application
based upon the following criteria for the making of a financing:
(1) The proposed energy efficiency improvements and/or renewable
energy systems are determined to be cost effective by the
Authority;
(2) The proposed energy efficiency improvements and/or renewable
energy systems will generate an estimated annual cost savings
greater than the annual charge payments;
(3) Sufficient funds are available to provide to the property owner;
(4) The property owner is current in payments on any existing
mortgage;
(5) The property owner is current in payments on any existing real
property taxes and has been current on real property taxes for the
previous three years; and
(6) Such additional criteria, not inconsistent with the criteria set forth
above, as the City, or EIC acting on its behalf, may set from time to
time.
A. A qualified property owner may participate in the Energize NY Benefit
Financing Program through the execution of an energize finance
agreement made by and between the qualified property owner and EIC,
acting on the behalf of the City.
B. Upon execution of the energize finance agreement, the qualified
property owner shall be eligible to receive funds from EIC, acting on
behalf of the City, for the acquisition, construction, and installation of
qualifying renewable energy systems and energy efficiency
improvements, provided that the requirements of § 83-7 of this chapter
have been met.
C. The energize finance agreement shall include the terms and conditions
of repayment set forth under § 83-8 of this chapter.
A. No funds shall be made available for energy efficiency improvements
unless determined to be appropriate through an energy audit as defined
in § 83-2.
B. No funds shall be made available for a renewable energy system unless
determined to be feasible through a renewable energy system
feasibility study as defined in § 83-2.
§ 83-5 RYE CODE § 83-7
73:222
§ 83-8. Terms and conditions of repayment.
The energize finance agreement between the qualified property owner and
EIC, acting on behalf of the City, shall set forth the terms and conditions of
repayment in accordance with the following:
§ 83-9. Verification and report.
Chapter 84
ENERGY CONSERVATION FINANCING: OPEN C-PACE
PROGRAM
§ 84-1. Legislative findings; intent and purpose; authority.
C. The cost of such energy audit and/or renewable energy system
feasibility study shall be borne solely by the property owner but may be
included in the financed amount if the work is approved.
A. The principal amount of the funds paid to the qualified property owner
hereunder, together with the interest thereon, shall be paid by the
property owner as a charge on his or her property tax bill and shall be
levied and collected at the same time and in the same manner as City
property taxes, provided that such charge shall be separately listed on
the tax bill. The City shall make payment to EIC, or its designee, in the
amount of all such separately listed charges within 30 days of the City
property tax due date.
B. The term of such repayment shall be determined at the time the
energize finance agreement is executed by the property owner and EIC,
provided that in no case shall the term exceed the weighted average of
the useful life of the systems and improvements as determined by EIC,
acting on behalf of the City.
C. The rate of interest for the charge shall be fixed by EIC, acting on behalf
of the City, at the time the energize finance agreement is executed by
the property owner and EIC.
D. The charge shall constitute a lien upon the real property benefited by
the Energize NY Benefit Financing Program and shall run with the land.
A transferee of title to the benefited real property shall be required to
pay any future installments, including interest thereon.
A. EIC shall be responsible for verifying and reporting to the City on the
installation and performance of renewable energy systems and energy
efficiency improvements financed by such program.
B. The City shall verify and report on the installation and performance of
renewable energy systems and energy efficiency improvements
financed by the Energize NY Benefit Financing Program in such form
and manner as the Authority may establish.
§ 83-7 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 84-1
73:223
§ 84-2. Definitions.
A. It is the policy of both the Municipality and the State of New York (the
"State") to achieve energy efficiency and renewable energy
improvements, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, mitigate the effect of
global climate change, and advance a clean energy economy. The
Municipality finds that it can fulfill this policy by providing propertyassessed
clean energy financing to Qualified Property Owners (as
defined below) for the installation of renewable energy systems and
energy efficiency measures. This chapter establishes a program that
will allow the Energy Improvement Corporation (as defined below,
"EIC"), a local development corporation, acting on behalf of the
Municipality pursuant to the municipal agreement (the "Municipal
Agreement") to be entered into between the Municipality and EIC, to
make funds available to Qualified Property Owners that will be repaid
through charges on the real properties benefited by such funds, thereby
fulfilling the purposes of this chapter and accomplishing an important
public purpose. This chapter provides a method of implementing the
public policies expressed by, and exercising the authority provided by,
Article 5-L of the General Municipal Law (as defined below, the
"Enabling Act").
B. The Municipality is authorized to execute, deliver and perform the
Municipal Agreement and otherwise to implement this Energize NY
Open C-PACE Financing Program pursuant to the Constitution and laws
of New York, including particularly Article IX of the Constitution, § 10 of
the Municipal Home Rule Law, the Enabling Act and this chapter.
C. This chapter, which is adopted pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home
Rule Law and the Enabling Act, shall be known and may be cited as the
"Energize NY Open C-PACE Local Law."
A. Capitalized terms used but not defined herein have the meanings
assigned in the Enabling Act.
B. For purposes of this chapter, and unless otherwise expressly stated or
unless the context requires, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ANNUAL INSTALLMENT AMOUNT — Shall have the meaning assigned
in § 84-8B.
ANNUAL INSTALLMENT LIEN — Shall have the meaning assigned in
§ 84-8B.
AUTHORITY — The New York State Energy Research and Development
Authority.
BENEFIT ASSESSMENT LIEN — Shall have the meaning assigned in
§ 84-3A.
§ 84-1 RYE CODE § 84-2
73:224
BENEFITED PROPERTY — Qualified Property for which the Qualified
Property Owner has entered into a Finance Agreement for a Qualified
Project.
BENEFITED PROPERTY OWNER — The owner of record of a Benefited
Property.
EIC — The Energy Improvement Corporation, a local development
corporation, duly organized under § 1411 of the Not-For-Profit
Corporation Law of the State, authorized hereby on behalf of the
Municipality to implement the Program by providing funds to Qualified
Property Owners and providing for repayment of such funds from
money collected by or on behalf of the Municipality as a charge to be
levied on the real property.
ELIGIBLE COSTS — Costs incurred by the Benefited Property Owner in
connection with a Qualified Project and the related Finance Agreement,
including application fees, EIC's Program administration fee, closing
costs and fees, title and appraisal fees, professionals' fees, permits, fees
for design and drawings and any other related fees, expenses and costs,
in each case as approved by EIC and the Financing Party under the
Finance Agreement.
ENABLING ACT — Article 5-L of the General Municipal Law of the
State, or a successor law, as in effect from time to time.
FINANCE AGREEMENT — The finance agreement described in § 84-6A
of this chapter.
FINANCING CHARGES — All charges, fees and expenses related to
the loan under the Finance Agreement, including accrued interest,
capitalized interest, prepayment premiums, and penalties as a result
of a default or late payment and costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred by the Financing Party as a result of a foreclosure or other
legal proceeding brought against the Benefited Property to enforce any
delinquent Annual Installment Liens.
FINANCING PARTIES — Third-party capital providers approved by EIC
to provide financing to Qualified Property Owners or other financial
support to the Program which have entered into separate agreements
with EIC to administer the Program in the Municipality.
MUNICIPAL LIEN — A lien on Qualified Property which secures the
obligation to pay real property taxes, municipal charges, or
governmentally imposed assessments in respect of services or benefits
to a Qualified Property.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Rye, a municipality of the State
constituting a tax district as defined in § 1102 of the RPTL of the State.
NONMUNICIPAL LIEN — A lien on Qualified Property which secures
any obligation other than the obligation to pay real property taxes,
municipal charges, or governmentally imposed assessments in respect
of services or benefits to a Qualified Property Owner or Qualified
Property.
§ 84-2 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 84-2
73:225
§ 84-3. Establishment of Energize NY Open C-PACE Financing
Program.
PROGRAM — The Energize NY Open C-PACE Financing Program
authorized hereby.
QUALIFIED PROJECT — The acquisition, construction, reconstruction
or equipping of Energy Efficiency Improvements or Renewable Energy
Systems or other projects authorized under the Enabling Act on a
Qualified Property, together with a related Energy Audit, Renewable
Energy System Feasibility Study and/or other requirements under or
pursuant to the Enabling Act, with funds provided in whole or in part
by Financing Parties under the Program to achieve the purposes of the
Enabling Act.
QUALIFIED PROPERTY — Any real property other than a residential
building containing fewer than three dwelling units, which is within the
boundaries of the Municipality, that has been determined to be eligible
to participate in the Program under the procedures for eligibility set
forth under this chapter and the Enabling Act and has become the site
of a Qualified Project.
QUALIFIED PROPERTY OWNER — The owner of record of Qualified
Property which has been determined by EIC to meet the requirements
for participation in the Program as an owner, and any transferee owner
of such Qualified Property.
RPTL — The Real Property Tax Law of the State, as amended from time
to time.
SECURED AMOUNT — As of any date, the aggregate amount of
principal loaned to the Qualified Property Owner for a Qualified Project,
together with Eligible Costs and Financing Charges, as provided herein
or in the Finance Agreement, as reduced pursuant to § 84-8C.
STATE — The State of New York.
A. An Energize NY Open C-PACE Financing Program is hereby established
by the Municipality, whereby EIC, acting on its behalf pursuant to the
Municipal Agreement, may arrange for the provision of funds by
Financing Parties to Qualified Property Owners in accordance with the
Enabling Act and the procedures set forth under this chapter to finance
the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, and installation of
Qualified Projects and Eligible Costs and Financing Charges approved
by EIC and by the Financing Party under the Finance Agreement. EIC,
on behalf of the Municipality, and with the consent of the Benefited
Property Owner, will record a Benefit Assessment Lien on the Benefited
Property in the Secured Amount (the "Benefit Assessment Lien") on the
land records for the Municipality. Such recording shall be exempt from
any charge, mortgage recording tax or other fee in the same manner as
if recorded by the Municipality.
§ 84-2 RYE CODE § 84-3
73:226
§ 84-4. Procedures for eligibility.
§ 84-5. Application criteria.
Upon the submission of an application, EIC, acting on behalf of the
Municipality, shall make a positive or negative determination on such
application based upon the following criteria for the making of a financing:
B. Before a Qualified Property Owner and a Financing Party enter into a
Finance Agreement which results in a loan to finance a Qualified
Project, repayment of which is secured by a Benefit Assessment Lien, a
written consent from each existing mortgage holder of the Qualified
Property shall be obtained, permitting the Benefit Assessment Lien and
each Annual Installment Lien to take priority over all existing
mortgages.
A. Any property owner in the Municipality may submit an application to
EIC on such forms as have been prepared by EIC and made available to
property owners on the website of EIC and at the Municipality's offices.
B. Every application submitted by a property owner shall be reviewed by
EIC, acting on behalf of the Municipality, which shall make a positive or
negative determination on such application based upon the criteria
enumerated in the Enabling Act and § 84-5 of this chapter. EIC may also
request further information from the property owner where necessary
to aid in its determination.
C. If a positive determination on an application is made by EIC, acting on
behalf of the Municipality, the property owner shall be deemed a
Qualified Property Owner and shall be eligible to participate in the
Program in accordance with § 84-6 of this chapter.
A. The property owner may not be in bankruptcy, and the property may not
constitute property subject to any pending bankruptcy proceeding;
B. The amount financed under the Program shall be repaid over a term not
to exceed the weighted average of the useful life of Renewable Energy
Systems and Energy Efficiency Improvements to be installed on the
property as determined by EIC;
C. Sufficient funds are available from Financing Parties to provide
financing to the property owner;
D. The property owner is current in payments on any existing mortgage on
the Qualified Property;
E. The property owner is current in payments on any real property taxes
on the Qualified Property; and
F. Such additional criteria, not inconsistent with the criteria set forth
above, as the State, the Municipality, or EIC acting on its behalf, or
other Financing Parties may set from time to time.
§ 84-3 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 84-6
73:227
§ 84-6. Energize NY finance agreement.
§ 84-7. Terms and conditions of repayment.
The Finance Agreement shall set forth the terms and conditions of
repayment in accordance with the following:
A. A Qualified Property Owner may participate in the Program through the
execution of a finance agreement made by and between the Qualified
Property Owner and a Financing Party, to which EIC, on behalf of the
Municipality, shall be a third-party beneficiary (the "Finance
Agreement"). Upon execution and delivery of the Finance Agreement,
the property that is the subject of the Finance Agreement shall be
deemed a "Benefited Property."
B. Upon execution and delivery of the Finance Agreement, the Benefited
Property Owner shall be eligible to receive funds from the Financing
Party for the acquisition, construction, and installation of a Qualified
Project, together with Eligible Costs and Financing Charges approved
by EIC and by the Financing Party, provided the requirements of the
Enabling Act, the Municipal Agreement and this chapter have been
met.
C. The Finance Agreement shall include the terms and conditions of
repayment of the Secured Amount and the Annual Installment Amounts.
D. EIC may charge fees to offset the costs of administering the Program,
and such fees, if not paid by the Financing Party, shall be added to the
Secured Amount.
A. The principal amount of the funds loaned to the Benefited Property
Owner for the Qualified Project, together with Eligible Costs and
Financing Charges approved by EIC and by the Financing Party, shall
be specially assessed against the Benefited Property and will be
evidenced by a Benefit Assessment Lien recorded against the Benefited
Property on the land records on which liens are recorded for properties
within the Municipality. The special benefit assessment shall constitute
a "charge" within the meaning of the Enabling Act and shall be
collected in annual installments in the amounts certified by the
Financing Party in a schedule provided at closing and made part of the
Benefit Assessment Lien. Said amount shall be annually levied, billed
and collected by EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, and shall be paid to
the Financing Party as provided in the Finance Agreement.
B. The term of such repayment shall be determined at the time the
Finance Agreement is executed by the Benefited Property Owner and
the Financing Party, not to exceed the weighted average of the useful
life of the systems and improvements as determined by EIC, acting on
behalf of the Municipality.
§ 84-6 RYE CODE § 84-7
73:228
§ 84-8. Levy of annual installment amount and creation of annual
installment lien.
C. The rate of interest for the Secured Amount shall be fixed by the
Financing Party in conjunction with EIC, acting on behalf of the
Municipality, as provided in the Finance Agreement.
A. Upon the making of the loan pursuant to the Finance Agreement, the
Secured Amount shall become a special Benefit Assessment Lien on the
Benefited Property in favor of the Municipality. The amount of the
Benefit Assessment Lien shall be the Secured Amount. Evidence of the
Benefit Assessment Lien shall be recorded by EIC, on behalf of the
Municipality, in the land records for properties in the Municipality. Such
recording shall be exempt from any charge, mortgage recording tax or
other fee in the same manner as if recorded by the Municipality. The
Benefit Assessment Lien shall not be foreclosed upon by or otherwise
enforced by the Municipality.
B. The Finance Agreement shall provide for the repayment of the Secured
Amount in installments made at least annually, as provided in a
schedule attached to the Benefit Assessment Lien (the "Annual
Installment Amount"). The Annual Installment Amount shall be levied
by EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, on the Benefited Property in the
same manner as levies for municipal charges, shall become a lien on the
Benefited Property as of the first day of January of the fiscal year for
which levied (the "Annual Installment Lien") and shall remain a lien
until paid. The creation or any recording of the Annual Installment Lien
shall be exempt from any charge, mortgage recording tax or other fee
in the same manner as if recorded by the Municipality. Payment to the
Financing Party shall be considered payment for this purpose. Such
payment shall partly or wholly discharge the Annual Installment Lien.
Delinquent Annual Installment Amounts may accrue Financing Charges
as may be provided in the Finance Agreement. Any additional Financing
Charges imposed by the Financing Party pursuant to the Finance
Agreement shall increase the Annual Installment Amount and the
Annual Installment Lien for the year in which such overdue payments
were first due.
C. The Benefit Assessment Lien shall be reduced annually by the amount
of each Annual Installment Lien when each Annual Installment Lien
becomes a lien. Each Annual Installment Lien shall be subordinate to all
Municipal Liens, whether created by § 902 of the RPTL or by any other
State or local law. No portion of a Secured Amount shall be recovered
by the Municipality, EIC, or an assignee upon foreclosure, sale or other
disposition of the Benefited Property unless and until all Municipal
Liens are fully discharged. Each Annual Installment Lien, however,
shall have priority over all Nonmunicipal Liens, irrespective of when
created, except as otherwise required by law.
D. Neither the Benefit Assessment Lien nor any Annual Installment Lien
shall be extinguished or accelerated in the event of a default or
§ 84-7 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 84-8
73:229
§ 84-9. Verification and report.
EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, shall verify and report on the installation
and performance of Renewable Energy Systems and Energy Efficiency
Improvements financed by the Program in such form and manner as the
Authority may establish.
§ 84-10. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this chapter shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, or part thereof involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered.
Chapter 87
bankruptcy of the Benefited Property Owner. Each Annual Installment
Amount shall be considered a charge upon the Benefited Property and
shall be collected by EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, at the same time
and in the same manner as real property taxes or municipal charges.
Each Annual Installment Lien shall remain a lien until paid. Amounts
collected in respect of an Annual Installment Lien shall be remitted to
EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, or the Financing Party, as may be
provided in the Finance Agreement.
E. EIC shall act as the Municipality's agent in collection of the Annual
Installment Amounts. If any Benefited Property Owner fails to pay an
Annual Installment Amount, the Financing Party may redeem the
Benefited Property by paying the amount of all unpaid Municipal Liens
thereon, and thereafter shall have the right to collect any amounts in
respect of an Annual Installment Lien by foreclosure or any other
remedy available at law. Any foreclosure shall not affect any subsequent
Annual Installment Liens.
F. EIC, on behalf of the Municipality, may sell or assign for consideration
any and all Benefit Assessment Liens and Annual Installment Liens to
Financing Parties that provide financing to Qualified Properties
pursuant to Finance Agreements. The Financing Parties may sell or
assign for consideration any and all Benefit Assessment Liens and
Annual Installment Liens received from EIC, on behalf of the
Municipality, subject to certain conditions provided in the
administration agreement between EIC and the Financing Party. The
assignee or assignees of such Benefit Assessment Liens and Annual
Installment Liens shall have and possess the same powers and rights at
law or in equity as the Municipality would have had if the Benefit
Assessment Lien and the Annual Installment Liens had not been
assigned with regard to the precedence and priority of such lien, the
accrual of interest and the fees and expenses of collection.
§ 84-8 RYE CODE § 84-10
73:230
ESCROW PROVISIONS
§ 87-1. Fees and consultants.
A. Upon any application to the City, the Planning Commission, the
Planning Commissioner, the Board of Appeals, the Architectural Review
Board, the Building Inspector, the City Engineer, or other employee or
official ("boards, commissions and employees"), subject to the
provisions of this section, may require the applicant to deposit with the
City, pursuant to an escrow agreement in a form that shall be approved
by the Corporation Counsel, funds sufficient to reimburse the City for
all reasonable costs of consultant and expert evaluation and
consultation in connection with the review of any application.
B. Any City boards, commissions or employees involved in the review of
any application may refer such application to such engineering,
planning, legal, technical or environmental consultant or other
professional hereinafter referred to as "consultant or consultants," as
they deem reasonably necessary to enable it to review such application
as required by law, provided that the required expertise is not available
from City staff, and subject to the following:
(1) The consultant(s) shall send to the City a detailed statement of the
consulting services ("statement") to be provided by the
consultant(s) and it shall include the consultant's fees for said
services with an acknowledgement by the consultant(s) that the
applicant, not the City, shall be ultimately responsible to the
consultant(s) for the services provided. A copy of the statement
shall be sent to the applicant by the City.
(2) Upon approval by the applicant of the fees and services proposed,
the applicant shall deposit a sufficient sum to cover said fees,
subject to the conditions set forth in the signed escrow agreement
with the City Comptroller. When said amount is diminished to 50%
of the original amount, the applicant will be asked to replenish the
escrow with funds sufficient to bring the account back to the level
of the original amount. Excess funds are to be returned to the
applicant as soon as is practicable following the application and
approval/denial process.
(3) If the applicant wishes to review the services and the costs with the
City boards, commissions or employees, the request for a review
shall be in writing and mailed to the City Clerk by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or delivered in person, within seven days
of the applicant's receipt of the service and cost statement.
(4) The boards, commissions or employees shall authorize the
consultant to proceed within seven days of receipt of the funds by
the City Comptroller. All details related to the kind and manner of
payment shall be in the discretion of the City Comptroller.
§ 84-10 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 87-1
73:231
Chapter 90
FENCES AND WALLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 170. Zoning — See Ch. 197.
§ 90-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by establishing regulations for the design, construction and
maintenance of fences and wails which, to the maximum extent practicable,
would continue the open appearance of the community while allowing
residents to have reasonable privacy in the use and enjoyment of their
homes.
§ 90-2. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning
stated here. Words used in this chapter which are not defined here shall
have the meaning defined by Chapter 197. Words not defined by this
chapter or by Chapter 197 shall have the meaning established by common
usage.
DIVISION LINE, FRONT — In the case of a lot abutting upon only one
street, the property boundary line separating the lot from the street; in the
case of a lot abutting more than one street, other than a corner lot, any
such property boundary for the area which has been previously designated
by the lot owner, pursuant to Chapter 197, as being the front yard or which
has been irrevocably designated by the lot owner, pursuant to this chapter,
as being the front division line. Each lot may have only one front division
(5) Nothing contained herein or in the escrow agreement shall be
deemed as an indication or obligation by the City to approve the
application or grant its approval. The escrow arrangement shall be
for the benefit of the applicant to facilitate the review process and
provide the City with the necessary expertise where the City does
not have such expertise. The applicant, in the escrow agreement
shall hold the City of Rye and all of the relevant boards,
commissions and/or employees harmless.
(6) Payment of the consultant(s)' fees shall be required in addition to
any and all other fees required by this or any other section of this
chapter or any other City law or regulation.
(7) No final action on an application or permit shall be taken and/or
issued until all consultant's fees charged in connection with the
review of the applicant's project have been paid.
§ 87-1 RYE CODE § 90-2
73:232
line unless it is a corner lot, as defined by Chapter 197 (§ 197-1), which
would have two front division lines. For the purposes of Chapter 90 only and
notwithstanding the foregoing, in the case of a corner lot on Boston Post
Road between the northern end of Old Post Road and Osborn Road where
an existing residence does not front on Boston Post Road, such property
shall be deemed to have only one front division line, that being the property
boundary line separating the lot from the street upon which the residence
faces.[Amended 4-4-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
DIVISION LINE, REAR — The line forming a property boundary of the lot
which is generally opposite the front division line.
DIVISION LINE, SIDE — The property boundary line or lines forming any
part of the connection of the front division line with the rear division line.
FENCE — A structure made of any materials, or combination of materials,
with clearly visible spaces between component parts, which encloses,
separates, divides or defines a lot or portion thereof "Fence" includes a
barrier of the stockade type made of parallel wooden posts or split poles.
HEIGHT (FENCE or WALL) — The vertical distance between the natural
grade of the property at the base of the fence or wall and the highest
horizontal member at the top. In the case of picket fences, wrought-iron
fences with decorative elements, fences made of vertical boards with
rounded ends or other structures of similar design, the top of the fence shall
be a line parallel to the tops of the several points.
PROPERTY BOUNDARY LINE — A line forming the perimeter of a lot,
delineating the separation between the lot and an adjoining lot or the rightof-
way of an abutting street as described by a recorded deed.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction framed
of component parts for occupancy or use, including buildings, but not
including a small object which is an accessory to a building or another
structure (such as decorative statuary or railing for a walkway).
WALL — A structure made of any materials or combination of materials,
without clearly visible spaces between components parts, which encloses,
The measurement of the height of a fence or wall shall not include the
height of an appropriate accessory structure, such as an entrance gate,
an archway or a decorative column at the corner of the lot.
A.
The measurement of the height of a fence or wall which has a top that
is curved, with the height of the central portion being higher or lower
than the height at the ends, is the vertical distance between the natural
grade of the property at the base and an average of the height of the
central portion and the height at the ends.
B.
The height of a fence or wall erected on a grade approximately equal to
the top of a retaining wall, situated within three feet horizontally from
the face of the retaining wall, shall be measured from the bottom at the
grade immediately adjacent to the base of the fence or wall.
C.
§ 90-2 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 90-2
73:233
separates, divides or defines a lot or portion thereof "Wall" does not include
a stockade type of fence.
WALL, FREESTANDING — A wall which is not a retaining wall.
WALL, RETAINING — A wall designed to retain or resist the lateral
displacement of earth or other materials, whether or not it serves to enclose
or subdivide any part of the lot in which it is located. This chapter does
not establish standards for design, location, construction or maintenance of
retaining walls and does not affect any such standard as may be required by
other applicable law.
§ 90-3. Permit required.
A. For the purposes of this section, the term "fence" also includes every
type of wall, and a repair made to more than 25% of an existing fence
shall be considered a replacement. No person shall erect or install a
new fence or shall extend, enlarge, replace or substantially modify an
existing fence without having obtained a permit from the Building
Inspector.
B. An application for a permit shall be made to the Building Inspector, on
forms provided by the Building Department, and shall contain the
following information:
(1) An accurate plan showing property lines and the location of the
proposed new or modified fence on or within the applicant's
property lines and the height of the proposed new or modified
fence.
(2) The full name and address of the owner and of the applicant.
(3) A brief description of the materials to be used.
(4) Such other information as may reasonably be required by the
Building Inspector to establish compliance with all applicable
requirements.
C. The application for a permit shall be submitted for review by the
Building Inspector upon receipt of payment of such fees as may be
required by resolution of the City Council.
D. A determination by the Building Inspector which denies an application
must be made in writing and must state the reason for denial.
E. Failure of the Building Inspector, within seven business days after
receipt of a completed application and fee, to deny the application or to
make any other determination shall be deemed to be approval.
F. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
§ 90-2 RYE CODE § 90-4
73:234
§ 90-4. Front line fences.
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no fence or freestanding wall
which exceeds four feet in height shall be erected along a front division line
or anywhere on the lot within 35 feet of a front division line (measured by
the shortest distance to such line).
§ 90-5. Rear line fences in residence districts.
In all residence districts, no fence or freestanding wall which exceeds six
feet in height may be erected along a rear division line or anywhere on the
lot within 35 feet of a rear line (measured by the shortest distance to such
line).
§ 90-6. Side line fences in residence districts.
In all residence districts, no fence or freestanding wall which exceeds four
feet in height may be erected along a side division line if such fence or wall
would be situated within any part of an area of the lot that is within 35
feet of the front division line (measured by the shortest distance to such
line) or if such fence or wall would be situated within 35 feet of the right-ofway
of an abutting street. However, if the shortest distance from the front
division line to an existing residential structure is less than 35 feet, the
limitation requiring that the height of a fence or wall may not exceed four
feet extends from the front division line along the side line to the point that
is the shortest distance to the residential structure. No such fence or wall
which exceeds six feet in height may be erected along any other segment
of the side line or within 35 feet of the side line (measured by the shortest
distance to such segment).
§ 90-7. Side line fences where residential use adjoins business use.
If such fence or freestanding wall is erected near the side line of a lot being
used as a residence which abuts property in a business district being used
as a business, and if a point on the side line nearest to the building on either
the residential property or the business property is within 35 feet of the
front division line, the height of such fence or wall may not exceed four
feet for a distance from the front division line until such point and may not
exceed six feet in height beyond such point.
§ 90-8. Side line fences where residential use adjoins I-95 or I-287.
A fence or freestanding wall erected on a residence lot which abuts I-95 or
I-287 and is situated within one foot of the property line may exceed four
feet in height but may not exceed six feet in height.
§ 90-9. Fences on property with steep grade.
The height of a fence or freestanding wall may exceed four feet but may not
exceed six feet above the natural grade if it is:
§ 90-4 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 90-9
73:235
§ 90-10. Fences in business districts. [Amended 8-10-2011 by L.L.
No. 4-2011]
In all business districts, no fence or freestanding wall that exceeds six feet
in height may be erected along a rear or side division line or anywhere
on the lot within 35 feet of such line (measured by the shortest distance
to such line); except that, if the lot abuts a street, the height of a fence
or wall located within 35 feet of the line abutting a street may not exceed
four feet; and, if the lot adjoins a lot within a residence district, the height
may not exceed the height that would be allowed on the adjoining lot. The
foregoing notwithstanding, in the B-5 Interchange Office Building Districts
only, a fence or freestanding wall not to exceed six feet in height may be
erected within 35 feet of the line abutting a street.
§ 90-11. Fences or walls prohibited in all districts.
In all districts, the following are specifically prohibited:
§ 90-12. Fences and walls prohibited in all residence districts.
In all residence districts, the following are specifically prohibited:
A. On a corner lot; and
B. Within 10 feet from the property line of an abutting roadway; and
C. Situated where the average natural grade at the location of the fence or
wall is at least four feet higher than the average natural grade on the
property within six feet from the fence or wall.
A. Barbwire fences or fences using razor wire or any other material likely
to cause physical injury to persons or animals.
B. Fences or walls erected in such a manner as to inhibit or divert the
natural drainage flow or cause the blockage or damming of surface
water creating ponding.
C. Fences or walls which may create a fire hazard or other dangerous
condition or which may result in obstruction to effective fire fighting.
D. Fences or walls more than eight feet in height located anywhere on a
lot, unless permitted by a section of Chapter 197 referring to outdoor
tennis courts or other structures required for recreational activities.
A. Chain-link fences having an unfinished or jagged top edge; and chainlink
fences having the opening spaces between wires covered by fabric
sheeting or by strips of plastic or other material woven through the
open spaces. In the case of a fence constructed before the effective date
of this chapter, the requirements of this section shall apply upon the
repair or replacement of that fence or wall.
B. Temporary fences, such as snow fences or expandable and collapsible
fences, unless necessary for use on sites under construction or for snow
§ 90-9 RYE CODE § 90-12
73:236
§ 90-13. Traffic visibility across corners.
In all districts, except the Central Business District, no structure or planting
of bushes or trees shall be maintained, or shall be allowed to remain, on
any lot within 25 feet of any street corner intersection, measured in any
direction by the shortest distance to the nearest corner, at a height in excess
of three feet above curb level or so as to interfere with the visibility of
vehicle traffic across the corner.
§ 90-14. Fence posts or supporting members.
In all districts, a fence or wall shall be erected with the smooth, finished
or better side facing out toward the adjoining lot or abutting street; and
all fence posts or supporting members shall be placed on the inside of the
fence or wall. In the case of a fence or wall constructed before the effective
date of this chapter, the requirements of this section shall apply upon the
repair or replacement of that fence or wall.
§ 90-15. Responsibility for maintenance.
Fences, walls and the area between their exterior side and the nearest
property line (or the nearest curbline if there is an abutting street) shall
be properly maintained at all times; broken, cracked, rotted or rusted
structural components shall be removed or repaired promptly; grounds
shall be kept clear or planted with vegetation appropriate to the site. A
property owner who fails to provide proper maintenance may, after notice
by the Building Inspector and an opportunity to correct the situation, be
required to remove the fence or wall.
§ 90-16. Duty of Building Inspector to issue notice of violation.
The Building Inspector shall have the duty and all power necessary to issue
appropriate notices or orders directing a property owner to correct any
conditions which are in violation of this chapter.
§ 90-17. Jurisdiction of Board of Appeals.
The Board of Appeals, acting pursuant to Chapter 197, is specifically vested
with the additional jurisdiction necessary to hear and decide appeals by
persons who may be aggrieved by a determination made by the Building
Inspector in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 90-18. Persons eligible to appeal; time limit for filing.
For the purposes of this chapter, a person who may claim to be aggrieved
must be an owner of a lot where a fence or wall has been erected or is
sought to be erected or must be an owner or occupant of a lot which adjoins
such lot or is situated on the opposite side of a street across from such lot.
control; canvas and/or cloth fences, except when necessary for
protection of shrubs and vegetation.
§ 90-12 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT § 90-18
73:237
An appeal must be filed with the Clerk of the Board within 30 days after the
determination being appealed was made.
§ 90-19. Standard for review of appeals.
The standard that shall be used by the Board of Appeals in determining
appeals made pursuant to this chapter shall be the most restrictive standard
generally applicable in the State of New York for the granting of a variance
from enforcement of provisions of a zoning ordinance limiting the height of
structures located in a residential district. In making a determination on an
appeal, the Board may consider the unusual amount of automobile traffic on
a street adjoining a residence lot as being a relevant factor. Any roadway
designed with four lanes for use by vehicles is presumed to have an unusual
amount of traffic.
§ 90-20. Rules or regulations for administration of provisions.
The Board of Appeals is authorized to adopt and issue such rules or
regulations as may be necessary for orderly administration of this chapter.
A copy shall be on file in the Building Inspector's office.
Chapter 92
(RESERVED)
Chapter 93
FILMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 197.
§ 93-1. Intent.
It is the intent of the City to encourage, but not solicit, producers and others
within the mass communications industries, including filming, television,
advertising and commercial photography, to make use of the City and its
environs as a setting for motion-picture films, television shows, commercials
and photographs, but only insofar as such use is at all times compatible, and
does not unduly interfere, with the lifestyles and day-to-day activities of the
City's citizens and merchants.
§ 93-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words and
their derivations shall have the following meanings given herein:
§ 90-18 RYE CODE § 93-2
92:238
FILMING — The recording on film or other medium of movies, commercials,
documentaries, serials, shows, performances or other similar events or
activities, including still photography, but not to include the coverage of
news, political, cultural, local sports or school district events.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any realty or personalty or interest therein owned by
the City of Rye, including all streets, parks and public places, lands, lands
underwater, waterfront property, and every estate, interest and right, legal
or equitable, therein.
§ 93-3. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall commence filming in the City of Rye
on public or private property, unless the filming whereon the same is to
be conducted, maintained or operated is licensed in the manner prescribed
herein.
§ 93-4. Application for license; issuance; expiration.
The license prescribed by this chapter shall be issued by the City Clerk.
Application shall be made on a form containing such information as may be
determined by the City Clerk, and shall be accompanied by the production
schedule, schedule and description of all dangerous activities and use of
explosives, and list of all vehicles and their license plate numbers to include
both the applicant's vehicles and vehicles of the applicant's personnel. Each
license shall expire on the date set forth on the license.
§ 93-5. Approval by City Manager.
No license shall be issued by the City Clerk until the application has been
approved by the City Manager or his or her designated agent, subject to the
following:
A. If private property is involved, the City Manager shall not approve the
application unless the filming will be consistent with the limits for such
accessory use set forth in Chapter 197 of this Code or a special
exception has been approved by the Board of Appeals pursuant to
§ 197-82L of this Code.
B. In his or her approval of the application, the City Manager or his or her
designated agent shall specifically fix the days and hours of filming.
C. In his or her approval of the application, the City Manager or his or her
designated agent shall specifically fix the filming location or locations.
D. The City Manager or his or her designated agent may deny any
application or limit any license which, in his or her judgment, would
conflict with other scheduled events in the area of the filming location,
would be detrimental to the community because of anticipated
excessive noise, illumination or other effect caused by the proposed
filming, including but not limited to the use of explosives, or would
§ 93-2 (RESERVED) § 93-5
92:239
§ 93-6. License fee.
The fee to be paid shall be determined by the City Clerk for each license,
including a license for a portion of a day, as follows:
unduly interfere for an extended period of time with the day-to-day
activities of citizens, property owners or merchants.
E. Any change in the license holder's planned activities shall be submitted
to the City Manager or his or her designated agent in advance of the
change and approved or denied in the same manner as the original
license application.
A. License fee for use of public property. The minimum and the maximum
fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council. The City Clerk, in
determining the specific fee to be required, shall take into
consideration the following factors which would denote a greater use of
public property and therefore require higher fees: [Amended
12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 10-2000; 3-30-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
(1) Use of public parking spaces.
(2) Use of vehicle travelways requiring the rerouting or directing of
traffic.
(3) Use of pedestrian travelways requiring the rerouting or directing of
pedestrian traffic.
(4) Use of public buildings during normal operating hours.
(5) Use of other public areas during normal operating hours.
(6) The size of the filming location.
(7) The number of filming locations.
(8) The number of hours the filming location or locations will be used.
(9) Use or involvement of City personnel.
(10) Use or involvement of City equipment.
(11) Use of explosives.
(12) Involvement of dangerous activities.
B. License fee for use of private property. The fee for filming on private
property shall be set by resolution of the City Council. [Amended
2-15-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989; 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 12-1998;
12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 10-2000; 12-18-2002 by L.L. No. 10-2002;
3-30-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
§ 93-5 RYE CODE § 93-6
92:240
§ 93-7. Suspension or revocation of license.
§ 93-8. Restrictions and requirements. [Amended 2-15-1989 by L.L.
No. 2-1989]
C. In the event that a license issued pursuant to this chapter is suspended
or revoked in accordance with the provisions of § 93-7 of this chapter,
the applicant shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the fee.
A. The City Clerk, on his own initiative or upon notice from any public
official of the City, is empowered to suspend or revoke, upon written
notice, a license issued pursuant to this chapter for any of the following
reasons:
(1) Violation by the licensee of any law or ordinance or any rule or
regulation of any agency of the state, county or City, pertaining to
the filming at the licensed location.
(2) Conviction of a felony.
(3) Licensee has permitted disorderly conduct at the licensed location
or conduct detrimental to health and safety of others or
constituting a breach of the public place.
(4) Abrogation of any agreement, written or oral, between the licensee
and the City Clerk or any other public official of the City.
B. Revocation of a license pursuant to the above conditions shall bar such
offender from applying for a new license within one year from the date
of revocation. [Added 2-15-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989]
A. The applicant must give notice to residents within 500 feet of the
proposed filming location pursuant to regulations promulgated by the
City Manager.
B. Noise shall be limited in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 133
of this Code.
C. Routing of traffic shall be subject to the same provisions as excavations
in § 167-13 of this Code.
D. The filming shall be conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire
stations and fire hydrants. Equipment, materials or obstructions shall
not be placed within 15 feet of fire hydrants. Passageways leading to
fire escapes or fire-fighting equipment shall be kept free of equipment,
materials or obstructions. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be
kept free of equipment, materials or obstructions.
E. A filming permit granted for private property shall confine such filming
to that property, including the storing of all equipment and vehicles.
F. Applications for a filming permit must be submitted five days prior to
the first date of filming.
§ 93-6 (RESERVED) § 93-9
92:241
§ 93-9. Insurance and bond.
The license shall not be issued until the applicant shall furnish a policy
of insurance in such amount as shall be fixed by the City Manager or his
designated agent and, in any event, in an amount not less than $1,000,000
indemnifying and saving harmless the City of Rye, its officers, agents and
employees from and against any claim, loss or damage resulting from
the filming operations permitted under this license in the City of Rye
and for the payment of all damages for bodily injury or property damage
which may be caused to any person by reason of the filming operations
performed under the license and arising from any acts or omissions of
the licensee, his agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors and/
or, on public property, a bond in the amount of not less than $1,000,000
for such purposes. The policy and/or bond shall be approved as to form
and sufficiency by the Corporation Counsel and filed with the City Clerk.
In addition, the applicant must produce certificates of insurance showing
adequate liability insurance in the applicant's name. Such certificates shall
also be approved by the Corporation Counsel. Further, the City Manager or
his designated agent may require the posting of a bond in an appropriate
case to insure restoration of the filming location.
§ 93-10. Hearings.
Any person affected by the fee required by the City Clerk pursuant to § 93-6
of this chapter, or the suspension or revocation of a license pursuant to
§ 93-6 of this chapter, may request and shall be granted a hearing before
the City Manager or his designated agent, provided that such person shall
file in the office of the City Manager or his designated agent a written
request for such hearing 10 days after being advised of the license fee
by the City Clerk or receiving notice of a suspension or revocation from
the City Clerk, setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. The
City Manager or his designated agent shall set a time and place for such
hearing within 30 days after the date on which the request was filed. After
a hearing and in consideration of the evidence presented, the City Manager
or his designated agent shall sustain or modify the fee, or in the case of
suspension or revocation of the license, sustain, modify or withdraw such
suspension or revocation.
§ 93-11. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the City Manager or his designated
agent in connection with the denial of an application for a filming license
may take an appeal therefrom to the duly constituted Board of Appeals of
the City of Rye for review, in the same procedural manner as is provided for
zoning appeals, and such Board of Appeals, after proceeding in the same
manner as is provided for zoning appeals and with the same power and
authority therein vested in passing on appeals before it under the provisions
of law and Chapter 197 of this Code and in the exercise thereof, may
reverse, modify or affirm the action of the City Manager or his designated
§ 93-9 RYE CODE § 93-11
92:242
agent upon a finding that the action of the City Manager or his designated
agent was arbitrary, capricious or not supported by substantial evidence.
§ 93-12. Penalties for offenses; additional remedies.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or fail, neglect or refuse
to comply with any provision of this chapter or any rule or determination
made thereunder, or who shall undertake filming in the City of Rye without
a license issued hereunder, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine of not more than $250, or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days,
or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense. Said prosecution and/or conviction shall
not be a bar to a civil action to recover a civil penalty in like amount, nor
shall either be a bar to a civil action by the City or an injured person for
actual damages.
§ 93-13. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the City Clerk.
Chapter 95
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 141.
§ 95-1. Discharge prohibited without permit.
In the interest and protection of the inhabitants of the city, the willful
discharge of firearms therein is prohibited unless an application is first
submitted to and approved by the Chief of Police and a written permit
issued thereupon by him.
§ 95-2. Use of terms.
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "firearms" as used herein is
described as any weapon which expels the charge by the combustion of
powder or any other explosive and includes a pistol, revolver, gun or rifle.
§ 95-3. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to sheriffs, policemen or other duly appointed
peace officers in the discharge of their official duties, nor to the members
of duly authorized military or civil organizations in the discharge of their
duties as such, nor to the discharge of firearms in self-defense.
§ 93-11 FIREARMS § 95-4
95:243
§ 95-4. Penalties for offenses.
The penalty for the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be that
defined and described in Article II, Chapter 1, of the Code of the City of Rye.
Chapter 98
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 46.
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 71.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 81.
Housing standards — See Ch. 108.
§ 95-4 RYE CODE § 95-4
95:244
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 98-1. Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to prescribe regulations, consistent with
nationally recognized good practice, for the safeguarding to a reasonable
degree of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising
from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials
and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use
or occupancy of buildings or premises. Compliance with standards of the
National Board of Fire Underwriters or other approved nationally
recognized safety standards shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of
compliance with this intent.
§ 98-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to new and existing
conditions, except that, unless otherwise required, existing conditions not
in strict compliance with the terms of this chapter shall be permitted to
continue where the exceptions do not constitute a distinct hazard to life or
property in the opinion of the Fire Inspector.
§ 98-3. Compliance with nationally recognized good practice.
All matters within the intent of this chapter not covered in detail by this
chapter shall comply with nationally recognized good practice. Compliance
at any time with the most recent provisions of the Fire Prevention Code
recommended by the National Board of Fire Underwriters shall be deemed
to be prima facie evidence of compliance with nationally recognized good
practice.
§ 98-4. Board of Fire Wardens; Fire Inspector. [Amended 9-12-2012
by L.L. No. 5-2012]
It shall be the responsibility of the Board of Fire Wardens, in conjunction
with the City Manager, to administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. There is hereby created in and for the City of Rye the Bureau
of Fire Protection, the head of which shall be a Lieutenant, whose duties,
among other things, shall include the responsibility for fire inspections
within the City. Such office shall be subject to the supervision and direction
of the Board of Fire Wardens in conjunction with the City Manager. Subject
to the Civil Service Law and Rules and Regulations, the Board of Fire
Wardens, in conjunction with the City Manager, and with the approval of
the Council, shall appoint such Lieutenant. Such person so appointed shall
be qualified to assume the duties and responsibilities of such office or
shall, within the time prescribed by law, qualify to do so. Such appointee
or appointees shall receive such annual salary as the Council shall fix and
determine.
§ 98-1 FIREARMS § 98-5
95:245
§ 98-5. Right of entry.
The Board of Fire Wardens, Chief of the Fire Department, Fire Inspector
or any other inspector designated by the Council or said Board may, at all
reasonable hours, enter any building or premises for the purpose of making
any inspection or investigation which, under the provisions of this chapter,
he or they may deem necessary to be made.
§ 98-6. Inspection of buildings and premises.
It shall be the duty of the Board of Fire Wardens, or any other board or
person designated by the Council, to inspect or cause to be inspected all
buildings and premises as often as may be necessary for the purpose of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire
or endanger life from fire or any violations of the provisions or intent of this
chapter and of any other ordinance affecting the fire hazard.
§ 98-7. Elimination of dangerous conditions.
Whenever the Board of Fire Wardens, Chief of the Fire Department, Fire
Inspector or any other inspector designated by the Council or said Board
shall find in any building or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous
conditions or materials as follows, he or they shall order such dangerous
conditions or materials to be removed or remedied in such manner as he or
they may specify:
A. Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible, explosive or otherwise
hazardous materials.
B. Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed
equipment for handling or using combustible, explosive or otherwise
hazardous materials.
C. Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, wastepaper, boxes, shavings or
other highly flammable materials.
D. Accumulations of dust or waste material in air-conditioning or
ventilating systems or of grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts.
E. Obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or
windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the Fire Department
or egress of occupants in case of fire.
F. Any building or other structure which, for want of repairs, lack of
sufficient fire escapes or other exit facilities, automatic or other fire
alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or
dilapidated condition, or from any other cause, constitutes a hazardous
condition.
§ 98-5 RYE CODE § 98-8
95:246
§ 98-8. Service of orders.
The service of orders for the correction of violations of this chapter shall
be made upon an owner, occupant or other person responsible for the
conditions, either by delivering a copy of the same to such person or by
delivering the same to and leaving it with any person in charge of the
premises, or in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing
a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the
said premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon
the owner of the premises, such order may be served either by delivering to
and leaving with the said person a copy of the said order or, if such owner is
absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by sending such
copy by registered or certified mail to the owner's last known post office
address.
§ 98-9. Permits.
§ 98-10. Revocation of permit.
The Council, Board of Fire Wardens, Chief of the Fire Department or Fire
Inspector may revoke a permit or approval issued if any violation of this
chapter is found upon inspection or in case there has been any false
statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application
or plans on which a permit or approval was based, or upon failure of a
permittee to comply with any stated condition of any permit.
A. Whenever a permit is required hereunder and unless otherwise
provided, same shall be issued by the City Clerk upon approval of the
Fire Inspector, who, prior to the issuance of any permit, shall make or
cause to be made such inspections or tests as may be necessary to
ensure that the requirements of this chapter will be met.
B. Written application shall be made for any permit required hereunder
and shall be in such form and shall contain such information as the City
Manager from time to time by rule or regulation may require.
C. An inspection fee of $5 shall be paid to the City Clerk simultaneously
with the filing of any application for a permit hereunder, except where a
different fee is specified.
D. A permit shall constitute a permission to maintain, store or handle
materials or to conduct processes which produce conditions hazardous
to life or property, or to install equipment used in connection with such
activities. Such permit does not take the place of any license required
by law. It shall not be transferable, and any change in use or occupancy
of premises shall require a new permit.
E. The City Clerk shall furnish the Fire Inspector with a copy of each of
such permits issued.
§ 98-8 FIREARMS § 98-11
95:247
§ 98-11. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section:
APPROVED — Accepted by the Board of Fire Wardens, Chief of the Fire
Department and Fire Inspector as a result of their investigation and
experience or by reason of test, listing or approval by Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., the National Bureau of Standards, the American Gas
Association Laboratories or other nationally recognized testing agencies.
AUTOMATIC FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — A system which automatically
detects a fire condition and actuates a fire alarm signal device.
BOARD OF FIRE WARDENS — Board of Fire Wardens of the Fire
Department of the City of Rye.
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING — The time in hours that a material or
construction will withstand a standard fire exposure as determined by a fire
test made in conformity with the Standard Method of Fire Tests of Building
Construction and Materials of the American Society for Testing Materials,
ASTM E119.
ICC CONTAINER — Any container approved by the Interstate Commerce
Commission for shipping any liquid, gaseous or solid material of a
flammable, toxic or other hazardous nature.
MERCANTILE OCCUPANCY — The occupancy or use of a building or
structure or any portion thereof for the displaying, selling or buying of
goods, wares or merchandise, except when classed as a high-hazard
occupancy.
OWNER — Includes his duly authorized agent or attorney, a purchaser,
devisee, fiduciary and a person having a vested or contingent interest in the
property in question.
PERSON — Includes corporation, association and copartnership as well as
an individual.
§ 98-12. Liability for damages.
This chapter shall not be construed to hold the municipality responsible for
any injury to persons or damage to property by reason of the inspection or
reinspection authorized herein, failure to inspect or reinspect, the issuance
of any permit herein provided or by reason of the approval or disapproval of
any equipment authorized herein.
§ 98-11 RYE CODE § 98-12
95:248
ARTICLE II
Bowling Alleys
§ 98-13. Conformity required.
Bowling alleys shall conform to all other applicable requirements of this
chapter as well as the following provisions.
§ 98-14. Permit required. [Amended 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984]
A permit shall be required for bowling pin refinishing and bowling alley
resurfacing operations involving the use and application of flammable
liquids or materials. Applications for such permit shall be accompanied
by an inspection and permit fee of $50. Each such permit or renewal
thereof shall expire on December 31 next following its issuance and may
be renewed for a period of one year from the date of expiration after
application therefor and payment of the permit fee.
§ 98-15. Lane resurfacing operations.
Resurfacing operations shall not be carried on while the establishment
is open for business. The Fire Inspector shall be notified when bowling
lanes are to be resurfaced. Proper ventilation shall be provided. Heating,
ventilation or cooling systems employing recirculation of air shall not be
operated during resurfacing operations or within one hour following the
application of flammable finishes. All electric motors or other equipment
in the area which might be a source of ignition shall be shut down, and
all smoking and use of open flames prohibited during the application of
flammable finishes and for one hour thereafter.
§ 98-16. Pin refinishing.
A. Pin refinishing involving the application of flammable finishes shall be
done only in a special room meeting the requirements of § 98-60; such
room shall not be located below grade nor shall it have communication
with any pits, wells, pockets or basements.
B. Storage of flammable liquids in such rooms shall not exceed a combined
aggregate of 60 gallons in original metal containers or in approved
safety containers not exceeding five gallons' individual capacity. A
metal waste can with self-closing cover shall be provided for all waste
materials and rags; contents shall be removed daily. Smoking shall be
prohibited at all times in refinishing rooms.
§ 98-13 FIREARMS § 98-16
95:249

ARTICLE III
Cellulose Nitrate Motion-Picture Film
§ 98-17. Scope.
This article applies to the storage and handling of cellulose nitrate motionpicture
film, hereafter referred to as "nitrate film." Film having a cellulose
acetate or other approved slow-burning base, marked "safety film," is
exempt from these provisions.
§ 98-18. Permit required.
§ 98-19. Enclosures for projectors.
A. No person shall store, keep or have on hand more than 25 pounds (for
thirty-five millimeter film, about 5,000 feet) of nitrate motion-picture
film without a permit.
B. No person shall sell, lease or otherwise dispose of any nitrate motionpicture
firm to any person not having a permit to handle, use or display
such film.
A. Motion-picture projectors shall not be operated with cellulose nitrate
motion-picture film except when located in approved enclosures having
all projection openings protected with approved gravity shutters and
ventilated in accordance with the requirements of Subsections B, C and
D of this section.
B. Ventilation shall be provided by one or more mechanical exhaust
systems which shall draw air from each arc lamp housing and from one
or more points near the ceiling. Systems shall exhaust to outdoors
either directly or through a noncombustible flue used for no other
purpose. Exhaust capacity shall not be less than 15 nor more than 50
cubic feet per minute for each arc lamp housing plus 200 cubic feet per
minute for the room itself. Systems shall be controlled from within the
enclosure and have pilot lights to indicate operation. An exhaust system
serving a projection room may be extended to cover rooms associated
therewith, such as rewind rooms. No dampers shall be installed in such
exhaust systems. Ventilation of these rooms shall not be connected in
any way with ventilating or air-conditioning systems serving other
portions of the building.
C. Exhaust ducts shall be of noncombustible material and shall be kept one
inch from combustible material or be covered with 1/2 inch of
noncombustible heat insulating material.
D. Fresh-air intakes other than those directly from the open air shall be
protected by approved fire shutters arranged to operate automatically
with the port shutters.
§ 98-17 FIREARMS § 98-19
95:251
§ 98-20. Handling nitrate film used in projection.
E. Provision shall be made so that auditorium lights can be turned on from
the inside of the projection room and from at least one other convenient
point in the building.
A. Rewinding of nitrate films shall be performed either in a special rewind
room at an approved location or in a projection room. An approved can
for scrap film having a self-closing hinged cover shall be provided.
B. Nitrate film in any projection room or rewinding room shall be kept as
follows:
(1) Up to 40 pounds of film (8,000 feet of thirty-five millimeter film)
may be kept in ICC shipping containers or approved cabinet in each
room.
(2) If the amount of film on hand exceeds 40 pounds, an approved
cabinet shall be provided in which the amount of film in excess of
40 pounds shall be kept.
§ 98-19 RYE CODE § 98-20
95:252
ARTICLE IV
Dry-Cleaning Plants
§ 98-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRY CLEANING — The process of removing dirt, grease, paints and other
stains from wearing apparel, textiles, fabrics, rugs, etc., by the use of
nonaqueous liquid solvents, flammable or nonflammable, and includes the
process of dyeing clothes or other fabrics or textiles in a solution of dye
colors and nonaqueous liquid solvents.
RATED — As applied to solvents, means classified as to fire hazard in
accordance with Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., standard of
classification.
§ 98-22. Permit required. [Amended 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984]
§ 98-23. Classification of systems.
Dry-cleaning systems shall be classified as follows:
A. No person shall engage in the business of dry cleaning without a
permit, which shall prescribe the class of system to be used. Application
for such permit shall be accompanied by an inspection and permit fee to
be set annually by resolution of the City Council before adoption of the
budget for the following year. Each such permit or renewal thereof shall
expire on December 31 next following its issuance and may be renewed
for a period of one year from the date of expiration after application
therefor and payment of the permit fee. [Amended 12-20-2000 by
L.L. No. 11-2000]
B. No change shall be made in a solvent used in the equipment to a solvent
in a more hazardous class unless permission for such change shall first
have been obtained from the Fire Inspector.
A. Class I systems shall be those utilizing solvents rated above 40,
including naphtha having a flash point of 50º F.
B. Class II systems shall be those utilizing solvents rated 40 or below but
which do not comply with Class III or Class IV requirements, including
Stoddard solvent.
C. Class III systems shall be those employing equipment listed by
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., as utilizing solvents having specified
characteristics and rated at 25 or below, including solvents having a
flash point of 140º F.
D. Class IV systems shall be those utilizing solvents rated as nonflammable
or as nonflammable at ordinary temperatures and only moderately
§ 98-21 FIREARMS § 98-23
95:253
§ 98-24. Class I systems.
§ 98-25. Class II systems.
flammable at higher temperatures, rated not over five, including carbon
tetrachloride and perchlorethylene.
A. New dry-cleaning plants or systems utilizing solvents rated above 40
shall be prohibited.
B. Existing dry-cleaning plants or systems utilizing solvents rated above
40 may be continued in use, provided the quantity of cleaning solvent
rated above 40 that is stored and handled is not increased.
A. Class II systems shall be located in buildings having walls of masonry or
noncombustible construction and wall finish shall be plain or plastered
without furring or concealed spaces. Floors of dry-cleaning sections
shall be of fire-resistive construction and without pits, wells or pockets;
and where located over a basement, floor shall be vapor- and liquidtight.
Roof and floors above grade floor, if of combustible construction,
shall have the ceilings over the dry-cleaning areas protected by cement
or gypsum plaster on metal lath or equivalent construction having a
fire-resistance rating of not less than one hour. Dry-cleaning buildings
shall not be closer than 10 feet to the line of adjoining property, except
that if exposing walls are equivalent to twelve-inch brick construction
without openings, the building may be located on the property line.
B. Dry-cleaning operations shall be restricted to the lowest floor of a
building, but shall not be located on any floor below grade nor in the
same building with other occupancies. Operations incidental to the drycleaning
business, such as laundering, pressing and ironing, may be in
a communicating building or located on the same floor with the drycleaning
plant, provided the dry-cleaning operations are separated
therefrom by partitions having a fire-resistance rating of not less than
two hours and the communicating openings are protected by fire doors
approved for such openings.
C. Door openings on stairs or elevators leading from a dry-cleaning area to
a basement, or opening into a room having openings or stairs to
basements, shall be provided with noncombustible sills or ramps raised
at least six inches. Approved self-closing fire doors shall be provided at
such openings. Enclosures shall be of construction equivalent to the
floor construction but having a fire-resistance rating of not less than
one hour.
D. Rooms in which articles are hung up to dry shall be constructed with
walls, partitions and ceilings having a fire-resistance rating of not less
than two hours. Entrances to drying rooms shall be provided with
approved self-closing fire doors. If the drying room is in a separate
building, it shall conform in all respects to the provisions for a drycleaning
building.
§ 98-23 RYE CODE § 98-25
95:254
§ 98-26. Class III systems.
Class III systems, if located in the same building with other occupancies,
shall be separated from the remainder of the building vertically and
horizontally by construction having a fire-resistance rating of not less than
one hour with openings protected by approved fire doors, except that such
separation shall not be required for operations incidental to or in connection
with the dry-cleaning business, such as laundering, scouring, scrubbing,
drying, pressing or ironing, and the requirement for such separation may
be waived in the discretion of the Board of Fire Wardens, Chief of the Fire
Department or Fire Inspector, based upon a consideration of such factors as
type of building construction, nature of occupancy, storage and operating
capacity of the system and extent of private fire protection provided.
§ 98-27. Class IV systems.
Class IV systems shall be subject to the requirement for permit in § 98-22
but shall be exempt from all other provisions of this article.
§ 98-28. Heating equipment.
E. A mechanical system of ventilation shall be installed in dry-cleaning
areas and drying rooms. Such system shall have sufficient capacity to
ensure complete and continuous change of air once every six minutes
and shall be provided with means for remote control. The system shall
operate automatically when any dry-cleaning equipment is in use.
A. Where Class II systems are used, heating shall be by steam or hot water
only. Where Class III systems are used, heating shall be by any
approved means which does not involve any open flame or ignition
source in the dry-cleaning area. Steam and hot water pipes and
radiators for heating and drying purposes shall be at least one inch
from all woodwork and shall be protected by substantial metal screens
arranged so as to prevent combustible goods or materials from coming
in contact with pipes and radiators.
B. Boilers shall be located in a detached building or in a boiler room cut off
from the dry-cleaning room. For Class II systems this cutoff shall be by a
fire wall without openings. Openings into such boiler rooms shall be at
least 10 feet from any exterior openings into a cleaning room. For Class
III systems this cutoff shall be by a partition of noncombustible material
without openings, having a fire-resistance rating of not less than two
hours.
§ 98-25 FIREARMS § 98-28
95:255

ARTICLE V
Coin-Operated Dry-Cleaning Establishments
§ 98-29. Permit required. [Amended 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984;
12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 11-2000]
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate a coinoperated
dry-cleaning establishment in the City of Rye without a permit
therefor. Application for such permit shall be accompanied by an inspection
and permit fee to be set annually by resolution of the City Council before
adoption of the budget for the following year. Each such permit or renewal
thereof shall expire on December 31 next following its issuance and may
be renewed for a period of one year from the date of expiration after
application therefor and payment of the permit fee.
§ 98-30. Unauthorized premises.
No permit shall be issued for a coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment in
any building occupied in part as a dwelling.
§ 98-31. Attendant required.
No coin-operated dry-cleaning machine shall be used by the general public
unless under the continued direct supervision of an employee or owner of
the coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment who is competent to supervise
the operation of such machine.
§ 98-32. Departmental approval.
All coin-operated dry-cleaning machines and locations must be approved by
the Building Inspector and Fire Inspector prior to the operation of a coinoperated
dry-cleaning establishment for public use. A floor plan showing the
business premises and the location, type and manner of installation of all
equipment shall be submitted with each permit application.
§ 98-33. Operating restrictions.
A. No coin-operated dry-cleaning machine shall be used by any person
who is less than 16 years of age. A suitable sign indicating such age
restriction must be prominently posted and maintained on the
premises.
B. Each coin-operated dry-cleaning machine shall be fitted with a device
which will prevent the opening of the door of such machine while it is in
operation and until all solvent vapors have been removed from any
textile, fabric, garment or other article and from the drum in which the
same shall be placed.
C. In the event that perchlorethylene or any chlorinated hydrocarbon is a
component part of any solvent used in a coin-operated dry-cleaning
machine, then such machine shall not be used if the odor of
§ 98-29 FIREARMS § 98-33
95:257
perclflorethylene or any chlorinated hydrocarbon is masked or altered
in any fashion, or if the concentration of solvent vapor of such
perchlorethylene or chlorinated hydrocarbon is greater than 40 parts
of such vapor to 1,000,000 parts of air at any time and anywhere in the
establishment where such machines are in use.
D. In any coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment, solvent storage tanks,
power boxes and other sources of danger shall be so situated as to be
inaccessible to the general public.
E. Spotting operations utilizing flammable or toxic liquids shall not be
permitted on the premises.
F. Only the front or customer side of dry-cleaning machines shall be
exposed in the customer area. The working or maintenance portion of
the equipment shall be separated from the front of such machines by a
solid partition. Access doors to the enclosure back of the machines shall
be kept closed and locked. The enclosure for the dry-cleaning machines
shall not be a part of or interconnected with those areas that contain
heating devices requiring air for combustion, such as dryers, water
heaters and boilers.
G. An exhaust system shall be provided for the removal of toxic vapors.
This exhaust system consists of the individual exhaust on each drycleaning
machine, scavenger ducts strategically located, fan for the
enclosure behind such machines and the front grill or loading door air
intake on each machine.
H. The exhaust system for dry-cleaning machines as described above shall
be operated continuously while the premises are open to the public.
This system shall be interlocked with the dry-cleaning machines so that
the latter cannot be operated without actuating the exhaust system.
Each machine shall be provided with an exhaust which shall terminate
above the roof of the premises and at least 25 feet from any window or
ventilation opening. In addition, a scavenger duct shall be provided for
each two machines to pick up vapors surrounding the equipment near
the floor. The suction of these scavenger pipes should be located two to
four inches above the floor. A general ventilation fan shall also be
installed within the rear enclosure of such machines, to be used in case
of serious solvent spill. Each such machine shall be designed so that
when the machine is not in operation air is drawn through the front
door or grill of the machine at a face velocity of at least 100 feet per
minute.
I. Provision must be made for the makeup air to compensate for that
which is exhausted to the outside.
J. Such dry-cleaning machines shall be provided with some satisfactory
means to salvage the solvent resulting from a spill due to an accident or
failure of equipment, such as by diking the entire system with a curb on
the floor which will contain the solvent and drain it to an underground
tank where it can be recovered. When an underground tank is not
§ 98-33 RYE CODE § 98-33
95:258
§ 98-34. Instruction to public.
feasible, the curbed area shall be provided with a sump pump that will
pump the solvent to an aboveground tank.
K. All coin-operated dry-cleaning establishments shall have two exits
which shall be at least 25 feet apart from each other and shall lead
directly to the outside.
L. Filter residue and other residues containing solvent shall be disposed of
so as not to create a health hazard or nuisance. A locked, covered metal
container shall be used for temporary storage outside the building.
M. All direct equipment exhausts or vents shall be provided with mesh lint
arrestors which shall be kept clean unless lint traps are provided on the
dry-cleaning unit.
N. No coin-operated dry-cleaning machine may be located within 25 feet of
any gas-fired dryer or similar gas-fired device.
O. Each coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment shall be provided with a
portable fire extinguisher approved by the Board of Fire Wardens, Chief
of the Fire Department or Fire Inspector.
A. All coin-operated dry-cleaning establishments shall prominently display
lighted indoor signs warning the general public of the danger of
excessive solvent vapor inhalation and skin irritation from
unevaporated dry-cleaning solvent.
B. A step-by-step instruction list must be posted in a conspicuous location
near each machine for customer use. A telephone number must be
listed for emergency assistance.
C. All machines shall be checked daily and kept in good repair by the
permittee. All maintenance personnel shall be familiar with all
necessary machinery repairs and instructed as to the solvent hazards.
D. Only the solvent specified by the equipment manufacturer shall be
used.
E. Coin-operated dry-cleaning establishments shall utilize only solvents
classified as nonflammable at ordinary temperatures.
§ 98-33 FIREARMS § 98-34
95:259

ARTICLE VI
Coin-Operated Laundry Establishments
§ 98-35. Definition.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, when used in this article the words
"coin-operated laundry establishment" shall include a self-service place
used by the general public for the purpose of washing or drying clothing or
other fabrics.
§ 98-36. Permit required. [Amended 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984;
12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 11-2000]
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate a coinoperated
laundry establishment without a permit therefor. Application for
such permit shall be accompanied by an inspection and permit fee to be set
annually by resolution of the City Council before adoption of the budget for
the following year.
§ 98-37. Exemption.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to coin-operated laundry
establishments in residential buildings, except that this exemption shall not
apply to store units in buildings occupied in part for residential purposes.
§ 98-38. Safety and sanitary regulations.
A. Washers and dryers shall be so constructed that they will cease to
function when the door is opened. Installations shall be so designed as
to prevent entrance to the rear of the washers and dryers by
unauthorized people. Washers and dryers shall be installed in
accordance with nationally recognized good practice. Compliance with
the provisions of the standards of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters, known as the "National Electrical Code," shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of compliance with this section. Provision
shall also be made so that in case of a blower motor or gas control
failure, the dryer must shut off automatically.
B. Boiler must be provided with a low-water cutoff device to protect the
boiler from burning out should a low-water condition occur.
C. The platform for washers shall be so designed that any water spilling
out of a washer shall be drained off on the platform itself. The floor of
the store shall be sufficiently and properly covered with a nonabsorbent
paint or cement or other impervious material. Areas such as basements,
offices, storage places and closets shall have locked doors.
D. Store layout, design and lighting shall be so planned as to provide
visibility of the complete interior of the store from the street or
sidewalk. The store shall be adequately ventilated and shall have a
sufficient amount of natural or artificial light, as shall be required by
§ 98-35 FIREARMS § 98-38
95:261
the Building Inspector. If the store has a rear entrance from a parking
area, an outside floodlight shall be provided to satisfactorily illuminate
the area leading to the rear of the store.
E. The store shall be kept clean at all times. Refuse disposal cans must be
provided and so designed that at no time will they be uncovered.
F. A fire extinguisher, approved by the Board of Fire Wardens, Chief of the
Fire Department or Fire Inspector, shall be mounted where it shall be
accessible to patrons of the store.
§ 98-38 RYE CODE § 98-38
95:262
ARTICLE VII
Explosives
§ 98-39. Scope.
This article applies to all explosives except small-arms ammunition and
fireworks.
§ 98-40. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXPLOSIVE — Any chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term "explosive"
shall include all material which is classified as Class A, Class B or Class
C explosives by the Interstate Commerce Commission, and include but not
be limited to dynamite, black blasting powder, pellet powders, initiating
explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps, safety fuse, fuse igniters,
fuse lighters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuse, instantaneous fuse, igniter
cord and igniters.
MAGAZINE — Any building or structure approved for the storage of
explosives.
SMALL-ARMS AMMUNITION — Any shotgun, rifle, pistol or revolver
cartridges.
§ 98-41. Permit required. [Amended 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984;
12-18-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 11-2000]
The manufacture of explosives is prohibited within a municipality. A permit
shall be obtained to have, keep, use, store or transport any explosives.
Application for such permit shall be accompanied by an inspection and
permit fee to be set annually by resolution of the City Council before
adoption of the budget for the following year. Each such permit or renewal
thereof shall expire on December 31 next following its issuance and may
be renewed for a period of one year from the date of expiration after
application therefor and payment of the permit fee.
§ 98-42. Storage.
A. All storage of explosives shall be in approved explosive magazines
located at distances from neighboring buildings, highways and railways
in conformity with the American Table of Distances for Storage of
Explosives.
B. When explosives in excess of immediate requirements are removed
from a magazine and delivered in the vicinity of a blasting operation,
they shall be kept either in a portable magazine consisting of a stout
tight box covered with not less than twenty-four-gauge sheet iron and
equipped with a hinged lid or in a small portable building similarly
§ 98-39 FIREARMS § 98-42
95:263
§ 98-43. Transportation of explosives.
§ 98-44. Use of explosives.
covered. Such portable magazine shall be painted vermillion and
conspicuously marked "explosives - dangerous" in white block letters
not less than three inches in height. Portable magazines as described
in this subsection shall be located as required by the Board of Fire
Wardens, Chief of the Fire Department or Fire Inspector.
A. Blasting caps or electric blasting caps shall not be transported over the
highways of the municipality on the same vehicles with explosives.
B. Vehicles used for the transportation of explosives shall be strong
enough to carry the load without difficulty and shall be in good
mechanical condition. If vehicles do not have a closed body, the body
shall be covered with a tarpaulin or other effective protection against
moisture and sparks. Such vehicles shall have tight floors and shall
have a lining of wood or other nonsparking material which shall cover
any projections or metal which might come into contact with packages
of explosives.
C. Every vehicle while carrying explosives shall be marked or placarded
on both sides and rear with the word "explosives" in letters at least
three inches high on contrasting background, or in lieu thereof, shall
display, in such manner as to be visible from all directions, a red flag
with the word "explosives" printed, stamped or sewed thereon in white
letters at least six inches high.
D. No sparking metal, sparking metal tools, oils, matches, firearms,
electric storage batteries, flammable substances, acids, oxidizing or
corrosive compounds shall be carried in the bed or body of any vehicle
transporting explosives.
A. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to blast or carry on
any blasting operations without first having obtained a permit therefor.
The permit shall state the location for which it is approved, the date
issued, the name of the person authorized to do the blasting and such
other information as the City Manager may deem necessary. The permit
shall be good only for the one location designated therein, shall not be
transferable and shall expire not later than three months from the date
of issue. Application for such permit shall be accompanied by an
inspection fee of $5.
B. Insurance required. The permit shall not be issued until the applicant
shall furnish a policy of insurance in such amount as shall be fixed by
the City Manager, and, in any event, in an amount not less than
$10,000, indemnifying and saving harmless the City of Rye, its officers,
agents and employees from and against any claim, loss or damage
resulting from the storage or use of explosives in the City of Rye and for
the payment of all damages for bodily injury or property damage which
§ 98-42 RYE CODE § 98-44
95:264
may be caused to any person by reason of the storage and use of
explosives and arising from any acts or omissions of the permittee, his
or her agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors. Such policy
shall be approved as to form and sufficiency by the Corporation Counsel
and filed with the City Clerk.
C. Amount of explosives to be used. No person shall use in a blasting
operation a quantity of explosives greater than necessary properly to
start the rock or other substances, nor use such an amount as will
endanger persons or property. The Fire Inspector may limit the
maximum quantity of explosives to be used, but no action by the Fire
Inspector shall relieve or exempt any person or surety company from
liability for damage caused by the use of such explosives.
D. Precautions.
(1) Whenever blasting is being conducted in the vicinity of gas,
electric, water, fire alarm, telephone, telegraph or steam utilities,
the blaster shall notify the appropriate representatives of such
utilities at least 24 hours in advance of blasting, specifying the
location and intended time of such blasting. Verbal notice shall be
confirmed with written notice. In an emergency this time limit may
be waived by the Fire Inspector.
(2) Due precautions shall be taken to prevent accidental discharge of
electric blasting caps from current induced by radio or radar
transmitters, lighting, adjacent power lines, dust storms or other
sources of extraneous electricity.
(3) All blasts, before firing, shall be covered with rope or metal
matting, heavy timbers chained together or other suitable material
of sufficient size, weight and strength to prevent the escape of
broken rock or other material in a manner liable to cause injury or
damage to persons or property.
E. Flagging. No person shall fire or explode, or direct or cause to be fired
or exploded, any blast in or near any highway or public place in the City
of Rye unless competent men carrying a red flag shall have been placed
at a reasonable distance on all sides of the blast to give proper warning
thereof at least three minutes in advance of firing.
F. Times when blasting is prohibited. No person shall conduct blasting
operations within the City of Rye after the hour of 5:00 p.m. and before
9:00 a.m. nor at any hour on Saturday, Sunday or any of the following
holidays: New Year's Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day except under
authority of a special permit issued by the City Manager. [Amended
4-11-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
G. Separate magazines required. During blasting operations, explosives
shall be stored separately from igniters, and for this purpose separate
§ 98-44 FIREARMS § 98-44
95:265
receptacles shall be built or provided and placed at a reasonable
distance appoint one from the other.
§ 98-44 RYE CODE § 98-44
95:266
ARTICLE VIII
Fireworks Displays
§ 98-45. Application for permit; fee. [Amended 12-5-1983 by L.L.
No. 17-1984; 4-4-1990 by L.L. No. 9-1990; 12-18-1996 by L.L. No.
14-1996; 12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 11-2000]
All applications for each public display of fireworks made pursuant to the
provisions of the Penal Law of the State of New York shall first be referred
to the Fire Inspector and to the Police Commissioner of the City of Rye for
approval before any permit for the public display of fireworks is issued by
the City Clerk pursuant to the provisions of said Penal Law. Application for
such permit shall be accompanied by an inspection and permit fee to be set
annually by resolution of the City Council before adoption of the budget for
the following year for each display.
§ 98-45 FIREARMS § 98-45
95:267

ARTICLE IX
Fire Protection Equipment
§ 98-46. Survey of premises for equipment needs.
The Fire Inspector or any other inspector designated by the Council or
the Board of Fire Wardens shall survey each commercial and industrial
establishment, mercantile, educational and institutional occupancy, place
of assembly, hotel and multifamily house and shall specify suitable fire
detecting devices or extinguishing appliances which shall be provided in or
near boiler rooms, kitchens of restaurants, clubs and like establishments,
storage rooms involving considerable combustible material, rooms in which
hazardous manufacturing processes are involved, repair garages and other
places of a generally hazardous nature. Such devices or appliances may
consist of automatic fire alarm systems, automatic sprinkler or water spray
systems, standpipe and hose, fixed or portable fire extinguishers of a type
suitable for the probable class of fire, suitable asbestos blankets, manual
or automatic covers or carbon dioxide or other special fire extinguishing
systems. In specially hazardous processes or storage, appliances of more
than one type or special systems may be required.
§ 98-47. Maintenance of equipment.
Sprinkler systems, standpipe systems, fire alarm systems and other fire
protective or extinguishing systems or appliances which have been installed
in compliance with any permit or order or because of any law or ordinance
shall be maintained in operative condition at all times, and it shall be
unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the
protection so required; except this shall not prohibit the owner or occupant
from temporarily reducing or discontinuing the protection where necessary
to make tests, repairs, alterations or additions. The Fire Inspector shall
be notified before such tests, repairs, alterations or additions are started
unless the work is to be continuous until completion.
§ 98-48. Fire alarm or detection system.
No fire alarm or fire detection system shall be installed in a building, other
than a single-family dwelling, without a permit.
§ 98-46 FIREARMS § 98-48
95:269

ARTICLE X
Flammable Liquids
§ 98-49. Scope.
This article shall apply to the storage, handling and use of flammable liquids
as hereinafter defined, except that it shall not apply to the transportation
of flammable liquids when in conformity with Interstate Commerce
Commission regulations or with regulations lawfully on file with and
approved by the Interstate Commerce Commission.
§ 98-50. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLOSED CONTAINER — A container so sealed by means of a lid or other
device that neither liquid nor vapor will escape from it at ordinary
temperatures.
FLAMMABLE LIQUID — Any liquid having a flash point below 200º F. and
having a vapor pressure not exceeding 40 pounds per square inch (absolute)
at 100º F. "Flammable liquids" shall be divided into three classes as follows:
FLASH POINT — The minimum temperature in degrees Fahrenheit at which
a flammable liquid will give off flammable vapor as determined by
appropriate test procedure and apparatus as specified below:
§ 98-51. Permits required.
A permit shall be obtained for any of the following:
A. Class I shall include those having flash points at or below 20º F.
Class II shall include those having flash points above 20º F. but at or
below 70º F.
B.
C. Class III shall include those having flash points above 70º F.
The flash point of flammable liquids having a flash point below 175º
F. shall be determined in accordance with nationally recognized good
practice using the Tag closed tester.
A.
The flash point of flammable liquids having a flash point of 175º F. or
higher shall be determined in accordance with nationally recognized
good practice using the Pensky-Martens closed tester.
B.
A. Storage, handling or use of Class I or Class II flammable liquids in
excess of one gallon in a dwelling or other place of human habitation, or
in excess of five gallons (which must be kept in a tightly closed
container) in any other building or other occupancy, or in excess of 10
gallons outside of any building, except that no permit shall be required
for the following:
§ 98-49 FIREARMS § 98-51
95:271
§ 98-52. Storage in underground tanks.
No person shall keep or store within the City of Rye any Class I or Class
II flammable liquids in a greater quantity than five gallons, which must
be kept in a tightly closed container (exclusive of that in tanks of motor
vehicles and packaged items in service stations), except in properly
constructed underground tanks which, if within the building, shall be buried
not less than five feet below the level of the basement floor, or if without
the building and within 10 feet thereof, buried not less than two feet below
the level of the basement floor, and if more than 10 feet distant from the
building, buried not less than two feet below the surface of the ground,
and which in all cases shall be drawn from the aforesaid tanks by approved
safety pumps, and all piping shall be so arranged as to drain back to the
tank. Where the tanks cannot be buried either inside or outside the building,
they may be located in a vault of fireproof construction approved by the Fire
Inspector.
§ 98-53. Dikes and walls.
(1) For the storage or use of flammable liquids in the fuel tank of a
motor vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, mobile power plant or mobile
heating plant.
(2) For the storage or use of paints, oils, varnishes or similar
flammable mixtures when such liquids are stored for maintenance,
painting or similar purposes for a period of not more than 30 days.
B. Storage, handling or use of kerosene in excess of 10 gallons or any
other Class III flammable liquids in excess of 25 gallons in a building or
in excess of 60 gallons outside of a building.
C. The manufacture, processing, blending or refining of flammable liquids.
D. Storage of flammable liquids in stationary tanks.
E. Storage, handling or use of paints, varnishes, lacquers or any other
substances, mixtures or compounds used for painting, varnishing,
staining or other similar purposes in excess of 25 gallons, except as
otherwise permitted in Subsection A(2) of this section.
F. Application for such permit shall be accompanied by an inspection and
permit fee to be set annually by resolution of the City Council before
adoption of the budget for the following year. [Added 12-5-1984 by
L.L. No. 17-1984; amended 12-18-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996;
12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 11-2000]
A. Tanks or groups of tanks above the ground which contain any
flammable liquids in excess of 20,000 gallons' capacity shall be diked
and the volumetric capacity of the diked area shall be not less than the
capacity of the largest tank within the diked area.
§ 98-51 RYE CODE § 98-53
95:272
§ 98-54. Foam-producing chemicals required.
Every person handling or storing any flammable liquids in tanks above the
ground which shall have either singly or together a capacity in excess of
20,000 gallons shall maintain on the premises upon which such tanks are
located such quantity of fire extinguishing foam-producing chemicals and
such foam-generating or foam delivery equipment as may be required by
the Board of Fire Wardens, Chief of the Fire Department or Fire Inspector.
§ 98-55. Handling flammable liquids.
Flammable liquids shall not be drawn or handled in the presence of an
open flame or fire, but may be drawn and handled when lighting is by
incandescent electric lamps with vaporproof globes and keyless sockets and
the installation is otherwise fully in accordance with nationally recognized
safe practice. Compliance with the applicable provisions of the standards of
the National Board of Fire Underwriters, known as the "National Electrical
Code," shall be deemed prima facie evidence of compliance with nationally
recognized safe practice. Smoking shall be prohibited, and signs to this
effect posted, wherever flammable liquids are stored or handled.
B. Tanks of less than 20,000 gallons' capacity, where deemed necessary by
the Board of Fire Wardens, Chief of the Fire Department or Fire
Inspector, on account of proximity to waterways, character of
topography or nearness to structures of high value or to places of
habitation or assembly, shall be diked or the yard shall be provided with
a curb or other suitable means taken to prevent the spread of liquid
onto other property or waterways.
C. The dikes or walls required by this section shall be of earth, steel,
concrete or solid masonry designed to be liquid-tight and to withstand a
full hydraulic head and so constructed as to provide the required
protection. Earthen dikes three feet or more in height shall have a flat
section at the top not less than two feet wide. The slope shall be
consistent with the angle of repose of the material of which the dikes
are constructed. The slope shall be riprapped where deemed necessary
by the City Engineer to prevent erosion. Dikes shall be restricted to an
average height of not more than six feet above the exterior grade.
D. Where provision is made for draining rainwater from diked areas, such
drains shall normally be kept closed and shall be so designed that when
in use they will not permit flammable liquids to enter natural
watercourses, public sewers or public drains. Where pumps control
drainage from the diked area, they shall not be self-starting.
E. No vegetation or loose combustible material shall be permitted on dikes
or within the diked area.
§ 98-53 FIREARMS § 98-55
95:273

ARTICLE XI
Tanks and Pumps for Flammable Liquids
§ 98-56. Permit required; classes of liquids.
It shall be unlawful to install, relocate, replace or use any tanks or pumps
for the storage or dispensing of flammable liquids in the City of Rye except
under permit issued in compliance with the provisions of this article. The
classes of flammable liquids shall be as defined in Article X herein.
§ 98-57. Application and permit for installation.
A. No permit for the installation, relocation or replacement of tanks, their
auxiliaries, piping and pumps shall be issued until an application is first
filed with the City Clerk and approved by the Fire Inspector and
Building Inspector, giving the following information:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Location where tanks are to be installed.
(3) Maximum quantity of flammable liquid to be stored.
(4) Dimensions of storage tanks.
(5) Gauge of metal tanks.
(6) Name of concern making installation.
(7) Address of concern making installation.
(8) Policy numbers and expiration dates of compensation and public
liability insurance.
(9) A sketch or plan showing clearly thereon the following:
(a) Location of buildings where tanks are located, if indoors.
(b) Nature of construction and purpose for which used.
(c) Location of each tank.
(d) Size of fill and vent pipes and where they terminate.
B. Application for such permit shall be accompanied by an inspection and
permit fee to be set annually by resolution of the City Council before
adoption of the budget for the following year. [Amended 12-5-1984 by
L.L. No. 17-1984; 12-18-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 12-20-2000 by
L.L. No. 11-2000]
C. Such permit shall state the name of permittee, capacity of tank and
location of premises where it is installed, and shall be on public display
on said premises at all times.
§ 98-56 FIREARMS § 98-57
95:275
§ 98-58. Installation of underground tanks.
D. The permit shall be at all times subject to inspection of the Fire
Inspector and Building Inspector and may be modified, suspended or
revoked at any time by the Council upon the certification and request of
either of said Inspectors.
A. No underground tank shall be located less than the distance indicated
below, measured horizontally from the nearest point of the shell of tank
to the nearest line of adjoining property that is or may be built upon and
to the nearest outside wall of any basement, pit or cellar of which the
floor is lower in elevation than the top of such tank: [Amended
10-6-1971 by L.L. No. 5-1971]
Maximum Tank Capacity
(gallons)
Minimum Distance
(feet)
Up to 600 5
601 to 4,000 10
Where such location is not practicable, an underground tank may be
placed closer than the distance specified, provided it is enclosed or
encased. Sides, top and bottom of such enclosure shall be of
reinforced concrete and not less than six inches in thickness.
B. The individual tank capacity shall not exceed 4,000 gallons. The total
capacity of all tanks at one location shall not exceed 20,000 gallons.
[Amended 10-6-1971 by L.L. No. 5-1971]
C. Underground tanks shall be set on firm foundation and surrounded with
soft earth or sand and well tamped in place. When a rock condition
exists, tanks shall be set on a foundation of cement. Tanks shall be
covered with a minimum of two feet of earth. When subjected to traffic,
tanks shall be protected against damage from vehicles passing over
them by at least three feet of earth cover or 18 inches of well-tamped
earth plus eight inches of reinforced concrete. When reinforced
concrete paving is used as part of the protection, it must extend at least
one foot horizontally in all directions beyond the greatest dimensions of
the tank. [Amended 2-5-1964 by L.L. No. 1-1964]
D. The location of a tank for the storage of gasoline with respect to any
such other tank shall be such that the distance between them shall be
not less than two feet.
E. Where, in the opinion of the Fire Inspector or Building Inspector, the
condition of the ground in which the tank is to be buried is such that the
tank may be caused to shift or made buoyant by a water condition, the
tank shall be anchored or enclosed securely.
F. Tanks shall be thoroughly coated on the outside with tar, asphaltum or
other suitable rust-resisting material. Tanks shall be surrounded with
not less than six inches of clean sand or earth.
§ 98-57 RYE CODE § 98-58
95:276
§ 98-59. Storage under buildings.
Tanks shall not be permitted inside or underneath a building except as
otherwise permitted in § 98-63E.
§ 98-60. Storage in mercantile occupancies.
In rooms or areas accessible to the public, storage shall be in closed
containers and limited to quantities needed for display and normal
merchandising purposes. Where the aggregate quantity of additional stock
exceeds 60 gallons, it shall be stored in rooms or portions of buildings
that comply with the following construction requirements: Walls, floors and
ceilings shall be of construction having a fire-resistance rating of not less
than one hour. Openings to other rooms or buildings shall be provided with
noncombustible liquid-tight raised sills or ramps at least six inches in height
and with approved fire doors with heat-actuated releasing devices arranged
to close doors automatically in case of fire. Where other portions of the
building or other properties are exposed, windows shall be protected in an
approved manner. No combustible material shall be used for interior room
surfaces or shelving. Proper ventilation shall be provided. Heating shall be
restricted to low-pressure steam or hot water or to electrical units approved
for hazardous locations.
§ 98-61. Underground tanks. [Amended 10-6-1971 by L.L. No.
5-1971]
Underground tanks shall be designed and constructed to withstand safely
the service to which they are subjected. Material other than steel, if used,
shall be of suitable durability and of thickness providing equivalent strength
to that provided by steel. Steel commonly known as "mill seconds" shall not
be used. Steel tanks shall be of a minimum gauge (United States standards)
in accordance with the following table:
Capacity
(gallons) Minimum Gauge
1 to 1,100 No. 10
1,101 to 4,000 No. 7
G. In particular installations, variances in these provisions may be
permitted at the discretion of the Fire Inspector or Building Inspector
after consideration of special features, such as topographical
conditions, nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings on adjoining
property and height and character of construction of such buildings,
capacity and construction of proposed tanks and character of liquids to
be stored, degree of private fire protection to be provided and facilities
of the Fire Department to cope with oil and gasoline fires. Such
variances must be reported to the Council by the Fire Inspector and
Building Inspector.
§ 98-58 FIREARMS § 98-62
95:277
§ 98-62. Testing tanks and piping.
All tanks and piping shall be tested by a minimum air or hydrostatic
pressure of 10 pounds per square inch. Such pressure shall be maintained
for a period of at least 30 minutes, during which time, if the test is by
air pressure, the entire exterior surface and all joints shall be coated with
a solution of soap and water or other material suitable for the purpose
to indicate the presence of leaks. Hydrostatic pressure, if used, shall be
gauged in the top of the tank and the tank piping shall be inspected for
the presence of liquid to indicate leaks. Any leakage detected by any of the
methods described shall be accepted as evidence of failure to maintain the
requirements of the specifications. Under no circumstances shall bottled
gases under pressure be used.
§ 98-63. Self-service stations, regular service stations and garages.
[Amended 9-6-1967 by L.L. No. 2-1967; 3-17-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
A. The above facilities will be inspected quarterly to ensure compliance
with Section 1164.3 of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code (9B NYCRR 1164.3). A fee to cover the cost of these
inspections shall be charged to such service stations. The fee shall set
by resolution of the City Council annually.
B. Regulations contained in Section 1164.3 of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code, which became effective in 1984 and
which must be complied with, read as follows:
(1) Storage and Handling.
(a) All new equipment, piping, tanks, electrical systems and
dispensers shall be installed and maintained according to
generally accepted standards.
(b) All existing equipment, piping, tanks, electrical systems and
dispensers shall be in compliance with the requirements
specified in paragraph (1) of this subdivision, except they may
be permitted to continue in use if they do not constitute a
distinct hazard to life or property.
(c) Class I and Class II liquids storage shall not be permitted
within a regular service station, self-service station or garage
containing a pit, basement or depressed area, unless adequate
ventilation is provided to prevent the accumulation of
flammable vapors. All possible sources of ignition in the pit
area should be eliminated or properly protected to assure that
the ignition of vapors does not occur.
(d) Handling of Class I and Class II liquids in open containers is
prohibited.
§ 98-62 RYE CODE § 98-63
95:278
(e) Portable containers for Class I and Class II liquids shall be
made of metal or suitable listed unbreakable material. Such
containers shall have a spring- or screw-type cover with a
spout or other design to prevent spilling when poured.
(f) Accurate daily product inventory and water level records shall
be maintained and recorded on all Class I and Class II liquid
storage tanks for indication of possible leakage from tanks or
piping. The records shall be kept at the premises, available for
inspection by the code enforcement official, and shall include,
as a minimum, records showing, by product, daily comparison
between sales, use, receipts and inventory on hand. If there is
more than one system consisting of a tank serving separate
pump or dispenser for any product, the comparison shall be
maintained separately for each tank system.
(g) No sale or purchase of any Class I, Class II or Class III liquids
shall be made in containers unless such containers are clearly
marked with the name of the product contained therein.
(h) Crankcase drainings and similar liquids shall not be dumped
into sewers, streams or adjoining property but shall be stored
temporarily in tanks or drums outside the building until
removed from the premises.
(i) Beginning five years from the effective date of these
regulations, the fill pipe openings and vapor recovery openings
of above-ground and underground petroleum storage tanks on
the premises of service stations with 1,100 gallons' or more
capacity shall be marked in accordance with the American
Petroleum Institute's (API) standardized Equipment Marking
Color Symbol System, as specified below:
(j) The fill pipe cap of gasoline storage containers shall be
identified with a colored circular symbol either painted or
permanently affixed to the cap. The circle shall be colored red
to indicate higher octane gasoline, blue for medium octane
gasoline and white for lower octane gasoline.
(k) Whenever such storage tank contains unleaded gasoline, an
additional white cross shall be affixed in the center of the
circular symbol, except the cross shall be colored black when
affixed to a white circle, indicating lower octane gasoline.
(l) The fill pipe caps of storage tanks containing all other
petroleum distillates with a capacity of 1,100 gallons or more
shall be marked with a colored hexagon symbol as follows:
(m) In the case of diesel fuel, the symbol shall be colored yellow;
§ 98-63 FIREARMS § 98-63
95:279
(n) In the case of fuel oil No. 1, the symbol shall be colored purple
with a yellow stripe affixed horizontally through the center of
the symbol;
(o) In the case of fuel oil No. 2, the symbol shall be colored green;
and
(p) In the case of kerosene, the symbol shall be colored brown.
(q) Caps for vapor recovery openings shall be colored orange.
(r) Fill caps for storage tanks containing an extender such as
alcohol shall be designated by the addition of a border around
the appropriate symbol — black border around white and
white border around other colors.
(s) See Table I-1164 which is contained in Section 1164.3 at page
638.281 of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code (9B NYCRR 1164.3, page 638.281).
(2) Dispensing of Class I and Class II liquids.
(a) Dispensers shall be maintained to prevent leakage or
accidental discharge.
(b) Remote master control devices, to shut off all pumps in the
event of an emergency, shall be accessible and properly
identified as pump shut-off controls.
(c) Dispenser hoses shall be of a type with automatic self-closing
nozzles.
(d) Impact valves which close automatically in the event of fire or
severe impact shall be maintained in safe operating condition.
The automatic closing features of this valve shall be checked at
the time of initial installation, and at least once a year
thereafter, by tripping the hold-open device.
(e) There shall be no smoking, welding, burning or open flames in
the areas used for fueling, servicing fuel systems for internal
combustion engines or receiving or dispensing of Class I or II
liquids. The motors of all equipment being fueled shall be shut
off during the fueling operations.
(f) Warning signs shall be conspicuously posted in the dispensing
areas, incorporating the following or equivalent wording:
"Warning: It is unlawful and dangerous to dispense gasoline
into unapproved containers; no smoking; and stop motor."
(g) Listed portable fire extinguishers of an appropriate type and
with a rating of not less than 10 BC shall be provided at regular
service stations and garages dispensing Class I and Class II
liquids. Extinguishers shall be located so that an extinguisher
§ 98-63 RYE CODE § 98-63
95:280
will be within 100 feet of each pump, dispenser, underground
fill pipe opening and lubrication or service room.
(h) Each regular service station and garage which is open to the
public shall have an attendant or supervisor on duty whenever
the station is open for business.
(i) Listed self-service dispensing devices are permitted at regular
service stations and garages. The areas containing such
devices shall meet the requirements specified in subdivision (c)
of this section.
(j) Dispensing of liquids at private locations, where the dispensing
equipment is not open to the public, does not require an
attendant or supervisor. Such location may include a card or
key-controlled dispenser; however, coin-operated dispensers
are prohibited.
(k) A hose nozzle valve used for dispensing Class I and Class II
liquids into a portable container shall be manually held open
during the dispensing operation.
(3) Dispensing of Class I or Class II liquids at self-service gas stations.
(a) All self-service gas stations, in addition to the requirements
specified in this subdivision, shall meet the requirements of
subdivision (b) of this section.
(b) All self-service gas stations shall have at least one attendant on
duty while the station is open to the public. The attendant's
primary function shall be to supervise, observe and control the
dispensing of Class I and II liquids while said liquids are
actually being dispensed.
(c) It shall be the responsibility of the attendant to prevent the
dispensing of Class I and II liquids into portable containers not
in compliance with Paragraphs (a)(4) and (5) of this section;
control sources of ignition; and immediately handle accidental
spills and fire extinguishers if needed. The attendant or
supervisor on duty shall be mentally and physically capable of
performing the functions and assuming the responsibility
prescribed in this section.
(d) Operating instructions shall be conspicuously posted in the
dispensing area.
(e) The dispensing area shall at all times be in clear view of the
attendant, and the placing or allowing of any obstacle to come
between the dispensing area and the attendant control area
shall be prohibited. The attendant shall at all times be able to
communicate with persons in the dispensing area.
(f) Latch hold-open devices on hose nozzle valves are prohibited.
§ 98-63 FIREARMS § 98-63
95:281
§ 98-64. Fill pipe openings and piping.
The fill pipe opening shall be located outside of any building and not less
than five feet from any door or cellar opening. It shall be liquid-tight when
closed and not in use. Fill pipe for filling by tank car or truck shall be
not larger than four inches in nominal inside diameter and shall not be
constricted. Fill pipe openings shall be identified by a definite color scheme
or other means and, unless otherwise approved by the Fire Inspector and
Building Inspector, shall extend to the curb. Tanks shall be filled by gravity
flow only.
§ 98-65. Vents.
C. The Board of Fire Wardens shall have the power to adopt rules and
regulations ensuring the implementation and enforcement of the above
regulations. Such rules and regulations shall be subject to the approval
of the City Council.
A. Pipe systems in connection with pumps shall contain a sufficient
number of valves properly to control the flow of liquid in normal
operation and in the event of physical damage.
B. All piping shall be standard wrought iron, steel or brass pipe with
standard fitting or approved seamless copper, brass or other nonferrous
tubing with approved fittings. Piping shall not be surrounded or
covered by metal of a corrosive nature. Joints may be welded, brazed,
coupled, flanged or of the ordinary screw type made up with a suitable
compound. The Fire Inspector and Building Inspector shall approve all
pipe and fittings.
A. Location and arrangement of vents. Vent pipes from tanks storing
gasoline shall be so located that the discharge point is outside of
buildings and not less than 12 feet above the height of the fill pipe
opening and not nearer than three feet, measured horizontally and
vertically, from any window or other openings. Vent pipes shall
discharge only upward or horizontally (not downward), in order to
disperse vapors. Vent pipes two inches or less in nominal outside
diameter shall not be obstructed by devices that will reduce their
capacity and thus cause excessive back pressure. Vent pipe outlets shall
be so located that flammable vapors will not be trapped under eaves or
other obstructions. The use of vent pipes common to two or more tanks
is prohibited and all tanks must be individually vented.
B. Size of vents. Each tank shall be vented through piping adequate in size
to prevent blowback of vapor or liquid at the fill opening while the tank
is being filled. Diameter of vent pipes shall be approximately as follows:
(1) One-and-one-fourth-inch minimum vent for two-inch fill.
(2) Two-inch minimum vent for a three- or four-inch fill.
§ 98-63 RYE CODE § 98-65
95:282
§ 98-66. Heating.
Rooms in which Class I and Class II flammable liquids are stored or handled
shall be heated only by means not constituting a source of ignition, such as
steam or hot water. Rooms containing heating appliances involving sources
of ignition shall be located and arranged to prevent entry of flammable
vapors.
§ 98-67. Safety rules.
§ 98-68. Fire appliances.
In gasoline stations, fire appliances shall be provided in such quantities and
of such type as shall be directed by the Board of Fire Wardens, Chief of the
Fire Department or Fire Inspector.
§ 98-69. Combustible waste materials.
In buildings, rooms or other confined spaces in which flammable liquids
are stored, combustible waste materials shall not be allowed to accumulate
except in closed metal containers. Cleaning with gasoline or other Class I
or Class II liquids shall not be permitted in or around the station.
§ 98-70. Abandoned tanks.
Tanks abandoned by replacement or otherwise shall be removed, or, upon
approval of the Board of Fire Wardens, their lines may be disconnected and
capped and the tanks filled with sand. Tanks not to be used for a period not
to exceed one year or more shall be filled with water and lines capped.
C. Vent piping. Vent pipes shall be so laid as to drain toward the tank
without sags or traps in which liquid can collect. They shall be so
located that they will not be subjected to physical damage above
ground.
A. There shall be no smoking on the driveway of service stations in areas
used for fueling motor vehicles, dispensing flammable antifreeze or the
receipt of products by tank truck, or in those portions of the building
used for servicing automobiles, tractors and internal-combustion
engines. Conspicuous signs prohibiting smoking shall be posted within
sight of the customer being served. The motor of all vehicles being
fueled shall be shut off during the filling operation. When removing fill
caps, only nonsparking tools shall be used.
B. Any delivery of flammable liquid at a service station shall be made only
when an attendant is on duty. No underground tank shall be filled
unless the quantity therein is first checked by a measuring rod or stick
and the delivery truck is equipped with a meter with an automatic
shutoff valve. [Amended 10-6-1971 by L.L. No. 5-1971]
§ 98-65 FIREARMS § 98-71
95:283
§ 98-71. Wiring and equipment.
All wiring and electrical equipment shall be designed and installed in
accordance with nationally recognized safe practice. Compliance with the
applicable provisions of the standards of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters, known as the "National Electrical Code," shall be deemed
prima facie evidence of compliance with nationally recognized safe practice.
§ 98-72. Inspections.
No tanks or pumps may be used until they have been inspected and
approved by the Fire Inspector and Building Inspector of the City of Rye
after application has been filed and permit issued therefor.
§ 98-73. Required notices.
The City Clerk and Fire Inspector shall be notified immediately upon any
change of ownership or when any gasoline tank is to be abandoned.
§ 98-71 RYE CODE § 98-73
95:284
ARTICLE XII
Garages
§ 98-74. Conformance required.
Garages shall conform to all other applicable requirements of this chapter
as well as the following provisions.
§ 98-75. Permit required. [Amended 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984]
No person shall use any building, shed or enclosure as a place of business
for the purpose of servicing or repairing any motor vehicle therein without
a permit and/or certificate of occupancy.
§ 98-76. Cleaning with flammable liquids.
No flammable liquid with a flash point below 100º F. shall be used in any
garage for washing parts or removing grease or dirt unless in a special
closed machine approved for the purpose or in a separate well-ventilated
room enclosed by walls having a fire-resistance rating of not less than
two hours with openings therein protected by approved fire doors or fire
windows and with no opening from such room to any upper or lower story.
§ 98-77. Handling of gasoline and oils.
§ 98-78. Exposed flame.
No stove, forge, torch or other device employing flame or fire shall be used
in any garage, except that a permit may be granted by the City Clerk upon
A. The fuel tanks of motor vehicles shall be filled directly through hose
from approved pumps attached to approved portable tanks or drawing
from underground storage tanks. Storage and handling of flammable
liquids shall conform to Article X. No transfer of gasoline in any garage
shall be made in any open container.
B. Garage floors shall drain to oil separators or traps discharging to sewer.
Contents of oil separators or traps of the floor drainage systems shall be
collected at sufficiently frequent intervals and removed from the
premises to prevent oil from being carried into the sewers. Gasoline
and other flammable liquids shall not be allowed to run upon the floor of
any garage or to fall or pass into the drainage system. Self-closing metal
cans shall be used for all oily waste or waste oils; and all flammable
waste material shall be kept therein until removed from the building.
C. The operator of a facility dispensing any Class I flammable liquid shall
keep daily records to show gallons received and gallons dispensed.
Records must be made available for inspection by the Fire Inspector,
any other inspector designated by the Council or Board of Fire Wardens
for the purpose of determining the possibility and/or extent of any
leakage from tanks or piping. [Added 8-20-1975 by Ord. No. 4-1975]
§ 98-74 FIREARMS § 98-78
95:285
approval of the Fire Inspector for the use of an oxyacetylene or equivalent
flame for repair work. Any boiler for furnace used in any public garage shall
be located in a completely isolated room of fireproof construction.
§ 98-79. Fire extinguishers and sand.
Every public garage and every garage containing more than three motor
vehicles shall be equipped with at least one approved chemical fire
extinguisher and two pails of sand and such additional fire extinguishers
and pails of sand as may be required by the Fire Inspector.
§ 98-80. Use of frame buildings.
No portion of any existing frame building in which hay, straw or other
combustible material is stored shall be used as a garage.
§ 98-78 RYE CODE § 98-80
95:286
ARTICLE XIII
Liquefied Petroleum Gases
§ 98-81. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS — Any material which is composed
predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons or mixtures of them:
propane, propylene, butane (normal butane or isobutane) and butylenes.
§ 98-82. Permits for installations. [Amended 9-6-1967 by L.L. No.
2-1967; 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984; 12-18-1996 by L.L. No.
14-1996; 12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 11-2000]
A permit shall be obtained for each installation of liquefied petroleum
gas made at buildings in which people congregate for civic, political,
educational, religious, social or recreational purposes. Such buildings shall
include schools, churches, hospitals, institutions, hotels and restaurants,
each having a capacity of 20 or more persons. Prior to making such an
installation, an installer shall submit plans to the Fire Inspector, and if
compliance with the requirements of this chapter is shown by said plans,
a permit shall be issued. Application for such permit shall be accompanied
by an inspection and permit fee to be set annually by resolution of the City
Council before adoption of the budget for the following year.
§ 98-83. Inspection of installations.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Inspector to inspect a reasonable number of
liquefied petroleum gas installations to determine if the provisions of this
chapter are being complied with.
§ 98-84. Location of containers.
Within the limits established by law restricting the bulk storage of liquefied
petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested
commercial area, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not
exceed 2,000 gallons' water capacity; except that in particular installations
this capacity limit may be altered at the discretion of the Fire Inspector
after consideration of special features such as topographical conditions,
nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings, capacity of proposed tanks,
degree of private fire protection to be provided and facilities of the local
Fire Department.
§ 98-81 FIREARMS § 98-84
95:287

ARTICLE XIV
Lumberyards and Woodworking Plants
§ 98-85. Permit required. [Amended 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984;
12-18-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 11-2000]
No person shall store in excess of 100,000 board feet of lumber without a
permit. Application for such permit shall be accompanied by an inspection
and permit fee to be set annually by resolution of the City Council before
adoption of the budget for the following year.
§ 98-86. Open yard storage.
§ 98-87. Operational fire hazards in lumberyards.
A. Lumber shall be piled with due regard to stability of piles and in no case
higher than 20 feet.
B. Driveways between and around lumber piles shall be at least 15 feet
wide and maintained free from accumulation of rubbish, equipment or
other articles or materials. Driveways shall be so spaced that a
maximum grid system unit of 50 by 150 feet is produced.
C. Permanent lumber storage operating under a permit shall be
surrounded with a suitable fence at least six feet high where not in
conflict with Building Zone Ordinance,18 unless storage is within a
building.
A. The burning of shavings, sawdust and refuse materials shall be
permitted only under boilers, in furnaces or in incinerators or refuse
burners safely constructed and located. Stacks shall be provided with
approved spark arresters having openings not greater than 3/4 inch, or
other effective means provided which will eliminate the danger from
sparks, such as an expansion chamber, baffle walls or other effective
arrangement. At boiler or other points where sawdust or shavings are
used as fuel, a storage bin of noncombustible construction with raised
sign shall be provided.
B. Smoking shall be prohibited except in specified safe locations in
buildings. Large "no smoking" signs shall be painted on exterior
building walls and on signs erected at driveway edges. "No smoking"
signs shall be posted throughout all buildings except in specific
locations designated as safe for smoking purposes.
C. Weeds shall be kept down throughout entire yard and shall be sprayed
as often as needed with a satisfactory weed killer or cut or grubbed out.
Dead weeds shall be removed.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Zoning.
§ 98-85 FIREARMS § 98-87
95:289
§ 98-88. Fire extinguishing equipment in open yards and buildings.
Water barrels and pails or approved fire extinguishing equipment shall
be provided for open yards and sheds. In buildings, fire extinguishing
equipment shall be provided as specified by the Fire Inspector.
§ 98-89. Woodworking plants.
D. Debris such as sawdust, chips and shorts shall be removed regularly
from piling areas and not less frequently than once every three months.
Proper housekeeping shall be maintained at all times.
A. Sawmills, planing mills and other woodworking plants shall be
equipped with refuse removal systems which will collect and remove
sawdust and shavings as produced; or suitable metal or metal-lined bins
provided with normally closed covers or automatically closing covers
shall be installed at or near such machines, and shavings and sawdust
shall be swept up and deposited in such bins at sufficiently frequent
intervals as to keep the premises clean. Blower and exhaust systems
shall be installed in accordance with nationally recognized good
practice.
B. Fire-fighting equipment, either portable fire appliances or hose
supplied from a suitable water system, shall be provided near any
machine producing shavings or sawdust.
§ 98-87 RYE CODE § 98-89
95:290
ARTICLE XV
Oil-Burning Equipment
§ 98-90. Scope.
This article applies to oil-burning equipment, except internal-combustion
engines, oil lamps and portable devices such as blowtorches, melting pots
and weed burners; and also, to boiler and furnace rooms or areas.
§ 98-91. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FUEL OIL — Kerosene or any hydrocarbon oil conforming to nationally
recognized good practice and having a flash point of not less than 100º F.
OIL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — An oil burner of any type, together with
its tank, piping, wiring controls and related devices, and includes all
conversion oil burners, oil-fired units and heating and cooking appliances,
but excludes those exempted by § 98-90.
§ 98-92. Permit required. [Amended 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984]
§ 98-93. Use of approved equipment.
Oil-burning equipment shall be of approved type.
§ 98-94. General installation requirements.
A. A permit shall be required for the installation of any oil tank or oil
burner that utilizes a fuel oil tank in excess of 25 gallons in a building or
in excess of 60 gallons outside of a building. Application for such permit
shall be made as provided by Chapter 68 of this Code.
B. No such permit shall be issued unless the applicant has submitted proof
that the installation work shall be done or directly supervised by a
licensed plumber or by a person who has successfully completed an
examination conducted by the former Examining Board of Installers of
Mechanical Equipment of the City of Rye or by a person who has
successfully completed a comparable examination conducted by at least
one other municipality located in Westchester or Putnam Counties and
has demonstrated competence to perform all necessary functions of
installing oil-burning equipment. If the applicant has contracted with a
partnership or corporation for performance of the installation, at least
one partner or officer must be either a licensed plumber or person who
successfully completed the required proficiency test.
A. The installation shall be such as to provide reasonable accessibility for
cleaning heating surfaces, removing burners, replacing motors,
controls, air filters, draft regulators and other working parts and for
adjusting, cleaning and lubricating parts requiring such attention.
§ 98-90 FIREARMS § 98-94
95:291
§ 98-95. Fuel oil.
The grade of fuel oil used in a burner shall be that for which the burner is
approved and as stipulated by the manufacturer. Crankcase oil or any oil
containing gasoline shall not be used.
§ 98-96. Installation of fuel oil tanks.
B. After installation of the oil-burning equipment, a complete cycle of
operation tests shall be conducted to make certain that the burner is
operating in a safe and acceptable manner and that all safety devices
function properly.
A. An unenclosed inside fuel oil supply tank shall have a capacity of not
more than 550 gallons. Not more than one five-hundred-fifty-gallon tank
or two tanks of aggregate capacity of 550 gallons or less shall be
connected to one oil-burning appliance, and the aggregate capacity of
such tanks installed in the lowest story, cellar or basement of a building
shall not exceed 1,100 gallons unless separation is provided for each
550 gallons of tank capacity. Such separation shall consist of an
unpierced masonry wall or partition extending from the lowest floor to
the ceiling above the tank or tanks, having a fire-resistance rating of not
less than two hours.
B. Stoves which are designed for barometric feed shall not be connected
to separate oil supply tanks.
C. Non-flue-connected stoves shall be equipped with integral tanks of
capacity not more than two gallons.
D. Gravity oil supply tanks installed in conversion range oil burners shall
not exceed one six-gallon metal tank or two three-gallon glass bottles.
E. Supply or storage tanks located above the lowest story, cellar or
basement shall not exceed 60 gallons' capacity and the total capacity of
tanks so located shall not exceed 60 gallons.
F. Oil supply tanks other than those furnished as an integral part of the
stove or range shall not be located within five feet, horizontally, of any
fire or flame; except that tanks not over six gallons' capacity may be
within this distance but not within two feet of the stove or range in
which the burner is installed, provided the temperature rise of the oil
supply at this distance is not excessive when the burner is operated at
full capacity.
G. Tanks exceeding 550 gallons' individual capacity shall be installed in an
enclosure constructed as follows: The walls of the enclosure shall be
constructed of solid masonry units or poured concrete construction
having a fire-resistance rating of not less than three hours. Such
enclosures shall be installed only on concrete or other fire-resistive
floors and shall be bonded to the floors. Enclosures shall have tops of
reinforced concrete at least five inches thick or equivalent fire-resistive
§ 98-94 RYE CODE § 98-96
95:292
§ 98-97. Installation of piping.
§ 98-98. Pumps, piping and valves.
construction, except that where floor or roof construction above the
enclosure is concrete or other fire-resistive construction, the walls
may be extended to and bonded to the underside of the construction
above in lieu of the provision of a separate top. Any openings to such
enclosures shall be provided with fire doors or other approved closures
and six-inch noncombustible liquid-tight sills or ramps. Provision shall
be made for adequate ventilation of such enclosures prior to entering
for inspection or repairs on tanks.
A. A fill pipe on a tank larger than 60 gallons shall terminate outside of a
building at least two feet from any building opening. Every fill terminal
shall be equipped with a tight metal cover.
B. A return line from a burner or pump to a supply tank shall enter the top
of the tank.
C. An auxiliary tank installed in the supply piping between a burner and its
main fuel supply tank shall be filled by pumping from storage tanks.
D. All piping, except the burner supply line from a tank having a capacity
of not over 550 gallons and the cross-connection between two such
tanks having an aggregate capacity of 550 gallons or less, shall be
connected into the top of the supply tank.
E. The burner supply connection to a tank or tanks having a capacity of
more than 550 gallons shall be connected to the top of the tank, except
in commercial and industrial installations for Nos. 5 and 6 oil, the
burner supply connection may be below the liquid level.
F. Vent pipes shall terminate outside of buildings not less than two feet,
measured vertically or horizontally, from any window or other building
opening. Vent terminals shall terminate in a weatherproof vent cap
which shall have a minimum free open area equal to the cross-sectional
area of the vent pipe. The static head of the vent pipe when filled with
oil shall not exceed that pressure at which the tank was pressure
tested.
G. Pressurized tank feed shall not be used.
H. All tanks in which a constant oil level is not maintained by an automatic
pump shall be equipped with an approved method of determining the oil
level.
A. An oil pump not a part of an approved burner shall be a positive
displacement type which automatically shuts off the oil supply when
stopped.
§ 98-96 FIREARMS § 98-98
95:293
§ 98-99. Manual stopping of flow of oil.
Oil burners other than oil stoves with integral tanks shall be provided with
some means for manually stopping the flow of oil to the burner. Such device
or devices shall be placed in a convenient location at a safe distance from
the burner.
§ 98-100. Enclosure of boiler and furnace areas.
All boilers, furnaces or other central heating plants or units, except for
heat, fuel, water and electrical lines leading thereto or therefrom, shall be
located in an area the floors, wall and ceilings of which are of unpierced fireretardant
construction and with self-closing fireproof doors leading thereto.
Any windows therein shall have fire-retarded or steel sash with wire glass
panes. Such areas or rooms shall have a direct or ducted outlet to the
outside for ventilation and air supply. This section shall not apply to singlefamily
residential buildings and shall serve as a minimum requirement for
all other type buildings, which must, in addition hereto, comply with all
other pertinent regulations, laws and ordinances. The owners of all existing
premises which do not comply with the requirements hereof shall cause said
premises so to comply within six months from the date hereof.
B. All piping shall be standard full-weight wrought iron, steel or brass pipe
with standard fittings or brass or copper tubing with fittings of an
approved type, except that approved flexible metal hose may be used
for reducing the effect of jarring and vibration or where rigid
connections are impracticable. Cast-iron fitting shall not be used.
C. Aluminum tubing shall not be used between the fuel off tank and burner
unit.
D. Piping shall be substantially supported and protected against physical
damage and, where necessary, protected against corrosion. All buried
piping shall be protected against corrosion.
E. Where a shutoff is installed in the discharge line of an oil pump not an
integral part of a burner, a pressure relief valve shall be connected into
the discharge line between the pump and the shutoff valve and
arranged to return surplus oil to the supply tank or to bypass it around
the pump, unless the pump includes an internal bypass.
§ 98-98 RYE CODE § 98-100
95:294
ARTICLE XVI
Places of Assembly
§ 98-101. Permit required.
§ 98-102. Decorative material.
§ 98-103. Pyroxylin-coated fabric.
A. No place of assembly as defined in Subsection B of this section shall be
maintained, operated or used as such without a permit, except that no
permit shall be required for any place of assembly used solely as a place
of religious worship.
B. "Place of assembly" shall mean a room or space used for assembly for
100 or more occupants or which has a floor area of 1,500 square feet or
more used for such purposes. Such room or space shall include any
similarly occupied connecting room or space in the same story or in a
story or stories above or below where entrance is common to the rooms
or spaces.
C. Application for such permit shall be accompanied by an inspection and
permit fee to be set annually by resolution of the City Council before
adoption of the budget for the following year. [Added 12-5-1984 by
L.L. No. 17-1984; amended 12-18-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996;
12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 11-2000]
A. Decorative material shall include all such materials as curtains,
draperies, streamers, surface coverings applied over the building
interior finish for decorative, acoustical or other effect, and also cloth,
cotton batting, straw, vines, leaves, trees and moss used for decorative
effect, but it shall not include floor coverings, ordinary window shades,
nor materials 1/40* of an inch or less in thickness applied directly to
and adhering tightly to a noncombustible base.
NOTE: May be measured by folding a piece to five thicknesses and
measuring to see if the thickness of five layers exceeds 1/8 inch.
B. No decorative material shall be used which as applied will ignite and
allow flame to spread over the surface when exposed to a match flame
test applied to a piece removed from the material and tested in a safe
place. The piece shall be held in a vertical position and the bottom edge
exposed to a flame from a common match held in a horizontal position
1/2 inch underneath the piece and at a constant location for a minimum
of 15 seconds.
C. Treatments used to accomplish flameproofing shall be renewed as often
as may be necessary to maintain the flameproof effect.
A. Pyroxylin-coated fabric used as a decorative material in accordance
with § 98-102 or as a surface covering on fixed furnishings shall be
limited in accordance with Subsection B of this section.
§ 98-101 FIREARMS § 98-103
95:295
§ 98-104. Motion-picture screens.
In places of assembly no motion-picture screen or screen masking shall be
used which will ignite and allow flame to spread over the surface when
exposed to the match flame test described in § 98-102B.
§ 98-105. Exit doors.
During the period of occupancy, no exit door shall be locked, bolted or
otherwise fastened or obstructed by any means so that the door cannot be
opened from the inside by the use of the ordinary door latch or knob or by
pressure on the door or on a panic release device.
§ 98-106. Aisles.
In each room where chairs or tables and chairs are used, the arrangement
shall be such as will provide for ready access by aisles to each exit doorway.
Aisles leading directly to exit doorways shall have not less than 36 inches
clear width, which shall not be obstructed by chairs, tables or other objects.
§ 98-107. Use of exitways.
No part of a stairway, whether interior or exterior, nor of a hallway, corridor,
vestibule, balcony or bridge leading to a stairway or exit of any kind, shall
be used in any way that will obstruct its use as an exit or that will present a
hazardous condition.
§ 98-108. Ashtrays.
Where smoking is permitted, there shall be provided on each table and
at other convenient places suitable noncombustible ashtrays or match
receivers.
§ 98-109. Fire appliances.
All fire protection equipment required under Article IX shall be kept in
working condition. Extinguishers and hose and similar appliances shall be
visible and convenient at all times. It shall be the duty of the owner and the
tenant of each building or part of a building occupied as a place of assembly
to properly train sufficient regular employees in the use of fire appliances
so that such appliances can be quickly put in operation.
B. Such fabrics containing 1.4 ounces or more of cellulose nitrate per
square yard shall not be used in excess of a total amount equivalent to
one square foot of fabric surface to 15 cubic feet of room volume. Each
square foot of such fabric which contains 1.7 ounces or more of
cellulose nitrate per square yard shall be counted as two square feet in
making this computation.
§ 98-103 RYE CODE § 98-110
95:296
§ 98-110. Plan of exitways and aisles.
A plan showing the capacity and location of exitways and of aisles leading
thereto shall be submitted for approval to the Fire Inspector and an
approved copy shall be kept on display in the premises.
§ 98-111. Marking of exitways.
§ 98-112. Lighting of exitways.
Required stairways, hallways and other means of egress, including exterior
open spaces to or through which exitways lead, shall be kept adequately
lighted at all times that the building served thereby is occupied. In places of
assembly and schools, an auxiliary lighting system shall be maintained.
A. In rooms accommodating more than 100 persons, required exit
doorways, other than those normally used for entrance, shall be plainly
marked by approved exit signs sufficiently illuminated when the floor
area is occupied to be readily distinguished.
B. Where exit doorways are not visible from all locations in public
corridors, directional signs, as required by the Board of Fire Wardens,
Chief of the Fire Department or Fire Inspector, shall be placed on walls
or otherwise displayed in conspicuous locations to direct occupants to
exit doorways.
§ 98-110 FIREARMS § 98-112
95:297

ARTICLE XVII
General Precautions Against Fire
§ 98-113. Bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires.
§ 98-114. Installation of fire-detecting alarm devices. [Added
6-18-1980 by Ord. No. 4-1980; amended 3-6-1985 by L.L. No.
2-1985]
A. Bonfires generally. No person shall burn or cause to be burned any
grass, leaves, rubbish or any other material within the city in a manner
whereby life or property is carelessly exposed to danger, nor shall any
person burn or cause to be burned any grass, leaves, rubbish or any
other material between sunset and sunrise, except in wire baskets or
other fireproof receptacles with a proper cover.
B. Fires on pavements. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or cause
to be burned any grass, leaves, rubbish or any other material of any
kind or nature in or upon any paved street, sidewalk or other public
place without a permit issued by the City Clerk upon approval of the
City Engineer.
C. Fires on private lands. No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or
rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on
any private land unless:
(1) The location is not less than 50 feet away from any structure and
adequate provision is made to prevent fire from spreading to within
50 feet of any structure; and
(2) Such fire is personally supervised until extinguished; or
(3) The fire is contained in an approved waste burner with closed top,
located safely not less than 15 feet from any structure.
D. Fire Inspector and others may prohibit. The Council, Board of Fire
Wardens, Chief of the Fire Department or Fire Inspector may prohibit
any or all bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires when atmospheric
conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous.
E. No person shall kindle a fire upon the land of another without
permission of the owner thereof or his agent. [Amended 6-18-1980 by
Ord. No. 4-1980]
A. In every multiple dwelling and commercial building having one or more
dwelling units, fire-detecting alarm devices shall be installed at the top
of each stairwell and on the ceiling of the lowest fire area.
B. Each fire-detecting alarm device shall be of a type approved by a
national testing organization. It shall be located so as to allow for easy
access for inspection and maintenance. It shall be designed and
installed so as to avoid dead air space, detect smoke and heat and
§ 98-113 FIREARMS § 98-114
95:299
§ 98-115. Use of torches for removing paint.
Any person using a torch or other flame-producing device for removing
paint from any building or structure shall provide one approved fire
extinguisher or water hose connected to the water supply on the premises
where such burning is done. In all cases, the person doing the burning shall
remain on the premises one hour after the torch or flame-producing device
has been used.
§ 98-116. Hot ashes and other dangerous materials.
No person shall deposit hot ashes or cinders, smoldering coals or greasy or
oily substances liable to spontaneous ignition into any wooden receptacle,
or place the same within 10 feet of any combustible materials, except
in metal or other noncombustible receptacles. Such receptacles, unless
resting on a noncombustible floor or on the ground outside the building,
shall be placed on noncombustible stands, and in every case shall be kept
at least two feet away from any combustible wall or partition or exterior
window opening.
§ 98-117. Accumulations of waste materials.
Accumulations of wastepaper, hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter or combustible
or flammable waste or rubbish of any kind shall not be permitted to remain
upon any roof or in any court, yard, vacant lot or open space. All weeds,
grass, vines or other growth, when same endangers property or is liable to
be fired, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the
property.
§ 98-118. Handling readily combustible materials.
No person making, using, storing or having in charge or under his control
any shavings, excelsior, rubbish, sacks, bags, litter, hay, straw or
combustible waste materials shall fail or neglect at the close of each day
to cause all such material which is not compactly baled and stacked in
an orderly manner to be removed from the building or stored in suitable
vaults or in metal or metal-lined, covered receptacles or bins. Suitable
baling presses shall be installed in stores, apartment buildings, factories
and similar places where accumulations of paper and waste materials are
not removed at least every third day.
activate the alarm, be reasonably free from false alarm and provide
visible indication that the alarm is energized.
C. Each fire-detecting alarm device shall be clearly audible in sleeping
rooms with intervening doors closed or wired to a central location
where twenty-four-hour attendance is provided.
D. Each required device shall be directly connected to the lighting circuit
of the building with no intervening wall switch. Cord-connected
installations are not permitted.
§ 98-114 RYE CODE § 98-119
95:300
§ 98-119. Storage of readily combustible materials.
§ 98-120. Flammable decorative materials in certain buildings.
Highly flammable materials such as cotton batting, straw, dry vines, leaves,
trees, artificial flowers or shrubbery and foam plastic materials shall not be
used for decorative purposes in show windows or other parts of mercantile
and institutional occupancies unless flame-proofed. Electric light bulbs in
mercantile and institutional occupancies shall not be decorated with paper
or other combustible materials unless such materials shall first have been
rendered flameproof.
§ 98-121. Use of open flame or light.
§ 98-122. Maintenance of chimneys and heating appliances.
A. Permit required. No person shall store in any building or upon any
premises in excess of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume of combustible
empty packing cases, boxes, barrels or similar containers, or rubber
tires, or baled cotton, rubber or cork or other similarly combustible
material without a permit.
B. Storage requirements. Storage in buildings shall be orderly, shall not be
within two feet of the ceiling and not be so located as to endanger exit
from the building. Storage in the open shall not be more than 20 feet in
height, shall be so located, with respect to adjacent buildings, as not to
constitute a hazard, and shall be compact and orderly.
A. No person shall take an open flame or light into any building, barn,
vessel, boat or any other place where highly flammable, combustible or
explosive material is kept unless such light or flame shall be well
secured in a glass globe, wire mesh cage or similar approved device.
B. No heating or lighting apparatus or equipment capable of igniting
flammable materials of the types stored or handled shall be used in the
storage area of any warehouse storing rags, excelsior, hair or other
highly flammable or combustible material, nor in the work area of any
shop or factory used for the manufacture, repair or renovating of
mattresses or bedding, nor in the work areas of any establishment used
for the upholstering of furniture.
C. All portable heating units using kerosene, fuel oil, propane or other gas
are prohibited in any buildings within the city except during the
construction of a building or in an emergency, and then only upon the
approval of the Chief of the Fire Department or the Fire Inspector.
A. All chimneys, smokestacks or similar devices for conveying smoke or
hot ashes to the outer air and the stoves, furnaces, incinerators,
fireboxes or boilers to which they are connected shall be constructed
and maintained in such a manner as not to create a hazardous
condition.
§ 98-119 FIREARMS § 98-122
95:301
§ 98-123. Dangerous conditions.
No person shall knowingly permit the existence in or upon any property
within the city owned or occupied by such person, of any condition from
which danger from fire shall exist, and any such owner or occupant shall
forthwith comply with any order of the Common Council, Board of Fire
Wardens, Chief of the Fire Department or Fire Inspector.
§ 98-124. Christmas tree storage.
B. Commercial and industrial type incinerators used for burning of
rubbish or other readily combustible solid waste material and flue-fed
incinerators shall be provided with approved spark arresters or other
effective means for arresting sparks and fly particles.
A. General. No Christmas trees shall be stored or displayed for sale in any
gasoline station or on any premises where flammable liquids are stored.
Christmas trees for wholesale or retail display and sale shall be stored
as directed by the Fire Inspector to avoid injury to life or property by
fire.
B. Permit required. No Christmas trees shall be stored or displayed for
sale without a permit. An inspection and permit fee, to be set annually
by resolution of the City Council before adoption of the budget for the
following year, shall accompany the application for the permit.
[Amended 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984; 12-20-2000 by L.L. No.
11-2000]
C. Bond required. A cash bond of $45 shall be posted to ensure removal or
disposition of such Christmas trees from the property to the satisfaction
of the Fire Inspector by December 30. The cash bond shall be refunded
to the applicant when the lot or storage space has been cleaned to the
satisfaction of the Fire Inspector. Such cash bond shall be used to clean
said area if the applicant fails to do so. [Amended 12-20-2000 by L.L.
No. 11-2000]
§ 98-122 RYE CODE § 98-124
95:302
ARTICLE XVIII
Prohibition of Smoking
§ 98-125. Definition.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SMOKING — The carrying of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or tobacco in any
form.
§ 98-126. Fire Inspector to designate prohibited areas.
Where conditions are such as to make smoking a hazard in any areas of
piers, wharves, warehouses, stores, industrial plants, institutions, places
of assembly and in open spaces where combustible materials are stored
or handled, the Board of Fire Wardens, Chief of the Fire Department and
the Fire Inspector are empowered and authorized to order the owner or
occupant in writing to post "no smoking" signs in each building, structure,
room or place in which smoking shall be prohibited. The Fire Inspector shall
designate specific safe locations, if necessary, in any building, structure or
place in which smoking may be permitted.
§ 98-127. Required signs.
"No smoking" signs of approved-size lettering and location required in
accordance with § 98-126 shall read "by order of the Board of Fire
Wardens."
§ 98-128. Prohibited conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any legally required "No
smoking" sign or to smoke in any place where such signs are posted.
§ 98-125 FIREARMS § 98-128
95:303

ARTICLE XIX
Welding and Cutting
§ 98-129. Scope.
Welding or cutting shall include gas, electric arc or flammable liquid
welding or cutting or any combination thereof.
§ 98-130. Permit required. [Amended 12-5-1984 by L.L. No.
17-1984; 12-18-1996 by L.L. No. 14-1996; 12-20-2000 by L.L. No.
11-2000]
A permit shall be required of each company, corporation, copartnership
or owner-operator performing welding or cutting operations. This permit
shall not be required for each welding or cutting job location. The company,
corporation, copartnership or owner-operator shall notify the Fire Inspector
in advance where such work is taking place, except where such work is
done in response to an emergency call that does not allow time for the Fire
Inspector to be notified in advance of the work. Application for such permit
shall be accompanied by an inspection and permit fee to be set annually
by resolution of the City Council before adoption of the budget for the
following year.
§ 98-131. Fire prevention.
A. When welding or cutting operations are performed above or within 35
feet of combustible construction or material exposed to the operation,
or within 35 feet of floor, ceiling or wall openings so exposed:
(1) Such combustible construction or material shall be protected by
noncombustible shields or covers from possible sparks, hot metal
or oxide.
(2) Such floor, ceiling or wall openings shall be protected by
noncombustible shields or covers.
(3) A fire watcher shall be provided to watch for fires, make use of
portable fire extinguishers or fire hose and perform similar fire
prevention and protection duties. The fire watcher shall remain on
the job at least 30 minutes after the welding or cutting operations
have been completed to ensure that no fire exists.
B. One or more portable fire extinguishers of approved type and size shall
be kept at the location where welding or cutting is to be done.
C. Welding or cutting shall not be done in or near rooms or locations
where flammable gases, liquids or vapors, lint, dust or loose
combustible stocks are present when sparks or hot metal from the
welding or cutting operations may cause ignition or explosion of such
materials.
§ 98-129 FIREARMS § 98-131
95:305
D. Welding or cutting shall not be performed on containers and equipment
which contain or have contained flammable liquids, gases or solids until
these containers and equipment have been thoroughly cleaned or
inerted or purged.
§ 98-131 RYE CODE § 98-131
95:306
ARTICLE XX
Electrical Wiring, Fixtures and Equipment19
§ 98-132. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings and structures
situate within the City of Rye, and the owner or owners thereof shall be
responsible for complying with same.
§ 98-133. Compliance with nationally recognized safe practice.
All electrical wiring, fixtures and equipment shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with nationally recognized safe practice.
Compliance with the applicable provisions of the standards of the National
Board of Fire Underwriters, known as the "National Electrical Code," shall
be deemed prima facie evidence of compliance with nationally recognized
safe practice.
§ 98-134. Existing buildings or structures.
Any electrical wiring, fixture, equipment or installation which on the
effective date of this chapter has not been installed, has not been
manufactured or is not being maintained in accordance with nationally
recognized safe practice shall be so repaired, remade, reinstalled, removed,
replaced or so maintained thereafter as to comply with nationally
recognized safe practice.
19.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 81, Electrical Standards.
§ 98-132 FIREARMS § 98-134
95:307

ARTICLE XXI
Miscellaneous
§ 98-135. Fire lines.
Any officer of the Fire and Police Departments may, in the event of fire,
establish fire lines and appoint such person or persons as may be necessary
to maintain such fire lines; and within the fire lines so established all
persons shall obey the orders of the officers of the Fire and Police
Departments and their duly appointed representatives.
§ 98-136. New commercial occupancy.
There shall be no commercial occupancy at a new location within the city
without a permit. A commercial occupancy shall include the manufacture,
sale, resale, processing, reprocessing, displaying, storing, handling,
garaging or distribution of personal property.
§ 98-137. Maximum capacity of public rooms.
The Fire Inspector is authorized to fix the number of persons that shall be
permitted at any one time in any room open for public use. A sign specifying
the maximum capacity of the room shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
said room.
§ 98-138. Inspections by Fire Inspector.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Inspector to examine from time to time
all fireplaces, chimneys, stoves and pipes thereto, ovens, boilers and all
apparatus used in any building of manufactory which, in his opinion, may
be dangerous in causing or promoting fires, and also all places where ashes
and other refuse may be kept or deposited, and upon finding any of them
defective or dangerous, the Fire Inspector shall immediately inform the
owner or occupant of such building or premises of such defect or danger,
by written notice, and order the same to be corrected, altered, removed
or changed within such reasonable time as the Fire Inspector may in his
judgment deem proper.
§ 98-139. Safety during demolition. [Added 9-6-1967 by L.L. No.
2-1967]
A. Safe and sanitary conditions shall be provided where demolition and
wrecking operations are being carried on. Work shall be done in such
manner that hazard from fire, possibility of injury, danger to health and
conditions which may constitute a public nuisance will be minimized in
conformity with generally accepted standards.
B. Access to utilities and public facilities, including, among others, fire
hydrants, fire and police call boxes, streetlights and manholes, shall be
kept unobstructed during demolition.
§ 98-135 FIREARMS § 98-139
95:309
C. Gas, electric, sewer, heat, power, water and other service connections
shall be disconnected, removed or sealed in conformity with the
applicable regulations of the public utility or municipal agency having
jurisdiction.
D. No demolition shall be commenced without first obtaining a permit
from the City Clerk upon approval of the Fire Inspector and Building
Inspector.
§ 98-139 RYE CODE § 98-139
95:310
ARTICLE XXII
Enforcement
§ 98-140. Rules and regulations.
§ 98-141. Interference prohibited.
No person shall obstruct or hinder the Board of Fire Wardens, Chief of the
Fire Department, Fire Inspector or any other inspector designated by the
Council or said Board in the performance of their duties as prescribed in
this chapter.
§ 98-142. Variances. [Amended 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984]
Any person or persons directly aggrieved by the strict application of the
provisions of this chapter to premises owned or occupied by him or them
may, in writing, duly verified, and upon payment of an application fee of
$100, apply to the Board of Fire Wardens of the City of Rye for a variance
as to the premises so owned or occupied of any provision or provisions of
this chapter. No variance, however, shall be granted unless the applicant
shall state and subsequently prove to the satisfaction of said Board all of the
following:
§ 98-143. Appeals.
Any person or persons directly aggrieved by any decision or order of the
Fire Inspector may, in writing, appeal to the Board of Fire Wardens from any
such decision or order. In passing on such appeals, the Board may affirm,
A. The Board of Fire Wardens shall have the power to promulgate any
rules, regulations and supplemental requirements consistent with the
intent of this chapter, subject to the approval of the Council, and to
prepare any forms required to be used in administering this chapter. All
such forms shall first be approved by the City Manager.
B. Every building or part of a building occupied as a place of assembly, as
defined in Article XVI of this chapter, shall contain not less than one
fire-detecting alarm device in addition to any other device or equipment
required by Article IX of this chapter. [Added 6-18-1980 by Ord. No.
4-1980]
A. Practical difficulties preventing substantial compliance with the
provisions as to which a variance is sought.
B. Substantial unnecessary hardship would be imposed on the applicant
by requiring him to comply strictly with the provisions of this chapter.
Pecuniary hardship alone shall not be a sufficient basis for establishing
substantial unnecessary hardship.
C. Granting of a variance will not violate the spirit of this chapter, will not
prejudice public or private safety and will not endanger adjacent
properties.
§ 98-140 FIREARMS § 98-143
95:311
modify or reverse the decision or order of the Fire Inspector. In addition, the
Board may, before reaching a decision on any appeal, remand the matter to
the Fire Inspector for further inspection or consideration. All such appeals
must be taken within 30 days from the date of issuance of the decision or
order against which the appeal is taken.
§ 98-144. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-20-1982 by L.L. No.
3-1982; 4-11-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
In the event an activity is not being performed in accordance with this
chapter, the owner of the property or the owner's agent or the person
performing such violation shall be notified to suspend all work, and any
such persons shall forthwith stop such work and suspend all activities. Such
order and notice shall be in writing and may be served upon a person
to whom it is directed either by delivering it personally to him or her
or by posting the same upon a conspicuous portion of the property and
sending a copy of same by registered or certified mail. Any person who
shall violate or cause, suffer or permit the violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter or who shall fail to comply with any written order made
hereunder or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement or
specifications or plans submitted and approved hereunder or any certificate
or permit issued hereunder and from which no appeal has been taken or
who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by
the Board of Fire Wardens or by a court of competent jurisdiction within
the time fixed herein shall severally for each and every such violation and
noncompliance, respectively, upon conviction thereof, be punished upon
such first conviction by a fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each day
that such violation shall continue shall be construed as a separate offense.
Upon any subsequent conviction for the same offense, such person shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty
for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and
all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or
defects within a reasonable time. The application of these penalties shall
not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
§ 98-143 RYE CODE § 98-144
95:312
Chapter 100
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Storm sewer system — See Ch. 162.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 170.
Surface water control — See Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 197.
§ 100-1. Statutory authorization and purpose.
A. Findings. The City Council of the City of Rye finds that the potential
and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to
the residents of the City of Rye and that such damages may include:
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public
facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of
human life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and to
achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter
is adopted.
B. Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
(1) Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property
due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase erosion or flood damages;
(5) Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally
divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands; and
(6) Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
C. Objectives.
(1) To protect human life and health;
§ 98-144 FIREARMS § 100-1
95:313
§ 100-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOODING HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30,
A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base
floodplain" or "l00-year floodplain." For purposes of this chapter, the term
"special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with the
phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
(2) To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
(3) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
(4) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
(6) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future flood blight areas;
(7) To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
(8) To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 100-1 RYE CODE § 100-2
95:314
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high-velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on a FIRM as Zone
V1-V30, VE, VO or V.
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18
inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the
lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above
the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be
properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic forces which
would be experienced during periods of flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building (i) built, in the case of
a building in Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to have the
top of the elevated floor or, in the case of a building in Zone V1-30, VE,
or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the
elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns
(posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii)
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case
of Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, "elevated building" also
includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters. In the case of Zone V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building,"
even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that
meet the federal standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING —
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
A.
§ 100-2 FIREARMS § 100-2
95:315
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates
a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood
Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of
flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as
Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities.
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales, or
service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Flood or flooding also means the collapse or subsidence of land along
the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion
or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm,
or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in flooding as defined in Subsection (1) above.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
A.
§ 100-2 RYE CODE § 100-2
95:316
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the Building
Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of an engineering
department.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than
a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 100-2 FIREARMS § 100-2
95:317
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same
meaning as "base flood."
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous mound
or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves during major coastal storms. The
inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a
distinct change from a relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual market value
of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or by other agencies as
provided in § 100-4D(2) of this chapter.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or
mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided
that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition placement, or other improvement is within 180 days after the date
of issuance. The "actual start of construction" means the first placement
of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home)
on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings
or construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation (such as clearing, excavation, grading, or filling), or the
installation of streets or walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation
of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 100-2 RYE CODE § 100-2
95:318
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not include, however, either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this chapter.
§ 100-3. General provisions.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
A. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the City of Rye, Westchester County.
B. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
(1) The areas of special flood hazard for the City of Rye, Community
Number 360931, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency:
(a) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers 36119C0352F,
36119C0354F, 36119C0356F, 36119C0357F, 36119C0358F,
36119C0362F, whose effective date is September 28, 2007,
and any subsequent revisions to these map panels that do not
affect areas under our community's jurisdiction.
(b) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance
Study, Westchester County, New York, All Jurisdictions," dated
September 28, 2007.
§ 100-2 FIREARMS § 100-3
95:319
(c) Letter of Map Revision, Case Number 18-02-1994P, effective
May 2, 2019, amending Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel
36119C0354F. [Added 3-27-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
(2) The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part
of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file
at the City of Rye.
C. Interpretation and conflict with other laws. This chapter includes all
revisions to the National Flood Insurance Program through March 20,
1997, and shall supersede all previous laws adopted for the purpose of
flood damage prevention. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements,
adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations,
ordinances, or local laws, the most restrictive, or that imposing the
higher standards, shall govern.
D. Severability. The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter
shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof.
E. Penalties for noncompliance. No structure in an area of special flood
hazard shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or
altered and no land shall be excavated or filled without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and any other applicable regulations. Any
infraction of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any
of its requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute
a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no more
than $250 or imprisoned for not more than 15 days, or both. Each day of
noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the City of Rye from taking such other lawful
action as necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure
found not compliant with the requirements of this chapter for which the
developer and/or owner has not applied for and received an approved
variance under § 100-6 will be declared noncompliant and notification
shall be sent to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
F. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.
Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may
be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the area of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of
Rye, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 100-3 RYE CODE § 100-4
95:320
§ 100-4. Administration.
A. Designation of local administrator. The City Building Inspector is
hereby appointed local administrator to administer and implement this
chapter by granting or denying floodplain development permits in
accordance with its provisions.
B. Floodplain development permit.
(1) Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for
all construction and other development to be undertaken in areas
of special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of
protecting its citizens from increased flood hazards and ensuring
that new development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its
exposure to flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any
development in an area of special flood hazard, as shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 100-3B, without a valid
floodplain development permit. Application for a permit shall be
made on forms furnished by the local administrator and may
include, but not be limited to: plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale
and showing: the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of
the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing.
(2) Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee to be set by the City Council
annually by resolution. In addition, the applicant shall be
responsible for reimbursing the City of Rye for any additional costs
necessary for review, inspection and approval of this project. The
local administrator may require a deposit of no more than $500 to
cover these additional costs.
C. Application for a permit. The applicant shall provide the following
information as appropriate. Additional information may be required on
the permit application form.
(1) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially
improved structure to be located in Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, or
Zone A if base flood elevation data are available. Upon completion
of the lowest floor, the permittee shall submit to the local
administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or surveyor.
(2) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the bottom
of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding
pilings and columns) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zone V1-V30 or VE, or Zone V if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest
floor, the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the asbuilt
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or
surveyor.
§ 100-4 FIREARMS § 100-4
95:321
(3) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any
new or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be
floodproofed. Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the
structure, the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the
as-built floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer
or surveyor.
(4) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
any utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 100-5C(3),
Utilities.
(5) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
any nonresidential flood proofed structure will meet the flood
proofing criteria in § 100-5E, Standards for nonresidential
structures outside coastal high-hazard areas.
(6) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by
a licensed professional engineer must be submitted that
demonstrate that the altered or relocated segment will provide
equal or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. The
applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material
required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
to revise the documents enumerated in § 100-3B, when notified by
the local administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs
assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also
provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered or
relocated stream segment will be maintained.
(7) A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required
by the local administrator, which shows whether proposed
development to be located in an area of special flood hazard may
result in physical damage to any other property.
(8) In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from
other sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the
permit applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions) that are greater than
either 50 lots or five acres.
(9) In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation are
available, designs and specifications, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect, for any breakaway walls in a
proposed structure with design strengths in excess of 20 pounds
per square foot.
(10) In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation are
available, for all new and substantial improvements to structures,
floodplain development permit applications shall be accompanied
by design plans and specifications, prepared in sufficient detail to
enable independent review of the foundation support and
§ 100-4 RYE CODE § 100-4
95:322
connection components. Said plans and specifications shall be
developed or reviewed by a licensed professional engineer or
architect, and shall be accompanied by a statement, bearing the
signature of the architect or engineer, certifying that the design
and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice and with all applicable provisions of
this chapter.
D. Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator. Duties of the local
administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(a) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 100-4C, Application for a permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(b) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If
a proposed building site is located in an area of special flood
hazard, all new construction and substantial improvements
shall meet the applicable standards of § 100-5, Construction
standards, and, in particular, § 100-5A(2), Subdivision
proposals.
(c) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of
special flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other
property (e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood
velocities). The local administrator may require the applicant
to submit additional technical analyses and data necessary to
complete the determination. If the proposed development may
result in physical damage to any other property or fails to meet
the applicable requirements of § 100-5, Construction
standards, no permit shall be issued. The applicant may revise
the application to include measures that mitigate or eliminate
the adverse effects and resubmit the application.
(d) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required
by state or federal law.
(2) Use of other flood data.
(a) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
designated areas of special flood hazard on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate map (FIRM) but has neither produced
water surface elevation data (these areas are designated Zone
A or V on the FIRM) nor identified a floodway, the local
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
§ 100-4 FIREARMS § 100-4
95:323
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source, including data developed
pursuant to § 100-4C(7), as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(b) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the
purposes of this chapter.
(3) Alteration of watercourses.
(a) The local administrator shall notify adjacent communities and
the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or relocation of
a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
(b) The local administrator shall determine whether the permit
holder has provided for maintenance within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
(c) Determine compliance with Chapter 195, Wetlands and
Watercourses, of the Rye City Code.
(4) Construction stage.
(a) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor
or completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially
improved structure, the local administrator shall obtain from
the permit holder a certification of the as-built elevation of the
lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea
level. The certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional
engineer and certified by same. For manufactured homes, the
permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation upon
placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of elevation
must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it remains
on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is fully
licensed and ready for highway use).
(b) In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation
data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor of a new
or substantially improved structure, the permit holder shall
submit to the local administrator a certificate of elevation, in
relation to mean sea level, of the bottom of the lowest
structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and
§ 100-4 RYE CODE § 100-4
95:324
columns). For manufactured homes, the permit holder shall
submit the certificate of elevation upon placement of the
structure on the site. An elevation certificate must also be
submitted for a recreational vehicle if it remains on a site 180
consecutive days or longer (unless it is fully licensed and ready
for highway use).
(c) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval
of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies
detected shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the
project unless immediately corrected.
(5) Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's
engineer or architect shall make periodic inspections at
appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to
monitor compliance with permit conditions and enable said
inspector to certify, if requested, that the development is in
compliance with the requirements of the floodplain development
permit and/or any variance provisions.
(6) Stop-work orders.
(a) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a
stop-work order for any floodplain development found ongoing
without a development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order
shall subject the violator to the penalties described in § 100-3E.
(b) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a
stop-work order for any floodplain development found
noncompliant with the provisions of this chapter and/or the
conditions of the development permit. Disregard of a stop-work
order shall subject the violator to the penalties described in
§ 100-3E.
(7) Certificate of compliance.
(a) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 100-3B, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to
permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or
both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed,
converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or
structure until a certificate of compliance has been issued by
the local administrator stating that the building or land
conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
(b) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development
in areas of special flood hazard.
(c) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 100-4D(5), Inspections, and/or
§ 100-4 FIREARMS § 100-4
95:325
§ 100-5. Construction standards.
any certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing,
anchoring requirements or encroachment analyses which may
have been required as a condition of the approved permit.
(8) Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection, copies of the following:
(a) Floodplain development permits and certificates of
compliance;
(b) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to § 100-4D(4)(a) and (b), and whether or
not the structures contain a basement;
(c) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 100-4D(4)(a),
and whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(d) Variances issued pursuant to § 100-6, Variance procedures;
and
(e) Notices required under § 100-4D(3), Alteration of
watercourses.
A. General standards. The following standards apply to new development,
including new and substantially improved structures, in the areas of
special flood hazard shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
designated in § 100-3B.
(1) Coastal high-hazard areas. The following requirements apply
within Zones V1-V30, VE and V:
(a) All new construction, including manufactured homes and
recreational vehicles on site 180 days or longer and not fully
licensed for highway use, shall be located landward of the
reach of high tide.
(b) The use of fill for structural support of buildings, manufactured
homes or recreational vehicles on site 180 days or longer is
prohibited.
(c) Man-made alteration of sand dunes which would increase
potential flood damage is prohibited.
(2) Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home
and recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(a) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
§ 100-4 RYE CODE § 100-5
95:326
(b) Public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, shall be located and constructed so as to
minimize flood damage; and
(c) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to
flood damage.
(d) In a subdivision approved by the Planning Commission and in
site developments in an RFWP District approved by the
Planning Commission, fill may be placed for the purpose of
construction of roads and utility systems, provided that such
roads will be above the elevation of the base flood, will not
result in the ponding of water or will not significantly affect the
runoff of surface waters. Normal road base course and
surfacing shall not be considered fill, walls, dikes or
encroachments for the purposes of this section.
(3) Encroachments.
(a) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or
other development shall be permitted, including but not
limited to the placement of fill, construction of walls or dikes or
other encroachments, other than the pilings and columns
needed to support a building, structure or other improvement,
except in the following specific cases:
[1] Placement of fill in order to provide a safe means of access
from one entrance of a habitable structure to the closest
approved street for pedestrians and emergency and
ordinary vehicles, provided that such fill is designed so as
not to result in the ponding of water or significantly affect
the runoff of surface waters and is the minimum fill needed
to provide such access.
[2] In coastal high-hazard areas, fill may be placed only as
part of an approved plan for the construction of a seawall
or similar protective barrier, which has been designed by a
civil engineer with a professional engineering license,
except that no structure shall be erected on such fill until
the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map or Flood Insurance
Rate Map has been amended to show that the land on
which the structure is to be erected has been designated
as an A, AO, AH, A1 through A30, A99, B, C or D Flood
Insurance Zone.
[3] Regrading of a site which does not involve the placement
of fill.
[4] Normal lawn and landscaping maintenance, to include the
spreading of topsoil, provided that such topsoil shall not
§ 100-5 FIREARMS § 100-5
95:327
increase the elevation any place on the site by more than
four inches.
[5] The City of Rye agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM and
floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and the
applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the City of Rye for all fees and
other costs in relation to the application. The applicant
must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the City of Rye for all costs related to the final
map revision.
(b) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 100-3B, no new construction, substantial
improvements or other development in the floodway (including
fill) shall be permitted unless:
[1] A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base
flood; or
[2] The City of Rye agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM and
floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and the
applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the City of Rye for all fees and
other costs in relation to the application. The applicant
must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the City of Rye for all costs related to the final
map revisions.
B. Standards for all structures. The following standards apply to new
development, including new and substantially improved structures, in
the areas of special flood hazard shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map designated in § 100-3B. [Amended 10-5-2011 by L.L. No.
6-2011]
(1) Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to
structures in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement during the base
flood. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) New construction and substantial improvements to structures
shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage.
§ 100-5 RYE CODE § 100-5
95:328
(b) New construction and substantial improvements to structures
shall be constructed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage.
(c) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, new and substantially improved structures
shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage
in an area other than a basement and which are subject to
flooding, designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either
be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: (i) a minimum
of two openings having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding; and (ii) the bottom of all such openings no higher
than one foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all
sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
(d) Within Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also within Zone V if base
flood elevation are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the space below the lowest floor
either free from obstruction or constructed with nonsupporting
breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening
intended to collapse under wind and water loads without
causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation
system. The enclosed space below the lowest floor shall be
used only for parking vehicles, building access or storage. Use
of this space for human habitation is expressly prohibited. The
construction of stairs, stairwells and elevator shafts are subject
to the design requirements for breakaway walls.
(3) Utilities.
(a) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating,
ventilating, air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other
service equipment shall be located at or above the base flood
elevation. Electrical wiring and outlets, switches, junction
boxes and panels shall be elevated to or above the base flood
elevation unless they conform to the appropriate provisions of
the electrical part of the Building Code of New York State or
the Residential Code of New York State for location of such
items in wet locations;
§ 100-5 FIREARMS § 100-5
95:329
(b) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system;
(c) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
Sanitary sewer and storm drainage systems for buildings that
have openings below the base flood elevation shall be provided
with automatic backflow valves or other automatic backflow
devices that are installed in each discharge line passing
through a building's exterior wall; and
(d) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
C. Residential structures (except coastal high-hazard areas). The following
standards apply to new and substantially improved commercial,
industrial and other nonresidential structures, in addition to the
requirements in § 100-5A(1), Subdivision proposals, § 100-5A(2),
Encroachments, and § 100-5B, Standards for all structures.
(1) Elevation. The following standards, in addition to the standards in
§ 100-5A(1), Subdivision proposals, § 100-5A(2), Encroachments,
and § 100-5B, Standards for all structures, apply to structures
located in areas of special flood hazard as indicated:
(a) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated at least two feet above the base flood level.
(b) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved structures shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
(c) Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet
above the depth number specified in feet on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 100-3B (at least
two feet if no depth number is specified).
(d) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are
required to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures on slopes.
D. Residential structures (coastal high-hazard area). The following
standards, in addition to the standards in § 100-5A(1), Coastal highhazard
areas, and § 100-5A(2), Subdivision proposals, and § 100-5B,
Standards for all structures, apply to structures located in areas of
§ 100-5 RYE CODE § 100-5
95:330
special flood hazard shown as Zone V1-V30, VE or V on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 100-3B:
(1) Elevation. New construction and substantial improvements shall be
elevated on pilings, columns or shear walls such that the bottom of
the lowest horizontal structural member supporting the lowest
elevated floor (excluding columns, piles, diagonal bracing attached
to the piles or columns, grade beams, pile caps and other members
designed to either withstand storm action or break away without
imparting damaging loads to the structure) is elevated at least two
feet above base flood level so as not to impede the flow of water.
(2) Determination of loading forces. Structural design shall consider
the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously during
the base flood on all building components.
(a) The structural design shall be adequate to resist water forces
that would occur during the base flood. Horizontal water loads
considered shall include inertial and drag forces of waves,
current drag forces, and impact forces from waterborne storm
debris. Dynamic uplift loads shall also be considered if
bulkheads, walls, or other natural or man-made flow
obstructions could cause wave run-up beyond the elevation of
the base flood.
(b) Buildings shall be designed and constructed to resist the forces
due to wind pressure. Wind forces on the superstructure
include windward and leeward forces on vertical walls, uplift
on the roof, internal forces when openings allow wind to enter
the house, and upward force on the underside of the house
when it is exposed. In the design, the wind should be assumed
to blow potentially from any lateral direction relative to the
house.
(c) Wind loading values used shall be those required by the
building code.
(3) Foundation standards.
(a) The pilings or column foundation and structure attached
thereto shall be adequately anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement due to the effects of wind and
water pressures acting simultaneously on all building
components. Foundations must be designed to transfer safely
to the underlying soil all loads due to wind, water, dead load,
live load and other loads (including uplift due to wind and
water).
(b) Spread footings and fill material shall not be used for
structural support of a new building or substantial
improvement of an existing structure.
§ 100-5 FIREARMS § 100-5
95:331
(4) Pile foundation design.
(a) The design ratio of pile spacing to pile diameter shall not be
less than 8:1 for individual piles (this shall not apply to pile
clusters located below the design grade). The maximum
center-to-center spacing of wood piles shall not be more than
12 feet on center under load-bearing sills, beams, or girders.
(b) Pilings shall have adequate soil penetration (bearing capacity)
to resist the combined wave and wind loads (lateral and uplift)
associated with the base flood acting simultaneously with
typical structure (live and dead) loads, and shall include
consideration of decreased resistance capacity caused by
erosion of soil strata surrounding the piles. The minimum
penetration for foundation piles is to an elevation of five feet
below mean sea level (msl) datum if the BFE is +10 msl or less,
or to be at least 10 feet below msl if the BFE is greater than
+10 msl.
(c) Pile foundation analysis shall also include consideration of
piles in column action from the bottom of the structure to the
stable soil elevation of the site. Pilings may be horizontally or
diagonally braced to withstand wind and water forces.
(d) The minimum acceptable sizes for timber piles are a tip
diameter of eight inches for round timber piles and eight
inches by eight inches for square timber piles. All wood piles
must be treated in accordance with requirements of EPEE-C3
to minimize decay and damage from fungus.
(e) Reinforced concrete piles shall be cast of concrete having a
twenty-eight-day ultimate compressive strength of not less
than 5,000 pounds per square inch, and shall be reinforced
with a minimum of four longitudinal steel bars having a
combined area of not less than 1% nor more than 4% of the
gross concrete area. Reinforcing for precast piles shall have a
concrete cover of not less than 1 1/4 inches for No. 5 bars and
smaller and not less than 1 1/2 inches for No. 6 through No. 11
bars. Reinforcement for piles cast in the field shall have a
concrete cover of not less than two inches.
(f) Piles shall be driven by means of a pile driver or drop hammer,
jetted, or augered into place.
(g) Additional support for piles in the form of bracing may include
lateral or diagonal bracing between piles.
(h) When necessary, piles shall be braced at the ground line in
both directions by a wood timber grade beam or a reinforced
concrete grade beam. These at-grade supports should be
securely attached to the piles to provide support even if
scoured from beneath.
§ 100-5 RYE CODE § 100-5
95:332
(i) Diagonal bracing between piles, consisting of two-inch by
eight-inch (minimum) members bolted to the piles, shall be
limited in location to below the lowest supporting structural
member and above the stable soil elevation, and aligned in the
vertical plane along pile rows perpendicular to the shoreline.
Galvanized steel rods (minimum diameter 1/2 inch) or cabletype
bracing is permitted in any plane.
(j) Knee braces, which stiffen both the upper portion of a pile and
the beam-to-pile connection, may be used along pile rows
perpendicular and parallel to the shoreline. Knee braces shall
be two-by-eight lumber bolted to the sides of the pile/beam, or
four-by-four or larger braces framed into the pile/beam.
Bolting shall consist of two 5/8-inch galvanized steel bolts
(each end) for two-by-eight members, or one 5/8-inch lag bolt
(each end) for square members. Knee braces shall not extend
more than three feet below the elevation of the base flood.
(5) Column foundation design. Masonry piers or poured-in-place
concrete piers shall be internally reinforced to resist vertical and
lateral loads, and be connected with a movement-resisting
connection to a pile cap or pile shaft.
(6) Connectors and fasteners. Galvanized metal connectors, wood
connectors, or bolts of size and number adequate for the calculated
loads must be used to connect adjoining components of a structure.
Toe nailing as a principal method of connection is not permitted. All
metal connectors and fasteners used in exposed locations shall be
steel, hot-dipped galvanized after fabrication. Connectors in
protected interior locations shall be fabricated from galvanized
sheet.
(7) Beam to pile connections. The primary floor beams or girders shall
span the supports in the direction parallel to the flow of potential
floodwater and wave action and shall be fastened to the columns or
pilings by bolting, with or without cover plates. Concrete members
shall be connected by reinforcement, if cast in place, or (of precast)
shall be securely connected by bolting and welding. If sills, beams,
or girders are attached to wood piling at a notch, a minimum of two
5/8-inch galvanized steel bolts or two hot-dipped galvanized straps
3/16 inch by four inches by 18 inches, each bolted with two 1/2-inch
lag bolts per beam member, shall be used. Notching of pile tops
shall be the minimum sufficient to provide ledge support for beam
members without unduly weakening pile connections. Piling shall
not be notched so that the cross-section is reduced below 50%.
(8) Floor and deck connections.
(a) Wood two-inch by four-inch (minimum) connectors or metal
joist anchors shall be used to tie floor joists to floor beams/
girders. These should be installed on alternate floor joists, at a
§ 100-5 FIREARMS § 100-5
95:333
minimum. Cross bridging of all floor joists shall be provided.
Such cross-bridging may be one-inch by three-inch members,
placed eight feet on-center maximum, or solid bridging of the
same depth as joist at same spacing.
(b) Plywood should be used for subflooring and attic flooring to
provide good torsional resistance in the horizontal plane of the
structure. The plywood should not be less than 3/4-inch total
thickness, and should be exterior grade and fastened to beams
or joists with 8d annular or spiral thread galvanized nails. Such
fastening shall be supplemented by the application of
waterproof industrial adhesive applied to all bearing surfaces.
(9) Exterior wall connections. All bottom plates shall have any required
breaks under a wall stud or an anchor bolt. Approved anchors will
be used to secure rafters or joists and top and bottom plates to
studs in exterior and bearing walls to form a continuous tie.
Continuous 15/32-inch or thicker plywood sheathing, overlapping
the top wall plate and continuing down to the sill, beam, or girder,
may be used to provide the continuous tie. If the sheets of plywood
are not vertically continuous, then two-by-four nailer blocking shall
be provided at all horizontal joints. In lieu of the plywood,
galvanized steel rods of 1/2-inch diameter or galvanized steel
straps not less than one inch wide by 1/16 inch thick may be used to
connect from the top wall plate to the sill, beam, or girder. Washers
with a minimum diameter of three inches shall be used at each end
of the 1/2-inch round rods. These anchors shall be installed no more
than two feet from each corner rod, no more than four feet on
center.
(10) Ceiling joist/rafter connections.
(a) All ceiling joists or rafters shall be installed in such a manner
that the joists provide a continuous tie across the rafters.
Ceiling joists and rafters shall be securely fastened at their
intersections. A metal or wood connector shall be used at
alternate ceiling joist/rafter connections to the wall top plate.
(b) Gable roofs shall be additionally stabilized by installing two-byfour
blocking on two-foot centers between the rafters at each
gable end. Blocking shall be installed a minimum of eight feet
toward the house interior from each gable end.
(11) Projecting members. All cantilevers and other projecting members
must be adequately supported and braced to withstand wind and
water uplift forces. Roof eave overhangs shall be limited to a
maximum of two feet and joist overhangs to a maximum of one foot.
Larger overhangs and porches will be permitted if designed,
reviewed or certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect.
(12) Roof sheathing.
§ 100-5 RYE CODE § 100-5
95:334
(a) Plywood, or other wood material, when used as roof sheathing,
shall not be less than 15/32 inch in thickness, and shall be of
exterior sheathing grade or equivalent. All attaching devices
for sheathing and roof coverings shall be galvanized or be of
other suitable corrosion-resistant material.
(b) All corners, gable ends, and roof overhangs exceeding six
inches shall be reinforced by the application of waterproof
industrial adhesive applied to all bearing surfaces of any
plywood sheet used in the sheathing of such corner, gable end,
or roof overhang.
(c) In addition, roofs should be sloped as steeply as practicable to
reduce uplift pressures, and special care should be used in
securing ridges, hips, valleys, eaves, vents, chimneys, and
other points of discontinuity in the roofing surface.
(13) Protection of openings. All exterior glass panels, windows, and
doors shall be designed, detailed, and constructed to withstand
loads due to the design wind speed of 110 miles per hour.
Connections for these elements must be designed to transfer safely
the design loads to the supporting structure. Panel widths of
multiple-panel sliding glass doors shall not exceed three feet.
(14) Breakaway wall design standards.
(a) The breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance
of not less than 10 pounds per square foot and not more than
20 pounds per square foot, with the criterion that the safety of
the overall structure at the point of wall failure be confirmed
using established procedures. Grade beams shall be installed
in both directions for all piles considered to carry the
breakaway wall load. Knee braces are required for front row
piles that support breakaway walls.
(b) Use of breakaway wall strengths in excess of 20 pounds per
square foot shall not be permitted unless a registered
professional engineer or architect has developed or reviewed
the structural design and specifications for the building
foundation and breakaway wall components, and certifies that
(1) the breakaway walls will fail under water loads less than
those that would occur during the base flood; and (2) the
elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation
system will not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads
acting simultaneously on all building components (structural
and nonstructural). Water loading values used shall be those
associated with the base flood. Wind loading values shall be
those required by the building code.
E. Nonresidential structures (except coastal high-hazard areas). The
following standards apply to new and substantially improved
§ 100-5 FIREARMS § 100-5
95:335
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures, in addition
to the requirements in § 100-5A(1), Subdivision proposals, § 100-5A(2),
Encroachments, and § 100-5B, Standards for all structures.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to
or above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(b) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two
feet above the base flood level with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components located below the base flood level must be capable
of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects
of buoyancy.
(2) Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at
least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 100-5E(1)(b).
(3) If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional
engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing
certificate or other certification shall be provided to the local
administrator that certifies the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of this chapter, including the specific elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) to which the structure is to be
floodproofed.
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
(5) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three
feet above the highest adjacent grade.
F. Standards for nonresidential structures within coastal high-hazard
areas. In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevations
are available, new construction and substantial improvements of any
§ 100-5 RYE CODE § 100-5
95:336
§ 100-6. Variance procedure.
nonresidential structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall have the bottom of the lowest member of the lowest
floor elevated to or above the base flood elevation. Floodproofing of
structures is not an allowable alternative to elevating the lowest floor
to the base flood elevation in Zones V1-V30, VE and V.
G. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. The following
standards, in addition to the standards in § 100-5A, General
construction standards, and § 100-5B, Standards for all structures,
apply, as indicated, in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured
homes and to recreational vehicles which are located in areas of special
flood hazard:
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE, AH,
V1-V30, V, and VE shall either: be on site fewer than 180
consecutive days; be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
meet the requirements for manufactured homes in § 100-5E(2), (3)
and (4). A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quickdisconnect-
type utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions.
(2) A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in
Zones A1-A30, AE, AH, V1-V30, V, and VE shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor is elevated to or
above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
and lateral movement. Elevation on piers consisting of dry stacked
blocks is prohibited.
(3) Within Zone A or V, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be
elevated such that the manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Elevation
on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks is prohibited.
(4) Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 100-3B (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified). Elevation on piers consisting
of dry stacked blocks is prohibited.
A. Appeals board.
§ 100-5 FIREARMS § 100-6
95:337
(1) The Board of Appeals as established by the City of Rye shall hear
and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78
of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated
with conducting search and rescue operations during periods
of flooding;
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
§ 100-6 RYE CODE § 100-6
95:338
(l) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and
bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes
of this chapter, the Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
(6) The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided items in
§ 100-6A(4) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(a) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
(b) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(3) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(a) The criteria of Subsection B(1), (4), (5) and (6) of this section
are met;
(b) The structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create
no additional threat to public safety.
(4) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
§ 100-6 FIREARMS § 100-6
95:339
Chapter 102
(RESERVED)
Chapter 104
GRAFFITI
§ 104-1. Intent.
It has become apparent that the use of pens, writing and artistic devices
and spray can and marking devices used in connection with the writing of
graffiti on walls and other places of buildings and property has reached
such significant levels and proportions that immediate local attention
should be given this matter by this municipality. The defacing of such
property and the use of foul language in many of the writings is harmful
to the general public and violative of the good and welfare of the citizens,
residents and people of the City of Rye. It is the further intent of this
legislation that any person guilty of writing graffiti on buildings and
property shall be punished so that the punishment shall fit the offense.
§ 104-2. Prohibited acts.
No person shall write, paint or draw any inscription, figure or mark of
any type on any building, public or private, or any other property, real or
personal, owned, operated or maintained by any public benefit corporation,
the City of Rye or by any person, firm or corporation, or any agency
or instrumentality thereof, without the express written permission of the
owner of the property or his agent.
(6) Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification
of:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
(7) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from lowest floor elevation.
§ 100-6 RYE CODE § 104-3
102:340
§ 104-3. Penalties for offenses.
And person who violates § 104-2 of this chapter shall be punished by a fine
of not more than $500 for a first offense and of not more than $1,000 for a
second or subsequent offense or imprisonment for not more than 15 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 104-4. Reward.
Under the authority of § 91 of the General Municipal Law of the State of
New York, any person who shall provide information which leads to the
detection, arrest and conviction of any other person of a violation of this
chapter shall be entitled to a reward equal to 1/2 of any fine imposed by the
court, but in no event greater than $1,000.
§ 104-5. Responsibilities of owner.
It is the responsibility of the owner, or his agent, of the building or structure
which has been defaced without the owner's, or his agent's, prior written
permission by a writing, painting or drawing of any inscription, figure or
mark to completely remove said graffiti from the building or structure
within 10 days of receipt of written notice of the defacement by the Police
Commissioner or his designee, said notice having been served personally or
as otherwise permitted by law.
§ 104-6. Failure of owner to comply. [Amended 8-14-2002 by L.L.
No. 4-2002]
Failure of the owner of the building or structure to remove the graffiti
within the time allowed after written notice may subject the owner to civil
proceedings or criminal prosecution as authorized by Chapter 108, Article
VIII, of the Code.
§ 104-7. Sale prohibited. [Added 7-15-1992 by L.L. No. 12-1992]
§ 104-8. Penalty for illegal sale. [Added 7-15-1992 by L.L. No.
12-1992]
Any person who violates the above provisions relating to the sale of aerosol
spray paint cans or broad-tipped indelible markers shall be subject to a civil
penalty of not more than $250.
Chapter 106
A. No person shall sell or offer to sell an aerosol spray paint can or broadtipped
indelible marker to any person under 18 years of age.
B. For the purpose of this section, the term "broad-tipped indelible
marker" shall mean any felt tip marker or similar implement containing
a fluid that is not water soluble and which has a flat or angled writing
surface 1/2 inch or greater.
§ 104-3 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 104-8
106:341
HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT
§ 106-1. Prohibited acts.
Except as provided in § 106-2 hereof, the takeoff or landing of a helicopter
or other aircraft is prohibited within the City of Rye.
§ 106-2. Exceptions.
The following acts shall be exceptions to the prohibitions set forth in § 106-1
hereof:
§ 106-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, corporation or association violating any provision of this
chapter shall be liable to a fine or penalty of not less than $100 nor more
than $250 for each offense.
Chapter 108
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 71.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 81.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 98.
Landmark preservation — See Ch. 117.
Sanitary regulations — See Ch. 157.
Sewers — See Ch. 161.
Zoning — See Ch. 197.
A. Emergency landings of helicopters or other aircraft; provided, however,
that no helicopter or other aircraft which has landed as a result of an
emergency condition involving the safe operation of the aircraft shall
take off except under the supervision of the Police Department
providing police protection in the City of Rye, which shall permit such
takeoff only after consultation with qualified Federal Aviation
Administration personnel as to the airworthiness of the helicopter or
other aircraft. In the event that such helicopter or other aircraft is
deemed to be incapable of safe operations, it shall not be permitted to
takeoff and shall be removed only by surface.
B. Takeoffs or landings by police, military or other public safety personnel
in the exercise of their official duties or responsibilities.
§ 104-8 RYE CODE § 106-3
106:342
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 108-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Housing Standards Applicable to
Residential Premises in the City of Rye," or the "Housing Code of the City of
Rye."
§ 108-2. Purpose. [Amended 9-6-1967 by L.L. No. 1-1967]
The purpose of this chapter is to provide basic and uniform standards,
in terms of performance objectives implemented by specific requirements,
governing the condition, occupancy and maintenance of residential
premises, and establishing reasonable safeguards for the safety, health and
welfare of the occupants and users thereof. The intent of this chapter is also
to require buildings to be maintained in such manner that they continue to
comply with the provisions of this chapter and other codes of the City of
Rye.
§ 108-3. Scope.
This chapter shall apply to residential premises as follows:
§ 108-4. Nonapplicability.
This chapter shall not apply to mobile homes and mobile home courts or
to transient-type occupancies and uses, including but not limited to nursing
and convalescent homes, hotels, motels, tourist camps, farm labor camps,
travel trailers and trailer parks and other forms of temporary housing.
§ 108-5. Applicability; conflicting provisions.
A. Lots, plots or parcels of land on which residential buildings, buildings of
mixed occupancy or accessory structures are located.
B. Residential buildings, including one- and two-family dwellings and
multiple dwellings, except as specifically excluded in § 108-4.
C. Residential occupancies in buildings of mixed occupancy.
D. Accessory structures, accessory to residential occupancies.
A. This chapter establishes standards applicable to residential premises
used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, irrespective of when
such premises shall have been constructed, altered or repaired. The
standards of this chapter do not replace or modify standards otherwise
established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of building
equipment or facilities.
B. Where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of a zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, firesafety, health,
§ 108-1 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-5
106:343
§ 108-6. Applicable statutes and standards.
Installations, alterations and repairs to residential premises, and materials,
assemblies and equipment utilized in connection therewith, shall be
reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with applicable
statutes of the State of New York and orders, rules and regulations issued
by authority thereof. Conformity of such work, materials, assemblies or
equipment with the applicable requirements of the New York State Building
Construction Code shall be prima facie evidence that the same is reasonably
safe to persons and property.
§ 108-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental to
that of the residential building and which is located on the same premises.
ACCESSORY USE — A use, occupancy or tenancy customarily incidental
to the principal use or occupancy of a residential building. Such accessory
uses may include, among others, the following:
APPROVED — Approved by the administrative officer under the regulations
of this chapter, or approved by an authority designated by law or this
chapter.
BASEMENT — That space of a building that is partly below grade and which
has more than half its height, measured from floor to ceiling, above the
water supply or sewage disposal law or ordinance,20 or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, or other local law, ordinance or regulation,
the provision or requirement which is the more restrictive or which
establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
A. Offices for the building management.
B. Dining rooms, banquet rooms, public kitchens and ballrooms.
C. Recreation and play rooms.
Laundries for the use of tenants and occupants and in connection with
the management and operation of a residential building.
D.
Maintenance and work shops, storage rooms for linen, bedding,
furniture, supplies and tenants' equipment and effects.
E.
Rooms or space for the incidental sale or display of merchandise to
occupants and tenants, such as newspaper, candy and cigar stands.
F.
Garages within a residential building or on the premises thereof, used
primarily for the storage of passenger-type motor vehicles.
G.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 68, Building Construction; Ch. 81, Electrical Standards; Ch. 98, Fire
Prevention; Ch. 157, Sanitary Regulations; Ch. 161, Sewers; and Ch. 197, Zoning.
§ 108-5 RYE CODE § 108-7
106:344
average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building.
BATHROOM — Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs or
showers, or both, and which may also contain water closets, lavatories or
fixtures serving similar purposes. See definition of "toilet room."
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls
or within exterior or party walls and a roof, affording shelter to persons,
animals or property.
CELLAR — That space of a building that is partly or entirely below grade,
which has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, below
the average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining
the building.
CITY — City of Rye.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — Building containing not more than one
dwelling unit occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — Building containing not more than two
dwelling units occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provision for living, cooking,
sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one family.
EXIT — A way of departure from the interior of a building or structure to
the exterior at street or grade, including doorways, passageways, hallways,
corridors, stairways, ramps, fire escapes and all other elements necessary
for egress or escape.
FAMILY — A household constituting a single housekeeping unit occupied by
one or more persons.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARD — A specification, code, rule, guide
or procedure in the field of construction or related thereto, recognized and
accepted as authoritative.
GRADE, FINISHED — Natural surface of the ground, or surface of the
ground after completion of any change in contour, abutting building or
premises.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space occupied by one or more persons for living,
sleeping, eating or cooking. Kitchenettes shall not be deemed to be
habitable space. See definitions of "nonhabitable space," "public space" and
"exit."
INFESTATION — The presence, within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling
unit, lodging house, lodging unit or premises, of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests.
KITCHEN — Space, 60 square feet or more in floor area, with a minimum
width of five feet, used for cooking or preparation of food.
KITCHENETTE — Space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used for
cooking or preparation of food.
§ 108-7 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-7
106:345
LODGING HOUSE — A multiple dwelling used primarily for the purpose of
furnishing lodging, with or without meals, for compensation.
LODGING UNIT — A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit, used or intended to be used for lodging.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Occupancy of a building in part for residential use
and in part for some other use not accessory thereto.
MULTIPLE DWELLING —
MULTIPLE RESIDENCE — See "multiple dwelling."
NONHABITABLE SPACE — Space used as kitchenettes, pantries, bath,
toilet, laundry, rest, dressing, locker, storage, utility, heater and boiler
rooms, closets and other spaces for service and maintenance of the
building, and those spaces used for access and vertical travel between
stories. See definitions of "habitable space," "public space" and "exit."
PLUMBING SYSTEM — The water supply system, the drainage system,
the vent system, fixtures and traps, including their respective connections,
devices and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises.
POTABLE WATER — Water which is approved for drinking, culinary and
domestic purposes.
PUBLIC SPACE — Space within a residential building for public use, such
as lobbies, lounges, reception, ball, meeting, lecture and recreation rooms,
banquet and dining rooms and their kitchens, and swimming pools.
SEWAGE — Liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in
suspension or solution and which may include industrial wastes and liquids
containing chemicals.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction framed of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings.
A. Building containing three or more dwelling units.
Building containing living, sanitary and sleeping facilities occupied by
one or two families and more than four lodgers residing with either one
of such families.
B.
Building with one or more sleeping rooms, other than a one- or twofamily
dwelling, used or occupied by permanent or transient paying
guests or tenants.
C.
Building with sleeping accommodations for more than five persons,
used or occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house or for
similar uses.
D.
Building used or occupied as a convalescent, old-age or nursing home,
but not including private or public hospitals or public institutions. (See
§ 108-4 for certain multiple dwellings not within scope of this chapter.)
E.
§ 108-7 RYE CODE § 108-7
106:346
TOILET ROOMS — Enclosed space containing one or more water closets,
which may also contain one or more lavatories, urinals and other plumbing
fixtures. See definition of "bathroom."
VENTILATION — Supply and removal of air to and from a space by natural
or mechanical means.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer air through
windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks, with or without wind-driven
devices.
§ 108-7 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-7
106:347

ARTICLE II
Space Requirements
§ 108-8. General requirements.
§ 108-9. Occupancy classification of buildings.
Buildings, for the purpose of this chapter, shall be classified in respect to
their occupancies as follows:
§ 108-10. Maximum occupancy.
A. Buildings occupied in whole or in part as defined in this chapter shall
comply with the requirements hereinafter set forth concerning
occupancy, size, light and ventilation in order to provide safe and
healthful environment.
B. The term "accessory use" shall have a uniform meaning and shall apply
in the same manner and under the same conditions or restrictions to all
residential buildings.
A. One- and two-family dwellings. Buildings containing one or two
dwelling units with less than four lodgers residing with a family in
either one of such dwelling units.
B. Multiple dwellings.
(1) Buildings containing one or two dwelling units with more than four
lodgers with a family in either one of such dwelling units.
(2) Buildings containing three or more dwelling units.
(3) Apartment houses and apartment hotels.
(4) Lodging houses.
(5) Buildings with sleeping accommodations for more than five
persons, used or occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or
sorority house or for similar uses.
(6) Garden apartments.
C. Accessory structures. Garages, carports and similar-type structures on
residential premises.
A. In dwelling units, the maximum number of occupants shall be limited to
the number determined on the basis of the floor areas of habitable
rooms, other than kitchens, as follows: one occupant per room having
floor area of at least 80 but less than 120 square feet, two occupants per
room having floor area of at least 120 but less than 180 square feet, and
three occupants per room having floor area of 180 or more square feet.
B. In lodging units, the maximum number of occupants shall be limited to
the number determined on the same basis as for dwelling units.
§ 108-8 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-10
106:349
§ 108-11. Prohibited uses.
§ 108-12. Habitable space.
C. In buildings occupied as clubs, dormitories, sorority or fraternity
houses and providing sleeping accommodations for more than five
persons, the maximum number of occupants so accommodated in any
habitable room shall be limited to the number determined on the basis
of the floor area, in square feet, of the room divided by 50 square feet
per occupant.
A. It shall be prohibited to use for sleeping purposes any kitchen,
nonhabitable space or public space.
B. It shall be prohibited, in lodging houses, to use for dining purposes any
communal kitchen containing less than 100 square feet of floor area or
any nonhabitable space or public space other than dining space.
C. It shall be prohibited to prepare or eat meals in lodging units.
D. It shall be prohibited to use any cellar space as habitable space.
A. Size.
(1) Habitable space shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet
six inches over 50% of the floor area; and the floor area where the
ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered in
computing floor area.
(2) A dwelling unit shall contain at least one habitable room having a
minimum of 150 square feet of floor area and a minimum horizontal
dimension of 10 feet.
(3) Kitchens shall have a minimum of 60 square feet of floor area, and
other habitable spaces shall contain not less than 80 square feet of
floor area and shall have a minimum horizontal dimension of seven
feet.
(4) Every alcove less than 60 square feet in area, except a cooking
space or foyer, shall be deemed to be part of a habitable room. The
area of the opening in the dividing partition between the alcove and
the room shall be at least 80% of the wall area of such partition,
measured on the alcove side, but not less than 40 square feet. The
depth of such alcove shall not exceed half its width. The floor area
of the alcove shall be added to the floor area of the room in
determining light and ventilation requirements for the room. An
alcove with an area of 60 square feet or more, but less than the
required area of a habitable room, shall be separately lighted and
ventilated as required for habitable space.
§ 108-10 RYE CODE § 108-12
106:350
§ 108-13. Public space.
B. Basements. Basements shall not be deemed habitable space where
required windows are located only on one wall and the depth of the
basement space exceeds four times its clear height.
C. Light and ventilation.
(1) Habitable space shall be provided with natural light through one or
more windows, skylights, transparent or translucent panels, or any
combinations thereof, that face directly on legal open spaces at
least six inches above the adjoining finished grade, or are above a
roof. The amount of light shall be equivalent to that transmitted
through clear glass equal in area to 10% of the floor area of the
habitable space.
(2) Habitable space shall be provided with artificial light.
(3) Habitable space shall be provided with natural ventilation through
openable parts of windows or other openings in exterior walls that
face legal open spaces above the adjoining finished grade or above
a roof, or through openable parts of skylights, providing total clear
ventilation area equal to not less than 5% of the total floor area of
each habitable space.
(4) Habitable space may also be provided with mechanical ventilation
in addition to natural ventilation.
D. Miscellaneous requirements.
(1) Dwelling units shall be separated from each other and from other
spaces outside the dwelling unit.
(2) Sleeping rooms within dwelling units shall be separated from each
other and from other spaces outside the sleeping rooms to provide
privacy.
(3) Lodging units shall be separated from each other and from other
spaces outside the lodging units.
(4) A communal kitchen or dining room in a lodging house shall be
accessible to the occupants sharing such kitchen or dining room
without going through a dwelling unit or lodging unit of another
occupant.
A. Height. Public space shall have a minimum height of seven feet six
inches measured from finished floor to finished ceiling.
B. Light and ventilation.
(1) Public spaces shall be provided with artificial light.
(2) In public stairs, stairways and passageways, artificial light shall be
electric lighting available at all times so as to afford safe passage
§ 108-12 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-13
106:351
§ 108-14. Nonhabitable space.
for occupants and users. Such lighting shall conform to the
following:
(a) A sufficient number of fixtures shall be provided so that the
distance between fixtures is not more than 30 feet and so that
no wall is more than 15 feet distant from a fixture.
(b) Incandescent lighting shall be based on not less than 1/4 watt
per square foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have
a lamp or lamps with a total of not less than 25 watts.
(c) Fluorescent lighting shall be based on not less than 1/10 watt
per square foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have
a lamp or lamps of a total of not less than 15 watts.
(d) Where under these formulas the calculated wattage does not
correspond to that of a standard lamp, the next larger size shall
be used.
(3) Public spaces shall be provided either with natural ventilation
conforming to the requirements for habitable space or with
mechanical ventilation.
A. Height. Nonhabitable space, except crawl spaces and attics, in multiple
dwellings shall have a minimum height of seven feet measured from
floor to ceiling.
B. Toilet rooms and bathrooms.
(1) Toilet rooms and bathrooms in one- and two-family dwellings shall
have provisions for privacy.
(2) Toilet rooms and bathrooms for dwelling units in multiple dwellings
shall be located within the dwelling units and shall be accessible
from any sleeping room without passing through any other sleeping
room.
(3) Unless located within dwelling units or directly connected with
sleeping rooms, toilet rooms and bathrooms in multiple dwellings
shall be provided in each story containing habitable space and shall
be accessible thereto.
(4) Toilet rooms for employees in multiple dwellings shall be in
separate rooms for each sex where there are five or more
employees, shall be readily accessible to such employees and shall
not open directly into any public kitchen or other public space used
for the cooking or preparation of food.
(5) In one- and two-family dwellings, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall
be provided with floors of moisture-resistant material.
§ 108-13 RYE CODE § 108-14
106:352
§ 108-15. Access and vertical travel between stories.
§ 108-16. Exits.
(6) In multiple dwellings, floors of bathrooms, toilet rooms and similar
spaces shall be waterproof; such waterproofing shall extend six
inches or more above floors, except at doors, so that floors can be
flushed or washed without leaking.
C. Light and ventilation.
(1) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
artificial light appropriate for the use of such rooms.
(2) Laundry rooms, furnace rooms and similar nonhabitable space
shall be provided with artificial light appropriate for the intended
use of such rooms.
(3) Stairs shall be provided with artificial light to allow safe ascent or
descent.
(4) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
ventilation in accordance with either of the following:
(a) Natural ventilation as required for habitable space, except that
such openable areas shall be not less than 1 1/2 square feet for
bathrooms or toilet rooms and not less than three square feet
for kitchenettes; or
(b) Mechanical ventilation exhausting not less than 25 cubic feet
per minute for bathrooms and toilet rooms and not less than
100 cubic feet per minute for kitchenettes.
(5) Spaces in multiple dwellings which contain central heat-producing,
air-conditioning and other equipment shall be ventilated to the
outer air, and air from these spaces shall not be recirculated to
other parts of the building.
(6) Ventilation shall be provided in unheated attics, spaces below flat
roofs and in crawl spaces. Location and net areas of ventilation
openings shall be such as to minimize deterioration of structural
members from condensation or other causes, in conformity with
generally accepted standards.
A. Stairs, both interior and exterior, shall be of sufficient width in
conformity with generally accepted standards so as to serve the
occupants.
B. Railings shall be provided on open portions of stairs, balconies,
landings and stairwells.
A. Safe, continuous and unobstructed exit shall be provided from the
interior of the building to the exterior at street or grade level.
§ 108-14 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-16
106:353
B. Exits shall be arranged, constructed and proportioned so that
occupants may escape safely from the building in case of emergency.
C. In one- and two-family dwellings, in addition to a primary exit from the
building, there shall be provided a secondary exit or, in lieu thereof, one
or more exit openings for emergency use.
D. In multiple dwellings, approved exits shall be provided.
§ 108-16 RYE CODE § 108-16
106:354
ARTICLE III
Structural Requirements
§ 108-17. General requirements.
§ 108-18. Exterior protection. [Amended 4-1-1998 by L.L. No.
4-1998]
§ 108-19. Interior protection.
A. Buildings and parts thereof shall be maintained so as to be capable of
sustaining safely their own weight and the loads to which they may be
subject.
B. Buildings shall be maintained so that loads are transmitted to the soil
without undue differential settlement, unsafe deformation or movement
of the building or of any structural part.
C. Buildings shall be maintained so that protection is provided for all
structural members which may become structurally unsound if left
unprotected. Causes of such deterioration include, among others,
action of freezing and thawing, dampness, corrosion, wetting and
drying, termites and other destructive insects.
D. Buildings built in soil which is water-bearing at any season of the year
shall be maintained so that ground and surface water will not penetrate
into habitable spaces, basements and cellars.
A. Foundation walls shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound and
to prevent entrance of moisture, termites and vermin. Such protection
shall consist of shoring where necessary, subsoil drains at footings,
grouting of masonry cracks, waterproofing of walls and joists and other
suitable means.
B. Exterior walls and wall components shall be maintained so as to prevent
deterioration due to the elements and destructive insects. Such
maintenance shall consist of painting, installation or repair of walls,
copings and flashings, waterproofing of joints, waterproof coatings,
installation or repair of termite shields, poison treatment of soil or other
suitable means.
C. Roofing shall be maintained in watertight condition so as to prevent
leakage into the building. Such maintenance shall consist of repairs of
roofing, flashings, waterproof coatings or other suitable means.
D. Any proposed retaining wall, the cumulative height of which when
viewed in elevation from another property or public right-of-way is
more than two feet, or any proposed single wall planned to be higher
than two feet when so viewed, must be reviewed and approved by the
Board of Architectural Review before a permit is granted.
§ 108-17 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-19
106:355
A. Crawl spaces shall be maintained free of moisture and the flow of air
from such spaces into walls above shall be effectively barred so as to
prevent deterioration of structural members. Such provisions shall
consist of maintenance of openings in foundation walls to provide
adequate circulation of air in the crawl space, covering the ground in
the crawl space with a moisture barrier, installation of drains outside
the structure if the crawl space is below surrounding grade, blocking
openings in stud walls to prevent flow of air and moisture into walls,
frequent destruction of termite tubes from the soil to wood floor
members above, poison treatment of soil and other suitable means.
B. Structural members shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound.
Such protection shall consist of shoring, reinforcement or repair where
necessary, frequent destruction of termite tubes or other appropriate
means.
C. Chimneys and flues shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound
and to prevent leakage of gases into the structure. Such maintenance
shall consist of clearing flue stoppages, sealing open joints, repairing
masonry where necessary and other suitable means.
D. Ceilings and walls shall be maintained so that parts which become loose
or defective do not constitute a hazard to occupants. Such maintenance
shall consist of removing and replacing loose or defective sections.
E. Toilet room and bathroom floors shall be maintained so as to prevent
leakage of water through the floor, under normal conditions of use and
floor washing, and resultant deterioration or defects in structural
members and ceilings below. Maintenance shall consist of repairs which
effectively provide the moisture- and waterproof qualities required for
the particular floor.
§ 108-19 RYE CODE § 108-19
106:356
ARTICLE IV
Firesafety Requirements
§ 108-20. Prohibited accumulations and storage.
It shall be prohibited:
§ 108-21. Prevention of fire spread.
§ 108-22. Interior finishes, trim and decorative materials.
Interior finish materials for acoustical correction, surface insulation and
decorative treatment on the surfaces of walls and ceilings, and interior trim
shall be of materials that will not, in burning, give off excessive amounts of
smoke or objectionable gases.
§ 108-23. Fireplaces.
A. To accumulate or store on residential premises, except in approved
locations, any highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints,
volatile oils, cleaning fluids and similar materials, or any combustible
refuse liable to spontaneous combustion, such as wastepaper, boxes,
rags or similar materials.
B. To accumulate or store materials on fire escapes or stairs, in stairways
or passageways, at doors or windows or in any other locations where, in
the event of fire, such materials may obstruct egress of occupants or
interfere with firefighting operations.
A. Walls and ceilings shall be maintained free from cracks and openings
which would permit flame or excessive heat to enter the concealed
space.
B. In buildings of mixed occupancy, nonresidential space shall be
separated from residential space by approved fire separations which
will retard the spread of fire.
C. Garages in or attached to a residential building shall be separated from
other spaces in the building by approved fire separations which will
retard the spread of fire and prevent flammable or toxic vapors
originating within the garage from being transmitted to other parts of
the building.
A. Fireplaces and similar construction used or intended to be used for
burning fuel in open fires shall be connected to approved chimneys and
shall be installed so that nearby or adjacent combustible material and
structural members shall not be heated to unsafe temperatures.
B. Hearths and linings or other parts of fireplaces exposed directly to
flame shall be of materials that will not melt, disintegrate, spall or
shatter at high temperatures.
§ 108-20 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-23
106:357
C. Wood mantels and trim on fireplaces shall be placed and attached so
that they cannot be heated to unsafe temperatures or ignited by sparks
or embers from the fire.
§ 108-23 RYE CODE § 108-23
106:358
ARTICLE V
Equipment Requirements
§ 108-24. General requirements.
§ 108-25. Plumbing.
A. Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, air-conditioning,
refrigerating, cooking, fire protection and radiation production
equipment, elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators and other mechanical
additions, installations or systems for the use of the building shall be
installed, located and maintained so that under normal conditions of
use such equipment and systems will not be a danger to health or
welfare, a danger because of structural defects, a source of ignition or a
radiation hazard, and will not create excessive noise or otherwise
become a nuisance. Equipment and systems include, but are not limited
to, apparatus, devices, fixtures, piping, pipe hangers, pipe covering,
wiring, fittings and materials used as part of or in connection with such
installations.
B. Equipment and systems subject to damage from freezing shall be
adequately protected against freezing.
C. Moving parts of equipment which may be a potential hazard shall be
guarded to protect against accidental contact.
A. General requirements.
(1) Plumbing systems shall be maintained in sanitary and serviceable
condition.
(2) Plumbing systems shall be maintained so as not to weaken
structural members nor cause damage or deterioration to any part
of the building through fixture usage.
B. Water supply.
(1) Potable water from an approved source shall be available at all
times in residential buildings. The domestic water supply system of
the building shall be connected to such approved source and shall
not be subject to contamination. When supplied from a public
source, the potable water supply system shall not be connected to
private or unsafe water supplies.
(2) Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
provide at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices
and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate
to enable them to function satisfactorily and without undue noise
under all normal conditions of use.
(3) Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so that
water used for purposes of cooling or heating shall not be
§ 108-24 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-25
106:359
reintroduced into the domestic water supply system nor be
distributed through such equipment to plumbing fixtures.
(4) Hot water supply systems shall be provided with safety devices
arranged to relieve hazardous pressures and excessive
temperatures.
C. Sewage drainage system.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be drained to a sewage drainage system
and such system shall be connected to a public sewer or to an
adequate and approved system of sewage disposal.
(2) Where a public sewer is not available, a system shall be provided to
receive and dispose of sewage without health hazard or nuisance.
(3) Sewage or other waste which may be deleterious to surface or
subsurface waters shall not be discharged into the ground or into a
waterway unless it has first been rendered harmless through
subjection to treatment in conformity with generally accepted
standards.
(4) Substances which will clog the pipes, produce explosive mixtures,
destroy the pipes or their joints or interfere unduly with the sewage
disposal process shall not be discharged into the building drainage
system unless it is provided with approved devices suitable for
intercepting such substances.
(5) Each fixture directly connected to the sewage drainage system
shall be equipped with a water seal trap.
(6) Adequate cleanouts shall be provided and maintained so that the
pipes may be readily cleaned.
(7) The drainage system and its attendant vent piping shall be
maintained so as to provide adequate circulation of air in all pipes
in order that siphonage, aspiration or pressure will not cause a loss
of trap seal under ordinary conditions of use.
(8) Each vent terminal to the outer air shall be installed and
maintained so as to minimize the possibilities of clogging, frost
closure, the return of foul air to the building or the creation of a
nuisance to adjacent premises.
(9) Drains provided for fixtures, devices, appliances or apparatus
containing food, water, sterile goods or similar materials shall be
equipped with air breaks adequate to prevent contamination of
such contents from any possible backup of sewage through the
direct or indirect drainage piping.
D. Storm drainage.
§ 108-25 RYE CODE § 108-25
106:360
(1) Roofs and paved areas, including yards and courts, shall be
drained. Storm drainage shall be conveyed to an adequate and
approved system of stormwater disposal where available. Storm
drains shall be discharged in such manner that water will not flow
onto sidewalks.
(2) Where a drainage system may be subject to backwater, suitable
provision shall be made to prevent its overflow into the building.
(3) Leaders and gutters, if used, shall be constructed of
noncombustible material, except that wood leaders and gutters
may be used for buildings not more than three stories high.
E. Plumbing facilities.
(1) Buildings and portions thereof shall be provided with plumbing
systems designed to dispose of the sewage from all fixtures and to
furnish cold water to every water closet and urinal and furnish hot
and cold water to every sink, lavatory, bathtub and shower required
therein. In multiple dwellings, hot water shall be furnished at 130º
to 140º F. temperature range from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
(2) There shall be provided within each dwelling unit plumbing fixtures
consisting of at least:
(a) One kitchen sink;
(b) One water closet;
(c) One bathtub or shower; and
(d) One lavatory.
(3) Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations
arranged as individual rooms or suites, for each multiple of six
sleeping rooms or fraction thereof, there shall be provided
plumbing fixtures consisting of at least:
(a) One water closet;
(b) One bathtub or shower; and
(c) One lavatory.
(4) Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations
arranged as a dormitory, for each multiple of 15 persons or fraction
thereof so accommodated, there shall be provided and located
adjacent thereto plumbing fixtures consisting of at least:
(a) One water closet;
(b) One bathtub or shower; and
(c) One lavatory.
§ 108-25 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-25
106:361
(5) Urinals may be substituted in men's toilet rooms for not more than
1/3 of the required number of water closets.
(6) Privies, privy vaults and outhouses shall be prohibited on
residential premises.
F. Plumbing fixtures.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be made of smooth nonabsorbent material
and shall be free from concealed fouling surfaces.
(2) Plumbing fixtures shall be so spaced as to be reasonably accessible
for their intended use.
(3) Plumbing fixtures shall be located in spaces that are accessible,
lighted and ventilated.
G. Swimming pools.
(1) Water supply used for filling or for cleaning of the pool shall be
clean. Water supply shall be protected against potential pollution
from all sources, including cross-connection and backflow.
(2) Drains shall be provided so that the pool can be safely and
adequately drained. Drains shall be provided in floors surrounding
the swimming pool and arranged so that water from such areas will
drain without entering the pool.
(3) Filtering, sterilizing and auxiliary equipment, where required, shall
be adequate to maintain the sanitary quality of water during each
period the pool is in use. Equipment containing gases or
disinfectants capable of giving off irritating, toxic or flammable
fumes shall be located in ventilated rooms.
(4) The installation shall be arranged and maintained to prevent dirt,
sand or other foreign matter from entering the bathing areas.
H. Water supply tanks.
(1) Water supply tanks shall be installed and maintained so as to be
watertight, vermin-proof, rodent-proof, resistant to corrosion and
capable of withstanding the working pressures under normal
operation.
(2) Supports for tanks shall be of noncombustible construction.
(3) Tanks and their supports shall not be used to support equipment or
structures other than for tank use, except where specially designed
for such other use.
(4) Means for emptying water supply tanks shall be provided and
maintained in proper working condition.
§ 108-25 RYE CODE § 108-25
106:362
§ 108-26. Fuel gas.
(5) Potable water supply tanks for domestic supply and standpipe or
automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained to
furnish water in sufficient quantity and pressure for such systems.
A. General requirements.
(1) Fuel gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
remain gastight, safe and operative under conditions of use.
(2) Fuel gas piping systems shall provide a supply of gas sufficient to
meet the maximum expected demand of the installed gas-burning
appliances connected thereto.
B. Shutoff valves.
(1) Gas piping systems shall have at least one accessible means for
shutting off all gas supply and such means shall be maintained in
good operating condition.
(2) An easily accessible shutoff valve or cock shall be provided in the
piping in close proximity to and ahead of every outlet for gas
appliance.
C. Service equipment for gas supplied from utility mains. Gas services, gas
meters and gas pressure regulators shall be located so that they are
protected from damage.
D. Gas refrigerators and ranges. Gas refrigerators and ranges shall be
installed with clearance for ventilation and shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
E. High-pressure gas. Any service connection supplying gas at a pressure
in excess of one pound per square inch gauge shall be provided with a
device to reduce such pressure to not more than 1/2 pound per square
inch gauge prior to entering the meter, except where such service
supplies equipment using gas at high pressures.
F. Liquefied petroleum gas.
(1) Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be
conveyed through piping equipment and systems in buildings.
(2) Liquefied petroleum gas shall not be vaporized by devices utilizing
open flame or open electrical coil.
(3) Where two or more containers are installed, connection shall be
arranged so that containers can be replaced without shutting off
the flow of gas to equipment.
(4) Containers shall be designed, stored and located so as not to be a
hazard to the premises served or to the surrounding property.
§ 108-25 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-26
106:363
§ 108-27. Heating.
(5) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive
pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at
a safe location.
(6) Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off
the gas. Such means shall be located outside the building and shall
be maintained in good operating condition.
A. General requirements. [Amended 12-3-2008 by L.L. No. 5-2008]
(1) Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68° F (20°
C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the
winter design dry-bulb temperature for the locality indicated in the
Energy Conservation Construction Code of New York State.
Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to
meet the requirements of this section. Exception: owner-occupied,
one-family dwellings.
(2) Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling units, rooming units,
dormitories or guestrooms on terms, either expressed or implied,
to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during
the period from September 15 to May 31 to maintain a temperature
of not less than 68° F (20° C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
toilet rooms. Exception: When the outdoor temperature is below
the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality,
maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be
required, provided that the heating system is operating at its full
design capacity. The winter design dry-bulb temperature for the
locality shall be as indicated in the Energy Conservation
Construction Code of New York State.
(3) Occupiable work spaces.
(a) Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat
during the period from September 15 to May 31 to maintain a
temperature of not less than 65° F (18° C) during the period
the spaces are occupied.
(b) Exceptions:
[1] Processing, storage and operation areas that require
cooling or special temperature conditions.
[2] Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.
(4) Occupiable public spaces. Indoor public spaces shall be supplied
with heat during the period from September 15 to May 31 to
§ 108-26 RYE CODE § 108-27
106:364
maintain a temperature of not less than 68° F (20° C) in accordance
with the Building Code of New York State during the period the
spaces are occupied.
(5) Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures
shall be measured three feet (914 mm) above the floor near the
center of the room and two feet (610 mm) inward from the center of
each exterior wall.
B. Smoke control. Fuel-burning heat-producing equipment shall be
installed and maintained so that the emission or discharge into the
atmosphere of smoke, dust, particles, odors or other products of
combustion will not create a nuisance or be detrimental to the health,
comfort, safety or property of any person.
C. Warm-air heating. Ducts and other air-handling equipment used for
heating shall conform to the requirements of such equipment used for
ventilating purposes.
D. Prohibited locations for heat-producing equipment. Fuel-burning water
heaters shall not be located in sleeping rooms, bathrooms or toilet
rooms.
E. Fuel supply connection. Fuel-burning equipment shall be permanently
fastened and connected in place. Fuel supply connection to such
equipment shall be made with pipe or tubing of solid metal.
F. Installation and clearance. Where heat-producing equipment is
installed on or adjacent to combustible materials, the location,
insulation, clearance and the control of the equipment shall be such
that the temperature on the surface of the combustible materials will
not exceed a safe temperature.
G. Air supply.
(1) Direct-fired heat-producing equipment and the enclosure in which
it is located shall be provided with a supply of air adequate both for
complete combustion at the rated gross output of the equipment
and for the ventilation of the enclosure to prevent the accumulation
of heat.
(2) Rooms containing fuel-burning equipment shall have such air
supply provided by means of one or more openings to the exterior
or by means of fixed openings to interior spaces which open to the
exterior.
H. Removal of products of combustion.
(1) Equipment for burning solid or liquid fuel shall be connected to
suitable chimneys or flues and shall not be connected to gas vents.
Unvented heaters burning liquid fuel shall be prohibited.
§ 108-27 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-27
106:365
§ 108-28. Chimneys, flues and gas vents.
(2) Fuel-burning space heaters located in sleeping rooms or rooms
normally kept closed shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue
or gas vent.
(3) Gas-fired equipment shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue
or gas vent when the discharge of products of combustion into the
space where the equipment is installed would be a hazard.
I. Safety devices.
(1) Equipment capable of developing hazardous pressures or
temperatures shall be provided with means to relieve safely such
pressures and temperatures.
(2) Controls for the safe operation of automatically operated heatproducing
equipment shall be provided to function as follows:
When failure or interruption of flame or ignition occurs, the fuel
supply shall be cut off. When a predetermined temperature or
pressure is exceeded, the input of additional heat shall be
prevented or reduced to a safe rate. When the water level in a
steam boiler drops below a predetermined level, the fuel supply
shall be cut off. When failure or interruption of pilot light or main
burner of liquefied petroleum gas equipment occurs, the fuel
supply to each pilot light and main burner shall be cut off.
J. Heating of garages. Fuel-burning equipment for garages servicing
multiple dwellings shall be located in heater rooms, except that
equipment burning gas or liquid fuel, located in the vehicle storage
space, shall be permitted in stories at or above grade where elevated so
as not to be exposed to possible accumulation of flammable gases.
A. General requirements.
(1) Chimneys, flues, gas vents and their supports shall be installed and
maintained so as to be structurally safe, durable, smoketight,
noncombustible and capable of withstanding the action of flue
gases without softening, cracking, corroding or spalling.
(2) Such facilities shall effectively convey the products of combustion
to the outer air.
(3) Masonry, chimneys, except approved prefabricated chimneys, shall
have noncombustible foundations.
(4) Flue linings shall be capable of withstanding the action of the flue
gas without softening, cracking, corroding or spalling at the
temperature to which they will be subjected.
(5) Openings for smoke pipes or gas vent connections shall be
provided with means of easy connection without restriction of flue.
§ 108-27 RYE CODE § 108-28
106:366
§ 108-29. Incinerators.
§ 108-30. Electrical requirements.
(6) No flue shall have smoke pipe or gas vent connections in more than
one story of a building.
(7) Fuel-burning equipment and fireplaces located in different
tenancies shall not be connected to the same flue.
B. Firesafety. Chimneys, flues and gas vents shall be installed and
maintained so that under conditions of use the temperature of any
combustible material adjacent thereto, insulated therefrom or in
contact therewith does not exceed a safe temperature.
C. Spark arresters. A chimney or flue connected to an incinerator and a
chimney or flue which may emit sparks shall be provided with a spark
arrester of noncombustible construction. Spark arresters shall have
sufficient total clear area to permit unrestricted passage of flue gases.
Openings in spark arresters shall be of such size as to prevent passage
of embers and to minimize clogging by soot.
A. General requirements.
(1) Incinerators shall be of adequate capacity for the intended use.
(2) Flue-fed incinerators shall be equipped with means for burning
auxiliary fuel in sufficient quantity to assure complete combustion
of refuse.
(3) A flue serving an incinerator shall be provided with a substantially
constructed spark arrester.
(4) Incinerators shall be connected to a suitable noncombustible
chimney, smokestack or flue.
(5) Connections to incinerators shall provide free passage of refuse
without clogging.
B. Service openings.
(1) Service openings shall be readily accessible to the building
occupants.
(2) Durable signs with plainly legible letters prohibiting disposal of
highly flammable substances in incinerators shall be provided near
service openings.
A. General requirements.
(1) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be installed in conformity
with generally accepted standards and maintained so as not to be a
potential source of ignition of combustible material or a potential
source of electrical hazard. A certificate of compliance issued by
§ 108-28 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-30
106:367
the New York Board of Fire Underwriters shall be deemed prima
facie evidence of conformity with such generally accepted
standards. [Amended 9-6-1967 by L.L. No. 1-1967]
(2) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be firmly secured to the
surface on which it is mounted.
(3) Electrical wiring and equipment installed in damp or wet locations
or where exposed to explosive or flammable gases or to excessive
temperatures shall be of a type approved for the purpose and
location.
(4) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be protected against
excessive current by properly rated over-current devices.
(5) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be grounded or otherwise
protected by insulation, isolation or guarding so as to minimize the
danger of high voltages from lightning or other causes.
(6) Electrical equipment which in ordinary operation produces arcs or
sparks shall be enclosed unless separated and isolated from all
combustible material.
(7) Service equipment and over-current protection devices shall be
installed and maintained in a readily accessible location.
B. Artificial lighting.
(1) Residential buildings and occupancies shall be wired for electricity,
and lighting equipment shall be installed throughout to provide
adequate illumination for the intended use of each space. Electric
wiring system shall be connected to an adequate source of supply.
(2) There shall be a switch or other means for controlling a light in
each dwelling unit near the point of entrance to such unit.
C. Exit and directional signs.
(1) Exits in multiple dwellings shall be provided with exit and
directional signs visible from the approach to the exits, except that
such signs shall not be required in those portions of a building
which contain dwelling units only or in which exit from sleeping
rooms is directly to the outside.
(2) Directional signs shall be provided at locations from which the exit
doorway is not readily discernible.
(3) Such signs shall be worded in plainly legible block letters, with the
word EXIT for exit signs and the words TO EXIT, with a suitable
pointer or arrow indicating the direction of exit, for directional
signs. Letters for signs shall be conspicuous, readily discernible
and at least six inches high, except that for internally illuminated
signs the height of such letters shall be at least 4 1/2 inches.
§ 108-30 RYE CODE § 108-30
106:368
§ 108-31. Cooking and refrigeration.
§ 108-32. Air conditioning and mechanical ventilation in one- and
two-family dwellings.
§ 108-33. Air conditioning and mechanical ventilation in multiple
dwellings.
(4) Exit and directional signs shall be illuminated either externally or
internally by electric lights and shall be kept illuminated at all
times when the building is occupied.
A. General requirements.
(1) Each dwelling unit shall be provided with appropriate cooking and
refrigeration equipment.
(2) Cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
(3) Gas-burning cooking equipment shall be permanently fastened and
connected in place. Gas supply connection to such equipment shall
be made with pipe or tubing of solid metal.
(4) Solid fuel-burning cooking equipment shall be appropriately
vented.
B. Communal cooking and dining facilities. Communal kitchens and dining
rooms shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Communal kitchens shall contain at least one kitchen sink; at least
one kitchen gas or electric stove equipped with an oven and not
less than four top burners; at least one electric or gas-type
refrigerator with adequate food storage capacity, but in no case
less than eight cubic feet nominal size. Dining space and eating
facilities, where provided in the kitchen area, shall comply with the
requirements for communal dining rooms.
(2) Communal dining rooms shall contain at least one dining chair and
two lineal feet of dining space for each occupant permitted in a
dining room at any particular time.
A. Exhaust air from a dwelling unit shall not be circulated to another
dwelling unit.
B. Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately firestopped.
A. Refrigerants.
(1) Refrigerants that are highly flammable shall not be used in multiple
dwellings.
§ 108-30 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-33
106:369
(2) Direct systems using refrigerants that are flammable or toxic shall
not be used for air-conditioning purposes.
B. Ventilating systems.
(1) Ventilating systems shall be installed and maintained so that the
rapid spread of heat, flame or smoke through the system will be
prevented and so that under conditions of use the temperature of
any combustible material adjacent thereto or in contact therewith
will not exceed a safe temperature.
(2) Stairways, passageways, exits, shafts, hoistways or attics shall not
be used as plenum chambers.
(3) Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately firestopped.
(4) Ducts and other air-handling equipment shall be of noncombustible
material.
(5) Filters shall be installed and maintained so as not to constitute a
fire or smoke hazard.
(6) Ducts passing through or located within combustible construction
shall be separated from such construction by a clearance of at least
1/2 inch or by a noncombustible insulating material at least 1/4
inch thick.
(7) Air required for ventilation shall be taken from the exterior or shall
be quality-controlled.
(8) Exhaust air from a dwelling unit or a space whose contents may
emit odors, fumes or vapors shall not be circulated to other
occupied spaces within the building.
C. Air intake and exhaust openings.
(1) Air intake and exhaust openings shall be installed, located and
maintained so as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance and so as to
prevent the possibility of fire, smoke, fumes or foreign matter being
drawn into the system.
(2) Ventilating systems shall be provided with adequate openings for
incoming and outgoing air to obtain the required circulation. Intake
openings shall provide air from an uncontaminated source.
(3) Where openings for mechanical exhaust are located in spaces that
also contain fuel-burning equipment, there shall be provided fixed
intake openings from the exterior to supply sufficient air so that the
fuel-burning equipment is not adversely affected.
(4) Exhaust openings shall be located so that the exhaust air will not
create a nuisance.
§ 108-33 RYE CODE § 108-33
106:370
§ 108-34. Fuel oil.
§ 108-35. Fire protection in multiple dwellings.
D. Ventilation requirements.
(1) Enclosures or spaces where heat, gases, vapors or odors may
accumulate and become a potential source of hazard or nuisance
shall be provided with adequate means of ventilation to remove
such excess.
(2) Public spaces shall be provided with means for obtaining air supply
for the maximum number of persons for which such spaces are
designed.
E. Safety controls.
(1) Manually operated controls shall be provided to stop the operation
of all central fan equipment. Such controls shall be conspicuously
identified and in readily accessible locations outside the fan room.
(2) Every system using recirculated air and serving an assembly space
or more than one fire area or more than one story of a building shall
be provided with controls arranged so that under abnormal rise in
temperature of the air in the system, the fans causing normal
circulation shall stop and require manual restart.
(3) Every system for ventilating an assembly space shall be provided
with an emergency switch conveniently located and with a durable
sign giving instructions for shutting down the system in case of fire.
A. General requirements. Fuel oil shall be received, stored and conveyed
by means of fixed liquid-tight equipment.
B. Storage tanks.
(1) Tanks shall be provided with means for venting.
(2) Tanks shall be installed and maintained so as not to be a hazard to
the premises served or the surrounding property.
C. Piping.
(1) Automatically operated boilers and furnaces using fuel oil shall be
provided with remote control to stop the flow of oil during fire or
other emergency.
(2) Filling, emptying and venting of tanks shall be by means of fixed
piping. Pipes to underground tanks shall be pitched toward tanks.
Terminals of fill and vent pipes shall be located outside buildings at
a safe distance from building openings.
A. Fire alarm systems. Required fire alarm systems shall be maintained in
proper operating condition at all times.
§ 108-33 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-35
106:371
§ 108-36. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators in multiple
dwellings.
B. Sprinkler equipment.
(1) Required sprinkler equipment shall be maintained in proper
operating condition at all times. Storage of materials shall cause
minimum interference with effective discharge of water.
(2) Valves controlling water supply to sprinklers shall be secure in the
open position.
(3) Sprinkler heads shall be maintained free of corrosion and paint.
C. Standpipe systems.
(1) Standpipe systems shall be maintained in proper operating
condition at all times.
(2) Gate valves at hose stations shall be maintained tight against leaks.
(3) Hose shall be in proper position ready for operation, dry and free of
deterioration.
D. Portable extinguishers.
(1) Each oil burner for boiler, furnace or central hot water heater shall
be provided with an approved hand fire extinguisher or two
rounded-bottom pails filled with sand.
(2) Portable extinguishers required for fire protection shall be in their
designated locations and in a condition which will permit efficient
operation without delay.
A. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained so as to be
free from physical and fire hazards.
B. Elevator and power-operated dumbwaiter cars shall be provided with
durable signs in conspicuous locations on which the rated capacity shall
be indicated.
C. Elevator cars shall be provided with approved means for transmitting a
signal outside the hoistway in case of emergency.
D. Hoistways and pits shall be maintained free of refuse.
E. Machine rooms shall be maintained free of oil and grease and shall not
be used for storage of articles or materials unnecessary for the
maintenance of the elevator or dumbwaiter. Flammable liquids shall not
be kept in such rooms.
F. No person shall at any time make any required safety device or
electrical protective device inoperative, except where necessary during
tests, inspections or maintenance.
§ 108-35 RYE CODE § 108-36
106:372
ARTICLE VI
Property Maintenance Requirements
§ 108-37. General requirements.
Residential premises shall be maintained in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter so as to assure the desirable residential character of the
property.
§ 108-38. Open areas.
§ 108-39. Buildings and structures.
§ 108-40. Infestation and screening.
A. Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect
buildings and structures and to prevent development of stagnant ponds.
Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers,
approved combined storm and sanitary sewers or other satisfactory
drainage systems shall be utilized where deemed necessary.
B. Fences and other minor constructions shall be maintained in safe and
substantial condition.
C. Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas shall
be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and
weather conditions.
D. Yards and courts shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards.
E. Heavy undergrowths and accumulations of plant growth which are
noxious or detrimental to health shall be eliminated.
A. Exterior wood surfaces of buildings and structures that are not
inherently resistant to deterioration shall be periodically treated with a
protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative.
B. Floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures of residential buildings
shall be maintained in clean and sanitary condition.
C. Accessory structures shall be maintained so as to be free of conditions
detrimental to safety or health.
A. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
exterminating insects, vermin and rodents shall conform to generally
accepted practice.
B. Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows
and other openings in basements and cellars shall be appropriately
screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
§ 108-37 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-40
106:373
§ 108-41. Garbage and refuse.
§ 108-42. Domestic animals and pets.
Domestic animals and pets shall be kept in an appropriate manner and shall
not be permitted to run at large.
C. From May 1 to October 1, entrances to residential buildings shall be
provided with self-closing-type devices or screens, and windows and
other openings used for ventilation shall be appropriately screened.
Screens shall not be required in rooms located sufficiently high in the
upper stories of multiple dwellings as to be free of mosquitoes, flies and
other flying insects.
A. Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and refuse.
B. In multiple dwellings, it shall be prohibited to store or accumulate
garbage or refuse in public halls and stairways.
§ 108-40 RYE CODE § 108-42
106:374
ARTICLE VII
Compliance
§ 108-43. Responsibilities of owners.
§ 108-44. Responsibilities of lodging-house operators.
Lodging-house operators shall be responsible for compliance with this
chapter in regard to the following:
§ 108-45. Responsibilities of occupants.
Occupants of dwelling units shall be responsible for compliance with this
chapter in regard to the following:
A. Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with this
chapter and shall remain responsible therefor regardless of the fact
that this chapter may also place certain responsibilities on operators
and occupants and regardless of any agreements between owners and
operators or occupants as to which party shall assume such
responsibility.
B. Owners of premises shall be responsible for proper maintenance,
condition and operation of service facilities and for furnishing adequate
heat and hot water supply in multiple dwellings.
A. Limiting occupancy to the maximum permitted by this chapter.
B. Maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions in all parts of lodginghouse
premises.
C. Maintenance and operation of all required service facilities.
D. Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances within their control, as well as other building equipment and
facilities, in an operative, clean and sanitary condition.
E. Sanitary maintenance of walls, floors and ceilings.
F. Keeping exits clear and unencumbered.
G. Disposal of building garbage and refuse in a clean and sanitary manner.
H. Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests on the premises.
I. Hanging and removing required screens.
A. Limiting occupancy of that part of the premises which they occupy or
control to the maximum permitted by this chapter.
B. Maintenance of that part of the premises which they occupy or control
in a clean, sanitary and safe condition.
§ 108-43 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-45
106:375
C. Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances, as well as other building equipment and storage facilities in
that part of the premises which they occupy or control, in a clean and
sanitary condition, and providing reasonable care in the operation and
use thereof.
D. Keeping exits from their dwelling unit clear and unencumbered.
E. Disposal of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a clean and
sanitary manner.
F. Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests within their dwelling
unit if their unit is the only one infested in the premises.
G. Hanging and removing required screens.
H. Keeping their domestic animals and pets in an appropriate manner and
under control.
§ 108-45 RYE CODE § 108-45
106:376
ARTICLE VIII
Administration and Enforcement
[Amended 9-6-1967 by L.L. No. 1-1967; 8-14-2002 by L.L. No.
5-2002]
§ 108-46. Department of Buildings.
§ 108-47. Duties of Building Inspector.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector:
A. The Department of Buildings, under the direction and supervision of the
Building Inspector, shall be charged with the duty of administering the
applicable housing standards and securing compliance therewith and
shall be empowered to adopt rules and regulations necessary for
securing such compliance, provided that such rules and regulations
shall not be in conflict with the applicable housing standards and are
approved by the Common Council.
B. The Department of Buildings shall be authorized to conduct surveys of
housing in any area of the City to determine the conditions of premises,
extent of deterioration, lack of facilities, inadequate maintenance,
unsafe and insanitary conditions, extent of overcrowding, land use and
other relevant factors.
C. The Building Inspector and other personnel of the Department of
Buildings shall be free from personal liability for acts done in good faith
in the performance of their official duties.
A. To cause periodic inspections to be made, not less than once every five
years, of all premises within the scope of applicable housing standards.
B. To cause an investigation of all complaints of alleged housing violations
or other unsafe or insanitary conditions.
C. To order in writing the remedying of all conditions found to exist in or
on any premises in violation of the provisions of this chapter or of the
rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Buildings; to state
in the violation order a reasonable time for compliance therewith; and,
where necessary, to order the vacation of premises found unfit for
human habitation.
D. To request the Corporation Counsel to take appropriate legal action in
the name of the city upon failure of the responsible party to comply with
such violation order within the time specified therein.
E. To cause a search of said Department's records of housing violations on
any premises and to issue a certified statement thereof upon receipt of
a written request and payment of any fees required by the City.
F. To study housing conditions in the City.
§ 108-46 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-47
106:377
§ 108-48. Right of entry.
§ 108-49. Notice of violation.
Whenever the Building Inspector determines that there has been a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, he shall give notice of such violation or alleged violation
to the person or persons responsible for the violation. Such notice shall
specify in writing the alleged violation, provide a reasonable time for
compliance and be served upon the owner, agent, operator or occupant, as
the case may require.
§ 108-50. Power to act in emergencies.
Where violations of this chapter exist and pose an immediate hazard or
danger to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants of a building or of
the public, the Building Inspector may issue an order citing the violation
and directing that such action be taken as is necessary to remove or abate
the hazard or danger. If such a violation has not been corrected within the
time specified in the order, the Building Inspector may take such action as
is necessary to remove or abate the hazard or danger. Expenses incurred in
connection therewith shall be recovered as provided in § 108-51 hereof.
§ 108-51. Recovery of expenses.
The expenses incurred pursuant to § 108-50 herein shall be paid by the
owner or occupant of the premises or by the person who caused or
maintained the violation. The Building Inspector may institute suit in the
name of the City to recover such expenses against any person liable for such
expenses or may cause such expenses to be charged and assessed against
the property as a lien upon certification of the amount therefor to the City
Comptroller. If such expenses are not paid within 10 days after demand,
the amount thereof shall be added to and become part of the taxes next to
be assessed and levied upon the said premises and shall be collected and
enforced in the same manner as taxes.
G. To cooperate with other municipal, governmental and private agencies
engaged in the study and improvement of housing conditions.
H. To submit to the City Manager an annual report of housing conditions in
the City, accomplishments of the Department of Buildings and
recommendations for the future.
A. The Building Inspector and his subordinates shall be authorized and
have the right, in the performance of their duties, to enter any premises
during normal business hours and in emergencies whenever necessary
to protect the public interest.
B. Owners, agents, operators and occupants shall be responsible for
providing access to all parts of the premises within their control to
authorized City personnel acting in the performance of their duties.
§ 108-47 RYE CODE § 108-52
106:378
§ 108-52. Extension of time for compliance.
The Building Inspector may extend the compliance time specified in any
notice or order issued under the provisions of this chapter where there is
evidence of an intent to comply within the period specified, provided that
reasonable conditions exist which prevent immediate compliance.
§ 108-53. Hearings.
Any person affected by any notice of violation issued in connection with the
enforcement of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto may request and shall be granted a hearing before the City
Manager, provided that such person shall file in the office of the City
Manager a written request for such hearing within 10 days after the service
of notice of violation, setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor.
The City Manager shall set a time and place for such hearing within 30
days after the date on which the request was filed. After a hearing and in
consideration of the evidence presented, the City Manager shall sustain,
modify or withdraw the notice of violation. Where there are practical
difficulties or unreasonable hardships in the literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter, the City Manager shall have power to authorize a
variance from the provisions of this chapter, provided that the intent of the
chapter shall be observed with respect to the safeguarding of safety, health
and welfare.
§ 108-54. Review by Supreme Court.
Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any order of any
officer or department of the City may apply to the Supreme Court for relief
by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 108-55. Records.
The Department of Buildings shall keep records of all complaints received,
inspections made and violations found regarding premises regulated by this
chapter. Records shall be kept in a manner and form as prescribed by the
City Manager.
§ 108-56. Penalties for offenses.
Every person who shall fail to comply with a violation order issued by the
Department of Buildings within the time specified therein or shall violate
any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not more than $1,000. For violations of Chapter 104 of
this Code, each ten-day period after notification of violation shall be deemed
a separate offense; and, for all other violations, each day such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 108-52 HELICOPTERS AND OTHER AIRCRAFT § 108-57
106:379
§ 108-57. Severability.
If a term, part, provision, section, subsection or paragraph of this chapter
shall be held unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, such
determination shall not be deemed to invalidate the remaining terms, parts,
provisions, sections, subsections and paragraphs.
§ 108-57 RYE CODE § 108-57
106:380
Chapter 113
JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses — See Ch. 125. Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 144.
§ 113-1. Definitions.
Every person who, as principal, agent or employee, shall go with or without
a vehicle from house to house or place to place, buying, offering to buy,
collecting or gathering any of the articles enumerated in the following
section, shall be deemed to be a junk peddler. Every person who, as
principal, agent or employee, shall carry on the business of buying, selling
or storing any of the articles enumerated in the following section, at an
established place of business, shall be deemed to be a junk merchant or
dealer.
§ 113-2. License required.
No person shall engage in or carry on the business of collecting, buying,
selling or otherwise dealing in rags, old rope, bottles, bones, tinware,
rubber, bagging or any other article or thing, except old metal as defined in
Article 6 of the General Business Law of the State of New York, from which
its worn condition renders it useless for the purpose of which it was made,
whether at a fixed place of business or as an itinerant peddler, without first
having obtained a license from the Clerk.
§ 113-3. Bond.
An application for a license shall be accompanied by a bond to the city,
approved as to form and surety by the Corporation Counsel, in the penal
sum of $1,000, or collateral security satisfactory to the Corporation
Counsel, conditioned for the due observance during the term of the license
of any and all ordinances adopted by the city respecting the collection,
buying, selling or otherwise dealing in of articles enumerated in this
chapter.
§ 113-4. License fees. [Amended 12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 12-2000]
Every junk merchant shall pay an annual license fee to be set annually
by resolution of the City Council before adoption of the budget for the
following year for each established place of business. Every junk peddler
shall pay an annual license fee to be set annually by resolution of the City
Council before adoption of the budget for the following year.
§ 108-57 JUNK DEALERS § 113-5
113:381
§ 113-5. Name and address on vehicle.
The vehicle used by a junk peddler in the exercise of his or her license shall
have his or her name and address plainly, distinctly and legibly painted in
letters and figures at least two inches in height in a conspicuous place on
the outside of the sides of such vehicle, and such name and address shall be
kept so painted plainly and distinctly at all times while such vehicle is in use
during the continuance of the license.
§ 113-6. Restrictions.
§ 113-7. Record of purchases.
Every junk merchant and peddler shall keep, in such form as the Chief of
Police may prescribe and written in ink or indelible pencil, a daily record
of all articles purchased, the name, residence, age and occupation of the
person from whom purchased, the day and hour of such purchase and
the price paid. The records shall at all reasonable times be open to the
inspection of any police officer, the Mayor, the City Judge or any person duly
authorized in writing for such purpose by the Chief of Police, Mayor or the
City Judge, who shall exhibit such authorization to the junk merchant or
peddler, his agent or employee. No entry in such records shall be changed,
erased, obliterated or defaced.
§ 113-8. Reports to Police Department.
Every junk merchant or peddler, upon being served with a written notice
so to do, by a member of the Police Department, shall report to the Chief
of Police, on blank forms to be furnished by the Police Department, an
accurate description of all goods, articles or things purchased or received
by him in the course of business by a junk merchant or peddler at such time
A. No junk merchant or peddler shall carry on his business at or from any
other place than the one designated in the license therefor.
B. No junk merchant or peddler shall purchase any article enumerated in
§ 113-2 from any minor, apprentice or servant, knowing or having
reason to believe the seller to be such, nor from any person between
sunset and 7:00 a.m.
C. No person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall, during
the continuance of such license, use, exercise or carry on the business
or trade of a pawnbroker or dealer in secondhand articles, nor shall any
pawnbroker or dealer in secondhand articles receive a license under
the provisions of this chapter.
D. No junk merchant shall engage in business as a junk peddler without
paying a separate license fee therefor.
E. No license as junk merchant or peddler shall be granted to any person
who shall have been convicted, within one year of the date of
application, of a violation of this chapter or of a felony.
§ 113-5 RYE CODE § 113-8
113:382
and during such period of time specified in the notice, stating the amount
paid for such goods, articles or things and the name, residence and general
description of the person from whom such goods, articles or things were
received.
§ 113-9. Lost or stolen goods.
If any goods, articles or things whatsoever shall be advertised in any
newspaper as having been lost or stolen and the same or any of them
answering the description advertised or any part or portion thereof shall
be in or come into the possession of any junk merchant or peddler, he
shall give promptly information thereof in writing to the Chief of Police and
state from whom the same were received. Any junk merchant or peddler
who shall have or receive any goods, articles or things stolen or alleged or
supposed to have been lost or stolen shall exhibit the same on demand to
any police officer, the Mayor, the City Judge or any person duly authorized
in writing by the Chief of Police, Mayor or City Judge, who shall exhibit such
authorization to such merchant or peddler.
Chapter 117
LANDMARKS PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Architectural review — See Ch. 53. Zoning — See Ch. 197.
§ 117-1. Legislative intent.
It is desirable to take measures to provide for the creation of Preservation
Districts and Protected Sites and Structures in furtherance of the following
public purposes, which are found to promote the economic benefits, the
cultural and educational advantages and general welfare of the residents of
the City of Rye:
A. To provide for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of
those districts, sites and structures which are illustrative of the growth
and development of the City of Rye and which are of particular historic
or aesthetic value to the City.
B. To recognize and ensure the preservation of those elements of the City's
past which represent many and varied architectural, artistic and
cultural achievements which cannot be duplicated or otherwise
replaced.
C. To promote the use of Preservation Districts and Protected Sites and
Structures as a means of providing enjoyment and unique educational
benefit by perpetuating the physical evidence of Rye's past.
§ 113-8 JUNK DEALERS § 117-1
113:383
§ 117-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A certificate issued by the Board
of Architectural Review authorizing a material change of appearance of a
Protected Site or Structure or within a district, subject to other applicable
permit requirements.
DISTRICT — See "Preservation District."
EXTERIOR BUILDING COMPONENT — Any exterior structural, ornamental
or functional element of a structure which shall be open to public view,
including but not limited to type, color and texture of building materials;
entryways; fenestration; lighting fixtures; roofing; sculpture and carving;
steps; rails; fencing; vents and other openings; grillwork; signs; canopies;
and other attachments.
INTERIOR BUILDING COMPONENT — Any structural, ornamental or
functional element of a structure located within the interior of a public
building or other building accessible to the general public, including but
not limited to entryways; lobby area; hallways and corridors; auditoriums
and places of public assembly; galleries and exhibition areas; and interior
courtyards. The structural, ornamental or functional elements referred to
herein shall include but not be limited to: type, color and texture of building
materials; lighting fixtures; flooring; ceilings; ornamental woodwork;
moldings and trim; casings; stairs; rails; masonry; paintings and works of
art; sculpture and carving; doors; transoms and sidelights; fenestration;
skylights; and other interior elements.
MATERIAL CHANGE OF APPEARANCE — Includes but is not limited to:
D. To stabilize and improve property values of such districts, sites and
structures and otherwise promote their reuse.
E. To protect and enhance the City's attractions to tourists and visitors
and the support and stimulus to business and industry thereby
provided.
F. To foster civic pride in those elements of the City's past which give Rye
its unique character and set it apart from other cities.
G. To provide an educative role in the community with regard to historic
structures and landmarks preservation. [Added 7-15-1981 by L.L.
No. 3-1981]
Any treatment to a structure which results in a change in materials,
texture, colors, bulk, mass or any treatment by the addition,
substitution or deletion of materials or fixtures, including such
treatment which results in the covering of existing surfaces; or the
severance or improvement of the land in a designated district or which
is designated as a Protected Site.
A.
§ 117-1 RYE CODE § 117-2
113:384
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE OR REPAIR — Routine repair, replacement or
maintenance of electrical or mechanical installations or of damaged or worn
parts or surfaces, including repainting using the same color, landscaping
and treatment of flat roof areas not visible to the general public.
PRESERVATION DISTRICT — An area of the City of Rye delineated on the
Zoning Map of such City which meets some or all of the criteria enumerated
in § 117-5 and which, by reason of such factors, constitutes a distinct
section of the City, and is designated as a Preservation District pursuant to
amendment of the Zoning Ordinance. 21
PRESERVATION RESTRICTION — An easement or other interest less than
a fee interest, in favor of the City of Rye, in a Protected Site or Structure or
a structure in a district.
PROTECTED SITE OR STRUCTURE — A parcel of land or a building or
structure not located in a Preservation District, which nevertheless meets
one or more of the criteria enumerated in § 117-5 and is designated as a
Protected Site or Structure pursuant to § 117-5E.
§ 117-3. Landmarks Advisory Committee. [Amended 7-15-1981 by
L.L. No. 3-1981; 11-4-1981 by L.L. No. 8-1981; 1-18-1984 by L.L. No.
1-1984]
B. Complete or partial demolition.
C. Commencement of excavation.
D. Deposit of refuse, waste or fill on land not already used for the purpose.
Change in design or location of advertising on the exterior of any
structure.
E.
A. Jurisdiction and purpose. To effectuate the goals of this chapter, there is
hereby established in and for the City of Rye the Landmarks Advisory
Committee, hereinafter called the "Committee."
B. Composition and selection.
(1) The members of the Committee shall be appointed by and serve at
the pleasure of the Mayor and City Council. The Committee shall
consist of eight members, of whom at least five shall be City
residents, and appointments shall include at least one architect or
architectural historian, one member of the Rye Historical Society
and one member of the local Real Estate Board.
(2) The successors of those members serving on December 31, 1983,
shall be appointed for one- , two- or three-year terms, and
thereafter, their successors shall be appointed for three-year terms
so that the expiration dates of terms of membership are staggered
and so that the terms of no more than three members shall expire
in any one year.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Zoning.
§ 117-2 JUNK DEALERS § 117-3
113:385
§ 117-4. Regulated conduct.
(3) Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor with approval of the Council
in the same manner as provided for other appointments. A
Chairperson shall be selected by the Committee, from among its
members, for a one-year term.
(4) Members of the Committee shall serve without compensation.
C. Powers and duties.
(1) The Committee shall investigate, document and make annual
recommendations, or more frequently at its discretion, to the City
Council for designation of districts and Protected Sites and
Structures pursuant to § 117-5 herein.
(2) In carrying out the aforementioned duties, the Committee shall
have the power to:
(a) Adopt such regulations pertaining to its duties as it may deem
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. Copies of
such regulations shall be filed with the City Clerk and the City
Planning Commission.
(b) Retain or employ professional consultants, secretaries, clerks
or other such personnel as may be necessary to assist it in
carrying out its duties, to the extent that funds are
appropriated and available therefor.
(c) Conduct surveys, in consultation with public or private
agencies as appropriate, of buildings for the purpose of
determining those of historic and/or architectural significance
and pertinent facts about them.
(d) Formulate and publish recommendations concerning the
preparation of maps, brochures and historical markers for
selected historic and/or architectural sites and buildings.
(e) Cooperate with and advise the Mayor, the City Council and
other public and private agencies in matters involving historic
and/or architectural sites and buildings.
(f) Advise owners of historic buildings on problems and benefits of
preservation and restoration.
A. No material change in appearance as hereinabove defined shall be
made within a designated district or to a Protected Site or Structure
except as hereinafter provided. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior
building component in a district or a Protected Site or Structure which
does not involve such a material change in appearance.
§ 117-3 RYE CODE § 117-4
113:386
§ 117-5. Designation of Preservation Districts or Protected Sites
and Structures.
B. This chapter shall apply to all Protected Sites and Structures and to all
buildings, structures, outbuildings, walls, fences, steps, topographical
features, earthworks, paving and signs within a designated district;
provided, however, that it shall not apply to the construction, alteration
or demolition of any structure where, prior to the date of public notice
of any proposed designation:
(1) The applicant has in good faith either:
(a) Undertaken contractual commitments which require him to do
such construction or alteration; or [Amended 12-7-1983 by
L.L. No. 13-1983]
(b) Obtained a permit to do such work and such work has actually
commenced, and also
(2) Failure to proceed with such work will expose the applicant to
substantial financial hardship as defined in § 117-7 below.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the construction,
reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any building component
which a duly authorized public official shall order to remove a condition
dangerous to life, health or safety, but a certificate of appropriateness
pursuant to § 117-6 herein shall be obtained prior to commencement of
such work unless the delay attendant on obtaining such certificate
would prevent timely compliance with said order. Notice of any such
order or proposed order shall be given to the Committee as soon as
practicable by the agency issuing such order.
A. Designation of exteriors and interiors.
(1) Designation of a Protected Site or Structure may apply to the
exterior only or to the interior only or to both. The designation shall
include a specific reference as to whether the interior or exterior,
or both, is intended; where such specific reference is omitted, the
designation shall be deemed to apply to the exterior only.
(2) Designation of a Preservation District shall be deemed to apply to
the exterior only of structures or sites therein, except that interiors
of any structure within the district may be designated by specific
reference thereto.
B. No Preservation District or Protected Site or Structure, as the case may
be, shall be designated unless it is found to possess one or more of the
following characteristics:
(1) Association with persons or events of historic significance to the
city, region, state or nation.
§ 117-4 JUNK DEALERS § 117-5
113:387
(2) Illustrative of historic growth and development of the city, region,
state or nation.
(3) In the case of structures: embodying distinctive characteristics of a
type, period or method of construction or representing the work of
a master, or possessing unique architectural and artistic qualities,
or representing a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction.
(4) In the case of districts: possessing a unique overall quality of
architectural scale, texture, form and visual homogeneity, even
though certain structures within the district may lack individual
distinction.
(5) In the case of interiors: possessing one or more of the
characteristics enumerated in Subsection B(1), (2) or (3) above
and, in addition, embodying distinctive characteristics of
architectural scale, form and visual homogeneity which are an
integral part of the character of the structure in which the space is
contained.
C. Designation of a Preservation District or a Protected Site or Structure
shall be deemed a proposed amendment to the Zoning Ordinance and
Official Zoning Map of the City of Rye or the General Ordinances of said
City22 and shall become effective only after public hearing and upon
approval of such proposed amendment in the manner provided by law.
The Landmarks Advisory Committee or any person, group of persons or
association may petition the City Council for adoption of such an
amendment. In addition to any other notices required by law, the City
Council shall notify the Landmarks Advisory Committee 10 days prior
thereto of any hearings bearing on a proposed designation or change
thereof.
D. Designation procedures.
(1) The proposed designations or changes thereof shall be filed by the
Landmarks Advisory Committee with the City Clerk, together with
its request that all property owners affected by such proposals be
notified thereof. The City Clerk shall give public notice of such
proposals and shall mail each property owner affected by the
proposals a copy thereof. [Amended 12-7-1983 by L.L. No.
13-1983]
(a) Sites or structures which have been listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or proposed by the Committee on
the Register for consideration by the New York State Board on
Historic Preservation for a recommendation to the State
Historic Officer for nomination for inclusion in the National
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Zoning, which includes a copy of the Zoning Map at the end
thereof. Ordinances formerly contained in the General Ordinances are currently included
in the Code of the City of Rye.
§ 117-5 RYE CODE § 117-5
113:388
Register of Historic Places, and which have been
recommended for designation by the Landmarks Advisory
Committee, may be designated by the City Council, on its own
action, as protected sites or structures, when determined by
said Council to be of important historic significance.
(b) No other site or structure shall be designated unless the owner
thereof files a written consent, nor shall any property be
included within a Preservation District unless the owner
thereof files a written consent, with the Clerk.
(2) Except for action taken by the City Council pursuant to
§ 117-5D(1)(a), following expiration of the time within which
affected property owners may object, the proposals as to which
there are no objections shall be referred to the City Planning
Commission and the Board of Architectural Review for their review
and recommendations to the City Council. [Amended 12-7-1983
by L.L. No. 13-1983]
(3) The resolutions and/or recommendations of the City Planning
Commission and the Board of Architectural Review with respect to
any proposed designation or change thereof, together with the
recommendations of the Landmarks Advisory Committee, shall be
forwarded to the City Clerk, who shall transmit copies of the same
to the Council. The Council shall either adopt, modify or reject the
recommendations of the Landmarks Advisory Committee, the
Planning Commission and the Board of Architectural Review with
respect to a proposed designation or change thereof. Designation
of a district or a Protected Site or Structure can be rescinded only
by the City Council.
(4) Within five business days after a designation of a district or
Protected Site or Structure has been adopted, notice of such
designation shall be sent to all affected property owners. The
designation shall be effective either upon service of a copy thereof
upon the affected property owner or 10 days after publication of
the change to the Zoning Ordinance as provided above. Notice of
such designation shall also be sent to all city and county
departments having power to administer and enforce any laws,
codes or regulations governing real property within the City, and a
certified copy of the designating local law, ordinance or resolution
shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Westchester County
and indexed against the affected parcels of land. [Amended
12-7-1983 by L.L. No. 13-1983]
E. The designated Preservation District and protected sites and structures
shall be set forth in this subsection by block and lot number, street
designation and, if appropriate, by local designation. [Amended
9-15-1982 by L.L. No. 8-1982; 7-18-1984 by L.L. No. 10-1984;
1-16-1985 by L.L. No. 1-1985; 9-17-1986 by L.L. No. 14-1986;
8-19-1987 by L.L. No. 9-1987; 6-15-1988 by L.L. No. 11-1988;
§ 117-5 JUNK DEALERS § 117-5
113:389
10-6-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005; 1-28-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015;
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
(1) Preservation District: Village Green, the Square House, the Rye
Free Reading Room and City Hall, Boston Post Road, Rye, New
York, also known as Block 2, Lot Nos. 29 and 31, on the current tax
assessment map of the City of Rye, and formerly known as Block
42, Lot Nos. 14A, 14B, 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24. Specifically
designated as protected within the district are:
(a) The Square House: the exterior and the grounds surrounding,
a total of 1.88 acres. On the interior: the council room; tavern
room; warming kitchen; small exhibit room; ballroom;
nineteenth-century bedroom; the main entrance hall and
staircase; adjoining hallways between the specified rooms and
the Civil War period room in the attic, all exclusive of displays,
furnishings or exhibits. All areas not specifically proposed for
preservation as listed above should be deemed to be excluded.
(b) The Rye Free Reading Room:
[1] The exterior and grounds surrounding, a total of 0.26 acre.
On the interior, only that portion of the 1913 building
described as: in the first floor entrance vestibule:
woodwork, excluding doors; in the first and second floor
foyer: staircase, stairwell and landing space, including
three arches; woodwork, excluding doors to north and
south second floor rooms; in the first floor circulation area:
woodwork, including square and circular columns and
connecting beams only; in the first floor reading rooms,
north and south: woodwork, including fireplace surrounds
and mantels, trim above seven feet one inch (level of
mantels), window trim, including sills, and fireplaces as
working fireplaces.
[2] The following portions of the interior and exterior of the
1913 building shall be specifically excluded: second floor,
north and south rooms; toilet rooms and adjacent hallway:
furniture, including circulation desk and bookshelves:
furnishings, including carpet, vases, artwork, signage and
paint colors. Interior and exterior exclusions: lighting,
heating ventilation and electric; alarm systems, including
fire and security; wiring and devices for
telecommunications, including cable television, computer,
phone and similar installations.
[3] The following future possible changes are also excluded:
installation of ceiling and attic fans, railing in foyer,
exterior sign identifying the building, storm windows,
security lights and glass doors or stoves (e.g., Stovalator)
in fireplaces; waterproofing terrace.
§ 117-5 RYE CODE § 117-5
113:390
(c) The Rye City Hall be deemed protected as to exterior.
(d) The Village Green be deemed protected as to walks, walls,
millstones and landscaping.
(2) Protected site and structures: Alansten, the Jay Mansion, and the
Carriage House, 210 Boston Post Road, Rye, New York, also known
as Sheet 153.09, Block 1, Lot 24.1, on the current Tax Assessment
Map of the City of Rye. Specifically designated as protected sites
and structures are:
(a) Alansten: the entire site consisting of 22.46 acres and
including a viewway, a trapezoidal area located between the
Jay Mansion and the southerly property line in which there
shall be no construction, except for the installation of utility
services, which shall have a width of 90 feet at the rear of the
building and a width of 300 feet along the southerly property
line, the centers of which shall be the center of the rear facade
of the building and the point at which a line extending from the
rear facade and perpendicular to the rear facade intersects the
southerly property line, respectively. The foregoing described
orientation of the viewway to the mansion may be adjusted by
the Planning Commission during site plan review if it finds that
said adjustment will improve the public's view of the mansion.
(b) The Jay Mansion: the entire exterior.
(c) The Carriage House: the entire exterior.
(3) Protected site and structure: the Hains-Robinson House, 556
Milton Road, also known as Sheet 153.06, Block 1, Lot 70, on the
current Tax Map of the City of Rye. Specifically designated as
protected is:
(a) The Hains-Robinson House: the entire exterior and the entire
site, including the stone walls; the interior; the entire ground
floor, which includes the original kitchen and tap room
containing the ship's doors and paneling from the frigate
Brandywine. Also deemed protected are the stair railings and
newel posts and other Brandywine doors throughout the
house.
(4) Protected site: the Jay Family Cemetery, Boston Post Road, Rye,
New York, also known as Sheet 153.09, Block 1, Lot 33, on the
current Tax Map of the City of Rye. Specifically designated as
protected is:
(a) The Jay Family Cemetery: The entire site comprising 2.85 acres
shall be deemed protected, including walls, fences, stones,
monuments, paths and the access road. This designation shall
not interfere with or prevent additional burials or placement of
headstones.
§ 117-5 JUNK DEALERS § 117-5
113:391
(5) Protected site and structure: the Timothy Knapp House, 265 Rye
Beach Avenue, Rye, New York, also known as Sheet 146.19, Block
5, Lot 8, on the current Tax Map of the City of Rye. Specifically
designated as protected is:
(a) The Timothy Knapp House: the entire site and entire building,
including interior and exterior.
(6) Protected site and structure: the Parsons Estate, 260 Boston Post
Road, Rye, New York, also known as Sheet 153.09, Block 1, Lot 34,
on the current Tax Map of the City of Rye. Specifically designated
as protected is:
(a) The Parsons Estate: the entire site; the exterior and interior of
the main residence, the exterior of the gardener's cottage and
the exterior of the carriage house and stables.
(7) Protected site and structure: 235 Boston Post Road, Rye, New York,
also known as Sheet 153.05, Block 1, Lot 74.1, on the Tax Map of
the City of Rye. Specifically designated as protected is:
(a) The Stillman Residence: the entire site and the exterior of the
main residence.
(8) Protected structure: 5 Morris Court, Rye, New York, also known as
Sheet 153.05, Block 1, Lot 74.3, on the Tax Map of the City of Rye.
Specifically designated as protected is:
(a) The exterior of the one-story stone garage, including the
chimney. The attached greenhouse-type structure shall be
deemed to be excluded.
(9) Protected site and structures: the Bird Homestead, 600 Milton
Road, Rye, New York, also known as Sheet 153.6, Block 1, Lot 61,
on the Tax Map of the City of Rye; the Rye Meeting House, 624
Milton Road, Rye, New York, also known as Sheet 153.6, Block 1,
Lot 60, on the Tax Map of the City of Rye. Specifically designated as
protected are:
(a) The Bird Homestead: the entire site and the exterior.
(b) The Rye Meeting House: the entire site and the exterior.
(10) Protected site and structures: the Milton Cemetery, Milton Road,
Rye, New York, also known as Sheet 146-18, Block 4, Lot 51, on the
Tax Map of the City of Rye; the Purdy Cemetery, Milton Road, Rye,
New York, also known as Sheet 146-18, Block 4, Lot 76, on the Tax
Map of the City of Rye; Baird Square, Boston Post Road and Milton
Road, Rye, New York. Specifically designated as protected are:
(a) The Milton Cemetery: the entire site; this designation shall not
interfere with or prevent additional burials or placement of
headstones.
§ 117-5 RYE CODE § 117-5
113:392
§ 117-6. Procedure for issuance of certificate of appropriateness.
(b) The Purdy Cemetery: the entire site excluding the footbridge;
this designation shall not interfere with or prevent additional
burials or placement of headstones.
(c) Baird Square: the entire site, including the greenspace
encircled by hedges, the police booth, and the event sign.
A. Notwithstanding any inconsistent ordinance, code, rule or regulation
concerning the issuance of building or other permits, no material
change of appearance in any designated feature of a structure in a
designated district or of a designated Protected Site or Structure shall
be commenced without issuance of a certificate of appropriateness
from the Board of Architectural Review, nor shall any building or other
permits for such change be issued without such a certificate of
appropriateness having first been issued. The certificate of
appropriateness required by this section shall be in addition to, and not
in lieu of, any building or other permit that may be required by any state
or local law or regulation.
B. Application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be submitted to the
Board in such form and include such information as the Board may
require.
C. Construction; renovation; alteration; issuance of certificate. [Amended
12-7-1983 by L.L. No. 13-1983]
(1) Within a reasonable time after an application is filed and following
consultations with the Landmarks Advisory Committee, the Board
shall determine whether the proposed material change will be
appropriate to the preservation of the district of the Protected Sites
or Structures in view of the purposes of this chapter. In passing
upon appropriateness, the Board shall consider, in addition to any
other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural style,
general design arrangement, texture, material and color of the
building component involved and the relationship thereof to other
structures in the immediate neighborhood or district. With respect
to demolition in whole or in part, the Board shall also consider the
following:
(a) Whether the building is of such architectural or historical
interest that its removal would be to the detriment of the
public interest.
(b) Whether the building is of such interest that it could be made
into an historic shrine.
(c) Whether the building is of such old and unusual or uncommon
design, texture and materials that it could not be reproduced
or be reproduced only with great difficulty.
§ 117-5 JUNK DEALERS § 117-6
113:393
(d) Whether retention of the building would help preserve and
protect an historic place or area of historic interest in the City.
(e) Whether retention will promote the general welfare by
maintaining and increasing real estate values and encourage
interest in American history and architecture.
(2) If the Board approves a material change proposed, the Board shall
issue a certificate of appropriateness, which shall specify the work
to be done. In issuing such certificate, the Board may prescribe any
conditions that it deems to be necessary to carry out the intent and
purposes of this chapter. In setting such conditions, the Board is
authorized to require compliance with the Secretary of the
Interior's standards for additions, alterations and new construction
as contained in the Secretary of the Interior Standards for
Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings,
as revised from time to time. As to locally landmarked properties
which are not listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
proposed for such listing by the New York State Board on Historic
Preservation, this authorization does not include Secretary of the
Interior Standard 3 or 10, and the application of Standard 9 may
only be applied as locally amended. A copy of such standards,
including Standard 9 as locally amended, shall be kept on file and
made available to the public in the office of the Secretary of the
Board. A certificate issued pursuant to this section shall relate
solely to proposed plans accompanying the application or
otherwise submitted to the Board for official consideration prior to
the issuance of said certificate. It shall be unlawful to deviate from
the plans, including any modifications required as a condition of
the issuance of such certificate, unless and until an amended
certificate shall be applied for and issued. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Board shall not issue any such certificate unless and
until it has been advised by the agencies or department having
jurisdiction that there is no impediment to the issuance of any
building or other permit as may be required by applicable state or
local law or regulation for said work. [Amended 5-16-1990 by
L.L. No. 11-1990]
(3) If the Board determines that a certificate should not be issued or
that a certificate should be issued only upon specific conditions, the
Board shall notify the applicant in writing of such determination
and of the Board's reasons therefor. Such notice shall advise the
applicant of his right to a hearing before the Board to appeal such
determination or to show substantial hardship, pursuant to § 117-7
herein, as a result of such determination, if the applicant makes
written application to the Board therefor within 10 days of receipt
of such notice.
(4) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Board fails to issue a
certificate or notify the applicant of its determination not to issue a
certificate within 45 days after application therefor is filed or
§ 117-6 RYE CODE § 117-6
113:394
§ 117-7. Hardship cases.
within such additional time period as the Board and the applicant
may agree, such application shall be deemed approved.
D. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the
Board of Architectural Review in acting with respect to an application
for a certificate of appropriateness or in adopting regulations in
relation thereto, to waive any regulation or laws relating to height and
bulk of buildings, area of yards, courts and other open spaces, density
of population, the locations of trades and industries or location of
buildings designed for specific uses.
E. The Board may, in exercising or performing its powers, duties or
functions under this chapter with respect to any structure in a district
or to any Protected Structure, apply or impose, with respect to the
construction, reconstruction, alteration or use of such structure,
determinations or conditions which are more restrictive than those
prescribed or made by or pursuant to the applicable district regulations
contained herein or to any other applicable provisions or law.
[Amended 12-7-1983 by L.L. No. 13-1983]
F. Removing dangerous conditions. Anything herein to the contrary
notwithstanding, in any case where a duly authorized enforcement
agency shall order or direct the construction, removal, alteration or
demolition of any improvement on a Protected Site or in a Preservation
District for the purpose of remedying conditions determined to be
dangerous to life, health or safety, a certificate of appropriateness shall
be issued to permit compliance with such order or direction; provided,
however, that the work not result in a material change of appearance
where the danger to life, health or safety may be abated without such
material change of appearance.
G. Any certificate of appropriateness and any permit to raze a building
issued pursuant to these rules and regulations shall expire of its own
limitation 12 months from the date of issuance if the work authorized
thereby is not commenced by the end of such twelve-month period; and
further, any such certificate and permit shall also expire and become
null and void if such authorized work is suspended and abandoned for a
period of 12 months after being commenced. Any period or periods of
time during which the right to use any such certificate or permit is
stayed pursuant to these rules and regulations or to any statutory or
judicial rule or order shall be excluded from the computation of the 12
months. [Added 12-7-1983 by L.L. No. 13-1983]
A. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that the Board's failure to
issue a certificate of appropriateness causes a substantial hardship to
the applicant, the Board shall take one or more of the actions
enumerated in Subsection B below. For purposes of this section,
substantial hardship shall require a showing, to the satisfaction of the
Board, that:
§ 117-6 JUNK DEALERS § 117-7
113:395
(1) The land or improvement in question cannot yield a reasonable
return or be used for a necessary purpose of the owner if the
proposed construction, removal, alteration or demolition is not
permitted; and
(2) The hardship is not the result of any act or omission by the
applicant.
B. Upon a showing of substantial hardship, the Board shall take one or
more of the following actions: [Amended 12-7-1983 by L.L. No.
13-1983]
(1) Exercise its powers hereunder and its good offices to assist the
owner in developing an economically feasible plan to overcome the
Board's objections to the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness.
(2) Reconsider its decision and issue such certificate if it finds that
such certificate may be issued without substantial detriment to the
public welfare and without deviation from the intent and purposes
of this chapter.
(3) Recommend to the Council a limitation or remission of taxes on the
property affected, if permissible by law.
(4) Recommend to the Council that the City acquire, by purchase or
condemnation, a preservation restriction on the structure affected,
on such terms and conditions as the Council may approve.
(5) In the case of demolition in whole or in part, the Board shall
consider the issuance of a delayed certificate pursuant to § 117-7D.
C. Failure of Council to act.
(1) In the event that the Board determines that failure to issue a
certificate will cause a substantial hardship to the owner and
recommends that the Council take one or more steps to alleviate
such hardship and the Council fails to adopt such measures
recommended by the Board or such other measures as may be
sufficient to alleviate such hardship within 90 days, then such
certificate shall be deemed to have been issued to the owner, unless
a delayed certificate has also been issued by the Board pursuant to
§ 117-7D. [Amended 12-7-1983 by L.L. No. 13-1983]
(2) For the purposes of this section, the ninety-day period shall be
computed from the date the written findings and recommendations
of the Board are delivered to the City Clerk. Any relief granted
hereunder shall be in conformance with the objectives of this
chapter and shall be limited to the minimum required to effect
substantial justice and shall be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter.
D. Demolition. [Added 12-7-1983 by L.L. No. 13-1983]
§ 117-7 RYE CODE § 117-7
113:396
§ 117-8. Maintenance standards. [Added 12-7-1983 by L.L. No.
13-198323]
(1) With respect to an application to raze a landmark or a structure
located in an historic district, the Board of Architectural Review
shall have the right to issue a delayed certificate of
appropriateness. Such certificate shall not permit demolition or
razing for a period of up to 10 months from the date of application
therefor, during which time the Board and the applicant shall
undertake serious and continuing discussion for the purpose of
finding a method to save such property.
(2) During such period, the applicant and the Board shall cooperate in
attempting to avoid demolition of the property. At the end of this
ten-month period, if no mutually agreeable method of saving the
subject property being a reasonable prospect of eventual success is
underway or if no formal application for funds from any
governmental unit or nonprofit organization to preserve the subject
property is pending, the Building Inspector may issue the permit to
demolish the property without the approval of the Board. If such
mutually agreeable method for saving the subject property is not
successful or no such funds to preserve the subject property have
been obtained and are available for disbursement within a period of
two months following the end of such ten-month period, the
Building Inspector may issue the permit to demolish the property
without the approval of the Board.
(3) If the Board determines that a certificate of appropriateness should
not be issued, or that a delayed certificate or a certificate
contingent upon specific structural performance should be issued,
the Board shall notify the applicant in writing of such
determination, and of the Board's reasons therefor, and shall file
such notice with the City Clerk. Such notice shall advise the
applicant of his right to appeal such determination to the City
Council, which may reverse or affirm the action of the Board of
Architectural Review and of the Building Inspector.
(4) Unless the action of the Board of Architectural Review is reversed
by the City Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
Building Inspector shall refuse to grant a building permit or sign a
demolition or other permit in an historic district or involving a
landmark where a certificate of appropriateness has been denied or
where the grant of such permit is not within the terms and
conditions of such certificates of appropriateness as have been
granted.
A. Every owner or other person in charge of a Protected Site, building or
structure in a Preservation District shall keep in good repair all of the
23.Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 117-8 and
117-9 to become §§ 117-9 and 117-10.
§ 117-7 JUNK DEALERS § 117-8
113:397
exterior portions thereof which, if not so maintained, may cause or tend
to cause the exterior portions of such improvements to deteriorate,
decay or become damaged or otherwise to fall into a state of disrepair.
B. The following shall be the standards of good repair, which shall be in
addition to the requirements of Chapter 108:
(1) Protected Site, building or structure or a building or structure in a
Preservation District shall be properly secured (including fire,
smoke and/or entry alarms where necessary) from vandalism,
malicious mischief, and unauthorized use or casualty.
(2) Attached parts shall be affixed so they will not fall and injure
members of the public or property.
(3) Foundations shall be adequate and sound.
(4) Flooring or floor supports shall be of sufficient size or carry
imposed loads with safety.
(5) Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports shall be
sound and upright so that they are not split and do not lean, list or
buckle.
(6) Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports shall be of
sufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.
(7) Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other
horizontal members shall be sound and stabilized so they do not
sag or buckle and are not split.
(8) Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other
horizontal members shall be of sufficient size to carry imposed
loads with safety.
(9) Fireplaces or chimneys must be maintained so as not to settle, list
or bulge.
(10) Fireplaces or chimneys are of sufficient size or strength or carry
imposed loads with safety.
(11) Plaster is not cracked or loose.
(12) Exterior walls, roofs, foundations or floors, including windows or
doors, shall be effectively waterproofed.
(13) Effective weather protection shall be provided for exterior wall
coverings, including paint or other protective covering.
(14) Improvements shall be structurally sound and properly watertight
so that interior portions are secure from the elements.
§ 117-8 RYE CODE § 117-8
113:398
§ 117-9. Planning Commission. [Added 11-15-1989 by L.L. No.
12-1989;24 amended 6-20-1990 by L.L. No. 12-1990]
The Planning Commission, in connection with site plan or subdivision
approval, is authorized to set special conditions, regulations or restrictions
on alterations, additions or new construction in the vicinity of property
landmarked pursuant to this chapter to protect that property. In setting
such special conditions, regulations or restrictions, the Commission is
authorized to require compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's
Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic
Buildings, as revised from time to time. As to locally landmarked properties
which are not listed on the National Register of Historic Places or proposed
for such listing by the New York State Board on Historic Preservation, this
authorization does not include Secretary of the Interior Standard 3 or 10,
and the application of Standard 9 may only be applied as locally amended. A
copy of such standards, including Standard 9, as locally amended, shall be
(15) Improvements shall have sufficient heat source and temperature
controls so as to protect the premises (including plumbing, etc.)
from excessive deterioration or actual damage due to freezing.
(16) The Board may require necessary maintenance and repair work to
conform to the Secretary of the Interior's standards for such
maintenance and repair. [Added 5-16-1990 by L.L. No. 11-1990]
C. Administration and enforcement.
(1) Where it is alleged that a Protected Site or building or structure or
a building or structure in a Preservation District is not being
maintained in good repair, the Board of Architectural Review (by
majority vote), upon complaint of the Landmarks Advisory
Committee and after a hearing (with notice), shall determine what
improvements, betterments, replacements or repairs are required
to correct said deficiency.
(2) If upon written notice of the Board of Architectural Review's
decision the owner or other person in charge of the building or
structure does not commence corrective action and complete the
same within the time set forth by the Board of Architectural Review
in its decision, then the subsequent enforcement shall be the same
as if there had been noncompliance with a notice of violation issued
by the Building Inspector pursuant to § 108-49 et seq.
(3) Notice to an owner or other person in charge of the building or
structure shall be sufficiently given upon the date that a copy is
mailed to the person at the address shown upon the City real estate
tax rolls for the premises and also prominently posted on the main
entry door of the building or structure, whichever occurs later.
24.Editor's Note: This local law also renumbered former § 117-9, City-owned property, as
§ 117-10, and former § 117-10, Penalties for offenses, as § 117-11.
§ 117-8 JUNK DEALERS § 117-9
113:399
kept on file and made available to the public in the office of the Secretary of
the Commission.
§ 117-10. City-owned property. [Amended 11-15-1989 by L.L. No.
12-1989]
Plans for the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any
improvement or proposed improvement which is owned by the City or is
to be constructed upon property owned by the City and which is or is to
be located on a Protected Site or in a Preservation District shall, prior
to final action approving or otherwise authorizing the use of such plans
with respect to securing the performance of such work, be referred to the
Board by the agency of the City having responsibility for the preparation of
such plans. Within 30 days after such referral, the Board, after consultation
with the Landmarks Advisory Committee, shall submit its recommendations
thereon to the Mayor, the Council and the referring agency. Failure of the
Board to submit such recommendations shall be deemed approval by the
Board.
§ 117-11. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-15-1989 by L.L. No.
12-1989]
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a cumulative penalty of not more than $100 per day for each
such violation, and each day such violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. Any person who knowingly and willfully violates or
assists in the violation of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and,
upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $150 or
imprisonment, for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment for each offense. For the purpose of this section, the term
"person" shall include the owner, occupant, mortgagee or vendee in
possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent
or any other person, firm or corporation directly or indirectly in control
of a building or part thereof and is deemed to include all the officers
and directors if such "person" is a corporation.
B. The Corporation Counsel shall, upon complaint of the Board of
Architectural Review or of the Landmarks Advisory Committee or upon
his own motion, institute appropriate action to restrain, prevent, enjoin,
abate, correct or remove violations of this chapter and take such other
legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this
chapter. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by
law. Any and all remedies may be pursued concurrently or
consecutively, and the pursuit of any remedy shall not be construed as
an election or the waiver of the right to pursue any and all of the others.
§ 117-9 RYE CODE § 117-11
113:400
Chapter 121
LAUNDROMATS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses — See Ch. 125.
§ 121-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, when used in this chapter the word
"laundromat" shall include a self-service place used by the general public
for the purpose of washing or drying clothing or other fabrics.
§ 121-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate a
laundromat without a license therefor.
§ 121-3. Exemption.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to laundromats in residential
buildings, except that this exemption shall not apply to store units in
buildings occupied in part for residential purposes.
§ 121-4. License fee. [Amended 12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 13-2000]
Every person licensed pursuant to this chapter shall pay an annual license
fee to be set annually by resolution of the City Council before adoption of
the budget for the following year.
§ 121-5. Safety and sanitary regulations.
A. Washers and dryers shall be so constructed that they will cease to
function when the door is opened. Installations shall be so designed as
to prevent entrance to the rear of the washers and dryers by
unauthorized people. Washers and dryers shall be installed in
accordance with the National Electrical Code, except where it is
expressly provided otherwise by any ordinance of the City of Rye.
Provision shall also be made so that in case of a blower motor or gas
control failure, the dryer must shut off automatically.
B. The boiler must be provided with a low-water cutoff device to protect
the boiler from burning out should a low-water condition occur.
C. The platform for washers shall be so designed that any water spilling
out of a washer shall be drained off on the platform itself. The floor of
the store shall be sufficiently and properly covered with a nonabsorbent
paint or cement or other impervious material. Areas such as basements,
offices, storage places and closets shall have locked doors.
§ 117-11 LAUNDROMATS § 121-5
121:401
§ 121-6. Hours of operation. [Amended 4-21-1982 by Ord. No.
3-1982]
No laundromat shall be operated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. unless there shall be a supervising attendant present in the store at all
times.
Chapter 125
LICENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 46.
Amusements and exhibitions — See Ch. 50.
Auctioneers — See Ch. 56.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 113.
Laundromats — See Ch. 121.
Parking lots — See Ch. 138.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 144.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 180.
§ 125-1. Applications for licenses.
Any person desiring to procure a license required by this Code shall file with
the Clerk a written application upon a blank form prepared and furnished
by the city. Such application shall be signed and sworn to before a notary
public or other officer authorized to administer oaths in the State of New
York. No applicant to whom a license has been refused or who has had
a license which has been revoked shall make a further application until
a period of at least six months shall have elapsed since the last previous
rejection or revocation unless he can show that the reason for such rejection
or revocation no longer exists.
§ 125-2. Issuance of licenses.
Upon the filing of the application and any bond, certificate, report or
statement that may be required in addition thereto, and the payment of
D. Store layout, design and lighting shall be so planned as to provide
visibility of the complete interior of the store from the street or
sidewalk. The store shall be adequately ventilated and shall have a
sufficient amount of natural or artificial light, as shall be required by
the Building Inspector. If the store has a rear entrance from a parking
area, an outside floodlight shall be provided to satisfactorily illuminate
the area leading to the rear of the store.
E. The store shall be kept clean at all times. Refuse disposal cans must be
provided and so designed that at no time will they be uncovered.
F. A fire extinguisher approved by the Fire Department shall be mounted
where it shall be accessible to patrons of the store.
§ 121-5 RYE CODE § 125-2
125:402
the fee herein provided, the Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant. No
license shall be refused except for the protection of the public safety, health,
morals or general welfare. No license shall be granted to a person under 21
years of age. A license shall not be assignable. Any holder of such a license
who permits it to be used by any other person, and any person who uses
such license issued to any other person, shall be guilty of a violation of the
provisions of this Code. Whenever a license shall be lost or destroyed, a
duplicate in lieu thereof may be issued by the Clerk upon the filing with
him of an affidavit setting forth the circumstances of the loss and what, if
any, search has been made for its recovery. The license issued shall, unless
otherwise provided, include the right to use only one vehicle in carrying
on the business for which the person is licensed. Every licensee, while
exercising his license, shall have or carry the license with him and shall
exhibit the same upon demand. Any licensee using a vehicle in carrying on
his business may employ two persons and no more to assist him, but such
persons shall so act only while accompanying the licensee in the use of said
vehicle. In case any licensee shall remove his place of business designated
in the license, he shall immediately thereupon give notice to the Clerk and
have the new address endorsed upon such license.
§ 125-3. Expiration of licenses.
All licenses issued pursuant to this Code shall expire annually on the 31st
of December next succeeding the date of issuance thereof, unless sooner
revoked, and shall be renewable on or before such date in each year, except
where otherwise provided.
§ 125-4. Revocation of licenses.
The Mayor may, at any time, revoke or suspend any license after a hearing
for a violation of any ordinance or law or any rule, regulation, order or
special direction duly made as authorized by any provision herein. Written
notice of such revocation or suspension and the reason therefor shall be
served upon the person named in the application by mailing the same to the
address given in the application, and upon filing a copy of such notice in
the Clerk's office, with an affidavit of mailing, such license shall be revoked
or suspended. When a license shall be revoked, no refund of any unearned
portion of the license fee shall be made.
Chapter 128
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT ASSESSMENTS
§ 128-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 125-2 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT ASSESSMENTS § 128-1
128:403
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT — Any improvement, work or benefit, whether
done by the City with its own employees or by contract, the cost of which,
or part thereof, is to be borne by the property benefited, or its owner.
§ 128-2. Resolution and petition to initiate local improvement.
[Amended 5-19-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
§ 128-3. Contents of public notice.
The public notice shall generally describe the nature of the proposed local
improvement, and shall also generally describe the area deemed to be
benefited by said local improvement. The notice shall further specify the
time, date and place of the public hearing to be held before the City Council.
§ 128-4. Public hearing.
Before the City shall undertake any project the cost of which, or part
thereof, is to be borne by the property benefited or its owner, the City
Council shall hold a public hearing after public notice as hereinabove
provided. Upon such hearing, the City Council shall hear the objections
of interested parties and may adjourn from time to time to complete such
hearing. After such hearing, the City Council may make such changes,
additions or omissions as it deems proper in the proposed local
improvement, without the necessity of a further hearing, and may by
resolution direct the commencement of said local improvement either by
City forces or by contract.
§ 128-5. Amount to be borne by property benefited.
A. Resolution to initiate local improvement. The City Council may by
resolution provide for the undertaking of a local improvement. The
Council shall by resolution determine initially the property to be
benefited by said local improvement and shall order a public notice to
be published once in the official newspaper of the City. The notice shall
be published in the official newspaper of the City not less than 10 days
and not more than 30 days prior to the public hearing.
B. Petition to initiate local improvements. Upon a petition filed with the
City Clerk requesting that the City undertake a local improvement, duly
signed and authenticated by the property owners who own more than
66 2/3% of the lots and parcels which would benefit by the requested
local improvement, the Council may by resolution provide for the
undertaking of such local improvement as provided for in this chapter.
A. The City Council shall, in its resolution authorizing and directing the
undertaking of said local improvement, state the estimated cost of said
improvement and establish the manner and method of determining the
proportionate share of all or part of the cost to be borne by the property
benefited, and the portion, if any, to be borne by the City as a whole.
§ 128-1 RYE CODE § 128-5
128:404
§ 128-6. Preparation of assessment roll; hearing; confirmation.
§ 128-7. Hearing on assessment roll; confirmation.
B. The benefit of the local improvement may be determined on the basis
of:
(1) The lineal front footage of the lots and parcels benefiting from the
local improvement;
(2) The area of the lots and parcels benefiting from the local
improvement;
(3) The assessed value of the lots and parcels benefiting from the local
improvement;
(4) The “unit method”: equally divided among the number of lots and
parcels benefiting from the local improvement; or
(5) A combination thereof.
A. Upon the completion of any local improvement, the City Comptroller
shall certify to the City Council the part of the total cost of such
improvement, the amount to be assessed against the property
benefited, with the exception of the property which may have already
paid its proper share of such improvement, which such property shall
be briefly described by name or number, in accordance with the
resolution of the City Council authorizing and directing the undertaking
of said local improvement. The City Comptroller shall also certify to the
City Council the part of the total cost of such improvement, if any,
chargeable to the City.
B. Within 30 days after certification of the cost of the improvement, the
City Assessor shall submit a special assessment roll to the City Council,
which shall describe each lot and parcel benefiting from the local
improvement and show the name or names of the reputed owners
thereof and the aggregate amount of the assessment to be levied upon
such lot or parcel of land.
C. The City Council shall thereafter fix a time of hearing thereon and shall
cause notice thereof to be published in the official newspaper of the
City. The notice shall be published not less than 10 days and not more
than 30 days prior to the public hearing. The City Council shall, so far
as practicable, cause notice to be mailed to each person appearing on
such assessment roll at the time of such publication.
A. Upon the hearing of the assessment roll, the City Council shall hear the
objections of the interested parties and may adjourn from time to time
to complete such hearing. The City Council may alter and amend said
assessment roll in its discretion. When the City Council shall deem the
assessment roll to be correct, it shall confirm the same.
§ 128-5 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT ASSESSMENTS § 128-7
128:405
§ 128-8. Financing of local improvements.
§ 128-9. Establishment of special fund.
There is hereby established a special fund, which shall be under the
supervision and control of the City Comptroller, into which the proceeds of
any financing and the assessments collected for local improvements shall
B. Upon the confirmation of the assessment roll, the amount assessed
against each parcel of real property shall become and be a first lien
upon such parcel or real property until paid. Every such assessment
shall be collected by the City Comptroller in the same manner as taxes
are collected, and as is hereinafter provided, and the amount thereof
shall be expended only for the purpose of paying for such improvement
or of repaying money borrowed on account of same.
A. Following the confirmation by the City Council of any assessment for
local improvements, the City Council may provide that the assessments
may be paid in equal annual installments, to be collected in the same
manner as provided for the collection of City taxes. When such
assessments are paid in installments, the first installment and interest
at 6% per annum, or at such rate as may be fixed by the City Council by
resolution, on the full assessment from the date of confirmation of the
assessment roll to the date of payment on the first installment, shall be
paid on the first day of February following the confirmation of the roll,
and the first day of February thereafter shall be the anniversary date of
payment of the remaining installments, with accrued interest, in
succeeding years. Interest at the rate of 6% per annum, or at such other
rate fixed by the City Council by resolution, on all unpaid principal
balances shall be paid annually on such anniversary dates.
B. In the event that the owner of the assessed premises shall become
delinquent in the payment of any installment on the assessment, the
amount in default shall be collected and enforced in the same manner,
by the same proceedings, at the same time and under the same
penalties, in addition to the aforesaid accrued interest, and have the
same lien effect upon the property, as the general City tax and as part
thereof. After the confirmation of the assessment of a local
improvement by the City Council, the City Clerk shall attach to the roll a
warrant signed by the Mayor for the collection of the assessment or the
first installment, if payment is permitted in installments, and deliver the
same to the City Comptroller, who shall proceed in the same manner as
relates to the collection of City taxes. The remaining installments, as
due, shall be extended in a separate column on the tax roll and shall be
payable and collected in each successive year thereafter under the
same tax roll and included in the same warrant for the collection of City
taxes.
C. Any assessment may be paid in full at any time prior to maturity with
accrued interest from the date of confirmation to the date of payment.
§ 128-7 RYE CODE § 128-9
128:406
be paid for any improvement financed through such fund as hereinafter
provided. The City Council may determine, by resolution, that the financing
of the construction of any improvement heretofore or hereafter authorized,
including the acquisition of any land or any right in the land therefor,
which shall be paid completely by assessments upon the property benefited
or partially by assessments upon the City, shall be through the aforesaid
special fund. The City Council, upon the completion of any such
improvement or at any time prior thereto, may determine to issue, pursuant
to the Local Finance Law, the obligations of the City in such an amount as
said Council may estimate to be sufficient to pay the entire cost of any such
improvement.
Chapter 133
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 46.
Amusements and exhibitions — See Ch. 50.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 141.
§ 133-1. Unnecessary noise prohibited.
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the creation of any unreasonably
loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise is prohibited. Noise of such
character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of
any individual is prohibited.
§ 133-2. Prohibited acts.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but any enumeration herein
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
A. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or longcontinued
noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in
the vicinity.
B. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sales or
display of merchandise by the creation of noise.
C. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other
moving vehicles for advertising or other purposes unless a written
permit is first obtained from the City Clerk.
D. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal-combustion engine or motorboat engine except
§ 128-9 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT ASSESSMENTS § 133-2
128:407
§ 133-3. Permissible intensity of noise. [Amended 8-21-1991 by L.L.
No. 19-1991]
Except for noise emanating from the operation of motor vehicles, the
permissible intensity of noise from any of the foregoing acts, whether such
noise is intermittent, impulsive, sporadic or continuous, shall be limited as
follows:
§ 133-4. Points and method for measuring intensity of sound.
[Amended 8-21-1991 by L.L. No. 19-1991]
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom.
E. The operation of any machinery, motor vehicle, equipment, pump,
exhaust fan, attic fan, air-conditioning apparatus or similar mechanical
device, television, radio or phonograph, the loading or unloading of any
vehicle, or the use of any instrument in such a manner or with such
volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person
or persons in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or in such a
manner or with such volume as to create any noise in excess of the
sound-pressure levels herein designated.
A. Maximum sound pressure [db(A)] shall be as follows: [Amended
7-20-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994; 4-2-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008;
5-7-2008 by L.L. No. 3-200825]
(1) Fifty-five db(A) for stationary sources and 70 db(A) for outdoor
power tools.
(2) Portable air compressors and their related equipment are limited to
76 db(A).
(3) Lawn mowers, leaf blowers, and outdoor vacuum cleaners shall
have a permitted intensity of 85 db(A); use of this equipment is
prohibited between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on
weekdays and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on
weekends and holidays. The permitted intensity and hours
described in this subsection will apply to leaf blowers during
months when the use of leaf blowers is permitted.
(4) Air-conditioning units and pool filters are limited to 60 db(A).
(5) Except for micro-wireless facilities, aboveground and belowground
stationary utilities or communication facilities are limited to 45
db(A). [Added 1-9-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
(6) Micro-wireless facilities, as defined in Chapter 196, are limited to
10 db(A). [Added 1-9-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
25.Editor's Note: This local law provided that it become effective 6-1-2008.
§ 133-2 RYE CODE § 133-4
128:408
§ 133-5. Noise from motor vehicles. [Amended 8-21-1991 by L.L.
No. 19-1991]
Noise emanating from the operation of motor vehicles shall not exceed
sound-pressure levels described in § 386 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 133-6. Evidence of unreasonably loud noises.
Upon the trial of any action or proceeding arising out of acts committed by
any person creating unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise,
the court may admit evidence of sound-pressure levels in decibels as shown
by a sound-level meter, octave band analyzer and impact noise analyzer
or similar device. For the purposes of this chapter, evidence that noise
exceeded the maximum sound-pressure levels in decibels as provided in
§§ 133-3 and 133-5 hereof may be admitted as prima facie evidence that the
noise was unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary.
A. Except for noise emanating from the operation of motor vehicles, the
point at which the intensity of sound is to be measured shall be at a
distance of 50 feet, except that noise from: [Amended 1-9-2019 by
L.L. No. 1-2019]
(1) Air-conditioning units and pool filters at a distance of 10 feet.
(2) Stationary utility or communications facilities located underground
shall be measured three feet from the source of the noise.
Stationary utility or communications facilities located on a utility
pole or within a pole or other stealth facility shall be measured 12
feet from the sources of the noise or the nearest property line,
whichever is closer. For any nonright-of-way stationary utility or
communications facility shall be measured at the point that meets
vertically from the nearest property line and horizontally from the
equipment. For any such facilities, the measurements should
include noise from that facility and all other stationary utility or
communications facilities proximately associated with the
stationary utility or communications facility or its Supporting
Structure as defined in Chapter 196. Micro-wireless facilities
located shall be measured at the source.
B. Measurement shall be made using a meter capable of measuring
decibels and of a type meeting ANSI S1.4-1971, Type 2 standard. The
measurement is to be made using a free-field microphone directed at
the noise source.
§ 133-4 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT ASSESSMENTS § 133-7
128:409
§ 133-7. Lawn maintenance equipment regulations. [Added
6-16-1999 by L.L. No. 5-1999; 4-2-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008; 5-7-2008
by L.L. No. 3-200826]
It is the policy of the City of Rye to minimize noise created by lawn
maintenance equipment. The following rules are intended to help
accomplish that goal.27 In addition to these restrictions, operators should
exercise courtesy and take reasonable steps to minimize the noise creation
at all times.
A. No person shall operate within the City of Rye any gasoline or electric
leaf blower between May 1 and September 30 every year with the
exception that this ban does not take effect until June 1, 2008. As used
in this subsection, "leaf blower" shall be defined to include any device
powered by a electricity, gasoline, diesel or similar fuel engine which is
used, designed or operated to produce a current of air for the purpose
of pushing, propelling or blowing leaves, dirt, gardening and grass
clippings and cuttings, refuse or debris.
B. The head of the Rye Department of Public Works may permit the use of
leaf blowers from May 1 to September 30 for a period of time not to
exceed seven days after significant storm events or during other
emergency situations circumstances.
C. Additional rules for any person operating any leaf blower between the
dates of October 1 and April 30 are as follows:
(1) No leaf blower shall be operated simultaneously on the same lot
with any other type of machine-powered lawn equipment.
(2) Two or more leaf blowers shall not be operated simultaneously
except in R-1 Residence Districts as indicated on the City of Rye
Zoning Map.
D. This section shall not apply to the following entities and activities:
municipal, schools, religious institutions, membership clubs, golf
courses, hospital and retirement communities, cemeteries, and
driveway/road paving and sealing activities, except that any leaf blower
use shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable in proximity
to residences.
E. The use of power or leaf blowers to move leaves or yard debris to city
streets, public property, storm drains or abutting lots is prohibited at all
times.
F. Between January 1 and March 1 of 2009, the City Council shall place on
its agenda for public comment a discussion of § 133-7 to evaluate the
City's experience concerning the provisions of this section. Exempt
entities in § 133-7D shall file a report with the City Manager by
26.Editor's Note: This local law provided that it become effective 6-1-2008.
27.Editor's Note: See also § 133-3A(3).
§ 133-7 RYE CODE § 133-7
128:410
§ 133-8. Permit required; construction work, mechanical rock
removal and blasting restrictions. [Added 6-18-2003 by L.L. No.
2-200328; amended 4-11-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007; 5-7-2008 by L.L.
No. 4-2008; 7-8-2015 by L.L. No. 6-2015]
December 31, 2008 describing their efforts to reduce and minimize leaf
blower use within their institutions.
A. Whenever used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MECHANICAL ROCK EXCAVATION — Mechanical rock removal with
the use of a mechanical hammer or similar device, but excluding
drilling or boring of holes, and excluding the removal of man-made
structures such as concrete steps or driveways.
ROCK EXCAVATION PERMIT — A permit issued for rock excavation on
a subject property.
SUBJECT PROPERTY — The lot for which a mechanical rock excavation
permit or blasting permit pursuant to Chapter 98 is issued.
TESTING DAYS — A day when a school is administering a state or
federally mandated test or a day when the school is administering
an advanced placement test, PSAT, SAT, ACT, final examinations or
other similar tests, as long as the school or district posts on their
web site at the beginning of each school year such dates and provides
such information at the beginning of the school year to the Building
Department.
UNEXPECTED CIRCUMSTANCES — Circumstances unforeseen by the
property owner including mechanical failure of a machine, unexpected
conditions or inclement weather.
B. No mechanical rock excavation or blasting may take place unless a
permit is obtained. All permits shall identify the purpose for which the
Rock Excavation Permit or blasting permit is being issued, the owner of
the subject property, including any partners of any limited liability
company, and the permitted duration of the mechanical rock excavation
or blasting. The application for a mechanical rock excavation or
blasting Permit shall include a certification by the property owner that
the property owner has reasonably determined that any mechanical
rock excavation can be completed within the period in Subsection B(1)
below.
(1) Mechanical rock excavation and blasting shall be restricted to 38
consecutive calendar days.
(2) No new/additional mechanical rock excavation permit or blasting
permit (see Chapter 98) shall be issued for the same subject
28.Editor's Note: This local law also renumbered former §§ 133-8 and 133-9 as 133-9 and
133-10, respectively.
§ 133-7 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT ASSESSMENTS § 133-8
128:411
property for 18 months from the date any previously issued permit
expires.
C. No mechanical rock excavation Permit or blasting permit shall be
issued unless the applicant has a dust mitigation plan approved by the
Building Department. Such dust mitigation plan shall incorporate the
best dust control practices including, but not limited to, a water spray
system (air suppression or surface wetting). All dust mitigation plans
shall include measures to control water runoff as a result of any water
spray program.
(1) Trucks and other vehicles used to transport particulate matter shall
be covered and any particulate matter kept on site shall be
sufficiently wetted or stored to prevent particulate matter from
becoming airborne.
(2) Portable hand water sprinklers or hose sprinklers are acceptable
means of wetting for dust control. The water sprays or jets shall be
designed to break the water stream into small droplets or
otherwise to provide effective wetting.
(3) Suitable drainage means shall be provided for the removal of water
and sludge which drains from the operation.
(4) Soil or debris piles shall be moistened if dust is being emitted from
the piles due to prevailing winds and not from a momentary gust.
Adequately secured tarps, plastic or other material may be
required by the Building Department to further reduce dust
emissions.
D. Upon receiving a mechanical rock excavation permit or blasting permit,
any individual who intends to engage in mechanical rock excavation or
blasting on any property in the City of Rye shall register with the City at
least seven calendar days prior to the commencement of such activities.
Upon such notification, the subject property will be listed on the City of
Rye website showing the earliest commencement date and when the
thirty-eight-day period ceases. Such notice shall be displayed in a
visible location at the subject property.
(1) In addition to notifying the City as required above, the individual
must also notify the neighbors by sending out a public notification
prepared by the Building Department. The applicant shall prepare
a notification list, using the most current City of Rye Tax Maps and
Tax Assessment Roll, showing the Tax Map sheet, block and lot
number, the owner's name and owner's mailing address for each
property located wholly or partially within 500 feet of the subject
property. If a property on the public notification list is also listed as
a cooperative or an apartment, the notice shall only be mailed to
the property owner of record. These mailing requirements must be
performed in accordance with the following requirements:
§ 133-8 RYE CODE § 133-8
128:412
(a) The mailing shall be limited solely to the public notice provided
by the City Building Department.
(b) The notice shall be mailed to all property owners by regular
United States mail at a post office or official depository of the
Postal Service at least 10 days prior to the commencement of
mechanical rock excavation or blasting.
(c) The individual must provide a copy of the certificate of mailing
to the City Building Department prior to the commencement of
any mechanical rock excavation or blasting.
E. Construction work prohibited at certain hours and on certain days. No
person shall engage in construction work earlier than 7:30 a.m. or later
than 6:30 p.m., prevailing time, on weekdays; earlier than 10:00 a.m. or
later than 5:00 p.m., prevailing time, on Saturdays; or at any hour on
Sundays or any of the following holidays: New Year's Day, Presidents'
Day, Martin Luther King Jr. Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Yom Kippur, Thanksgiving Day,
Christmas Day and New Year's Day.
F. Notwithstanding any provision of § 133-8 to the contrary, an individual
may perform construction work him/herself on property on which such
individual then resides as follows:
(1) Weekdays, between 7:30 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(2) Saturdays and Sundays (including holidays), between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
G. Mechanical rock removal, including mechanical rock excavation, and
blasting are prohibited at certain hours and on certain days. No person
shall engage in mechanical rock removal, including mechanical rock
excavation, as defined in Subsection A, or blasting operations using
explosives as defined by § 98-40, within the City of Rye after the hour of
3:30 p.m. or before 9:00 a.m. on weekdays or at any time on Saturday
and Sunday; or on any of the following holidays and time periods: New
Year's Day, Presidents' Day, Martin Luther King Jr. Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Yom
Kippur, Thanksgiving Day through Thanksgiving weekend and
Christmas Day through New Year's Day except under authority of a
special permit issued by the City Manager. In addition, mechanical rock
removal, including mechanical rock excavation, and blasting will be
prohibited within 500 feet of a school on testing days.
H. No person performing mechanical rock removal shall have more than
two machines and two hammers operating on the subject property at
the same time. Rock crushing shall not be permitted on the subject
property.
I. A property owner who has properly applied for and received a permit
for mechanical rock excavation or blasting, and has otherwise complied
§ 133-8 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT ASSESSMENTS § 133-8
128:413
§ 133-9. Penalties for offenses. [Added 6-16-1999 by L.L. No.
5-1999; amended 4-11-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007; 5-7-2008 by L.L. No.
4-2008; 7-8-2015 by L.L. No. 6-2015]
In the event an activity is not being performed in accordance with this
chapter, the owner of the property or the owner's agent or the person
performing such violation shall be notified to suspend all work, and any
such persons shall forthwith stop such work and suspend all activities.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not
more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than 15 days, or
both, except that violations under § 133-8, Permit required; construction
work, mechanical rock excavation and blasting restrictions, shall be treated
as individual violations and for each and every such violation and
noncompliance, respectively, thereof, shall be punished upon such first
conviction by a fine of not more than $1,000, an order to suspend
construction work, mechanical rock removal and/or mechanical rock
removal and/or excavation and/or blasting on the site for a period of not
more than 72 hours, or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or any
combination of such fine, suspension, and imprisonment, and each day that
such violation shall continue shall be construed as a separate offense. Upon
any subsequent conviction for the same offense such person shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $2,000, or an order to suspend construction work,
mechanical rock removal and/or excavation and/or blasting on the site for
a period of not more than 72 hours, or by imprisonment not exceeding 15
days, or any combination of such fine, suspension and imprisonment. The
imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse or remedy such
violations.
with the provisions of this chapter, may apply to the City Manager for
an additional, one-time seven-calendar-day waiver in addition to the
38 days above, subject to all the other restrictions contained herein,
to be granted at the discretion of the City Manager on a reasonable
basis under a totality of the circumstances presented. If the waiver
is granted, the additional seven-day period will be set by the City
Manager, and the period will be listed on the City website.
J. A property owner who has properly applied for and received a permit
for mechanical rock excavation or blasting, and has otherwise complied
with the provisions of this chapter, may apply to the City Manager for
an additional, one-time seven-consecutive-calendar-day waiver in
addition to the 38 days above, subject to all the other restrictions
contained herein. The property owner shall have the burden of
demonstrating to the City Manager that a waiver is warranted due to
unexpected circumstances. The City Manager, at his sole discretion,
can require documentation supporting unexpected circumstances,
including a certification that the unexpected circumstances prevented
the completion of mechanical rock excavation or blasting during this
period. If the waiver is granted the period will be listed on the City
website.
§ 133-8 RYE CODE § 133-10
128:414
§ 133-10. Exempt acts. [Added 8-21-1991 by Ord. No. 19-1991;
amended 6-16-1999 by L.L. No. 5-1999; 7-8-2015 by L.L. No.
6-2015]
The following activities and agencies are exempt from the requirements of
this chapter:
Chapter 138
PARKING LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses — See Ch. 125.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 167.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 191.
§ 138-1. Definitions.
Wherever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKING LOT — Any outdoor space or uncovered plot of ground which
has the capacity to hold three or more motor vehicles and is used to
accommodate, store or keep any motor vehicle for the payment of a fee.
PERSON — Natural persons, corporations, partnerships, associations, jointstock
companies and societies.
§ 138-2. License required.
A. The actions of governmental agencies, including the Rye City School
District and the Rye Neck Union Free School District, shall be
specifically exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
B. Removal of rock for the sole purpose of the installation of gas or
electrical service, and the installation of water, sewer service or storm
water drainage, shall be exempt from § 133-8B and D above. Any
property owner seeking to utilize this exemption must certify in writing
that the rock removal is solely for this purpose, and must provide at
least 24 hours' notice to the City of same. The property owner must
provide new certification and notice if the removal lasts more than
three days. Upon such notice(s), the activity will be listed on the City
website.
A. It shall be unlawful for any persons to maintain, operate or conduct a
parking lot in the City of Rye without first obtaining a license therefor,
issued by the City Clerk after approval therefor has been given by the
Planning Commission of the City of Rye pursuant to the provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance.29
§ 133-10 PARKING LOTS § 138-2
138:415
§ 138-3. Application for license.
Applications for licenses to maintain, conduct or operate a parking lot shall
be made to the City Clerk upon blanks furnished by him and shall set forth
the name under which and the place where the parking lot is to be operated;
whether the applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation; if an
individual, the name and business and residence addresses of the
individual; if a partnership, the name and business and residence addresses
of each partner; if a corporation, the name, date and state under which
such corporation was organized, and the names and business and residence
addresses of the officers, managers in charge and directors thereof;
whether the applicant, if an individual, or, if a partnership, each partner, or,
if a corporation, each officer thereof, has ever been convicted of a felony or
a misdemeanor; whether the premises are owned or leased by the applicant,
and if leased, the name and address of the owner thereof; the number of
motor vehicles which may be parked on the premises and the schedule
of rates setting forth the parking charge the applicant will actually make
for various days of the week and holidays, together with a statement that
he agrees that he will not charge in excess of the rates set forth in the
schedule, and that upon proof of making charges in excess of those shown
in the schedule of rates, his license may be revoked under the terms of
§ 138-13 hereof; provided, however, that after a license has been granted
and a schedule of rates filed, the licensee may not lawfully change or alter
such rates without the consent of the City Council. In such cases where a
change of rates is allowed, a new schedule of rates shall be filed with the
City Clerk.
§ 138-4. Denial of license.
An application for a license may be denied on the grounds that an applicant,
or his partner in a copartnership, or an officer in a corporation, is
unacceptable after such applicant has been given a hearing before the
Common Council.
§ 138-5. License fees. [Amended 5-15-1956]
The fee for every license or for a renewal thereof shall be $1 per car of the
maximum capacity of the parking lot; provided, however, that in the case of
B. A license to maintain, operate or conduct a parking lot shall be granted
to a person of good character, in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, upon approval by the Planning Commission as provided in
Subsection A.
C. In case an applicant is a copartnership or a corporation, all members of
the copartnership and all officers of a corporation are required to be
persons of good character.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Zoning.
§ 138-2 RYE CODE § 138-5
138:416
parking lots operated on a seasonal basis, said fee shall be $0.25 per car for
each three-month operating period or fraction thereof.
§ 138-6. Verification of application.
Each application shall be signed and verified under oath by the applicant, if
an individual, or by a duly authorized agent, if a partnership or corporation.
§ 138-7. Bond required.
Each application shall be accompanied by a bond in such form as may
be required by the Corporation Counsel, executed by a bonding or surety
company authorized to do business in the State of New York, in the penal
sum of $5,000, conditioned upon the payment by the licensee of any and
all final judgments for damages resulting to persons or property, including
the theft of any motor vehicle or any part or accessory thereof, arising out
of the operation or maintenance of the parking lot. Such bond shall run
to the City of Rye for the benefit of any person who may receive injuries
and for the benefit of any person, partnership, association or corporation
who may claim redress for the property damaged or theft resulting from the
operation or maintenance of such parking lot. Such bond shall remain in full
force and effect for the full period of time for which the license is effective.
In lieu of such bond, the application may be accompanied by a certificate
of insurance in a like amount which, to the satisfaction of the Corporation
Counsel, shall be adequate to satisfy any judgments for the aforementioned
injuries, losses or damages.
§ 138-8. Signs required.
Each licensee shall maintain at each entrance to such parking lot a
permanently affixed sign suitable to apprise persons using such parking lot
of the name of the licensee, the hours of the day and/or night during which
such places are open to storing motor vehicles, the rates charged and the
closing hour of such parking lot. The figures for the rate or rates charged
for parking shall measure not less than six inches in height and the letters
and figures indicating the closing hours shall be not less than six inches
in height. All such signs shall be subject to the approval of the Building
Inspector.
§ 138-9. Regulations.
A. No motor vehicle shall be accepted by a licensee for parking or storage
in excess of the capacity of the parking lot as shown in the license.
Whenever the maximum capacity of the parking lot has been reached,
the licensee shall post at the public entrance thereof a sign composed of
letters at least six inches in height, stating that such maximum capacity
has been reached.
B. Vehicles shall be stored or parked on the licensed premises in such a
manner as to safeguard persons and property and permit adequate
inspection of the premises.
§ 138-5 PARKING LOTS § 138-9
138:417
§ 138-10. Claim checks.
§ 138-11. Notification of claims.
§ 138-12. Limitation of liability.
No contract, agreement, lease, receipt, rule or regulation shall exempt
any person operating a parking lot from damage or loss caused by the
negligence of such person or any employee of such person.
§ 138-13. Revocation of license.
The City Council may revoke any license, after a hearing before the City
Council, if at any time:
C. A minimum area of 8 1/2 feet in width and 20 feet in length shall be
allotted for each parked car. Driveways between rows of parked cars
shall be of a width approved by the City Engineer.
D. The licensee shall not permit vehicles to be so parked in the parking lot
as to create a fire or other hazard.
E. Parking lots shall be equipped with proper fire extinguishing apparatus
subject to the approval of the Fire Department of the City of Rye.
A. At the time of accepting a motor vehicle for parking in a parking lot, the
person conducting the same, his agent or employee shall furnish to
such person parking his motor vehicle a distinctive check which shall be
numbered to correspond to a coupon placed upon such motor vehicle,
which check shall show the location of the lot, the name and address of
the licensee operating such parking lot and upon which shall be written
or stamped the date and the license number of the motor vehicle.
B. The above provision shall not apply where cars are stored on a monthly
or weekly fee basis.
C. It shall be unlawful to affix any parking tags on any motor vehicles so as
to obliterate in whole or in part any portion of the motor vehicle license
plates on such vehicles.
A. Each licensee shall immediately notify the Chief of Police of any loss,
theft or conversion occurring upon his premises.
B. The obligations herein created of any person operating or conducting a
parking lot under the terms of this chapter to the owner of a motor
vehicle parked therein shall not extend beyond the regular posted
hours of attendance as posted upon such parking lot and printed upon
the regular receipt furnished to such motor vehicle owner.
A. The licensee has made any false or materially incorrect statement in the
application.
§ 138-9 RYE CODE § 138-13
138:418
§ 138-14. Licensing of employees.
Each person employed in the operation of a parking lot must be licensed
as such. Each applicant for a parking lot employee's license shall be 18
years of age or over and of good character and must fill out a form to be
provided by the Police Department, giving his full name, residence, place
of residence for five years previous to moving to his present address, age,
color, height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth, length of residence
in the City of Rye, whether married or single and whether he has ever
been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor. The Police Department is
hereby authorized and empowered to establish such additional rules and
regulations governing the issuance of employees' licenses, not inconsistent
herewith, as may be reasonably necessary. Upon satisfactory fulfillment of
the foregoing requirements, there shall be issued by the City Clerk to the
applicant a license for not more than one calendar year and expiring on the
31st of December next succeeding. No licensee shall employ any unlicensed
person to work in a parking lot. A fee of $1 shall be charged for such license,
and there shall be delivered to each employee an identification of such form
and style as the Police Department may prescribe, with his license number
thereon, which must be constantly and conspicuously displayed on the
outside of the employee's clothing when he is engaged in his employment.
§ 138-15. Barriers.
Persons operating parking lots shall keep the same enclosed with an
approved barrier so that motor vehicles may not be removed from such lots
except at the regular established entrances and exits.
§ 138-16. Entrances and exits; attendants.
Unless otherwise permitted by the Police Department, each parking lot shall
have not more than two entrances and two exits, which may or may not be
combined, and the licensee shall keep such entrances and exits properly
attended at all times during the period the parking lot is in operation.
§ 138-17. Maintenance of sidewalks and lots.
Each licensee shall keep the sidewalk surrounding the parking lot free from
dirt, ice, sleet and snow and shall keep the sidewalks in safe condition for
the travel of pedestrians. The parking lot shall also be free from papers and
debris and shall be maintained in a safe condition for the patrons.
B. The licensee violates or permits or countenances the violation of any
provision of this chapter.
C. The licensee violates or permits or countenances the violation of any
provision of any penal law or ordinance regarding theft, larceny or
conversion of a motor vehicle or the operation of a motor vehicle
without the owner's consent, whether or not such licensee or other
person is convicted of such offense.
§ 138-13 PARKING LOTS § 138-18
138:419
§ 138-18. Prohibited charges.
The licensee shall not require patrons to subscribe to or to pay for any
additional service, amusement, recreation or other purpose in order to be
admitted to the licensed premises.
§ 138-19. Licenses not transferable.
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred to
or assigned to any person or be used by any person other than the licensee
to whom it was issued, nor shall such license be used at any location other
than the location stated in such license.
§ 138-20. Attendance and supervision.
The premises of licensed parking lots must be adequately attended and
supervised at all times during operation.
§ 138-21. Lighting.
All licensed parking lots which are operated during any portion of the
period between one hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise shall be
adequately lighted so as to meet the approval of the Building Inspector.
§ 138-22. Lots to be graded.
AU licensed parking lots shall be graded unless special permission is
granted after special application to the Building Inspector. Such permission
may be granted by the Building Inspector if in his judgment the granting
thereof will not be inconsistent with the purposes of this chapter and will
not be detrimental to the public welfare and safety.
§ 138-23. Use of parked vehicle.
It shall be unlawful to make any use for any purpose whatsoever of any
motor vehicle parked in any parking lot unless such use shall first be
expressly authorized by the owner or person having control of such vehicle.
§ 138-24. Protection of parked vehicles; ignition keys.
It shall be unlawful for the licensee to permit or allow any parked
automobile to remain on any licensed parking lot after the posted closing
hour of said lot with the ignition keys in said car. It shall be the duty of the
licensee, after the closing hour of any parking lot, to cause to be removed
from the parked automobile the ignition keys, lock the car doors and make
the keys available to the owner and inform him where they may be obtained
on furnishing proper identification to the custodian of said keys. A sign shall
be posted stating where the keys may be obtained after the closing hour,
and a card identifying the location of the custodian of such keys shall be
securely affixed to the cars remaining parked on the lot after the closing
hour thereof.
§ 138-18 RYE CODE § 138-25
138:420
§ 138-25. Reports of abandoned vehicles.
It shall be the duty of the licensee to report to the Chief of Police the make
and license number of any car that shall have remained more than 48 hours
on any parking lot of said licensee without having been reclaimed. Such
report shall be made within three hours after the expiration of the fortyeight-
hour period; provided, however, that such report shall not be required
in the case of cars stored on a weekly or monthly basis or in the case of
parking lots operated in connection with or as an adjunct of any hotel, motor
court, tourist house or transient rooming house unless the circumstances
reasonably indicate that the car has been abandoned.
§ 138-26. Solicitation of patronage.
The licensee shall not shout, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other noisy
device to attract patronage.
§ 138-27. Payment of judgments.
Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to suspension
or revocation upon the failure of such licensee to pay or satisfy any
judgment secured against him by anyone who stored or parked a motor
vehicle in the parking lot licensed hereunder, provided that the licensee
is adjudged liable for acts of commission or omission with regard to the
business maintained, operated or conducted by him pursuant to the license
issued hereunder.
§ 138-28. Regulations authorized.
The City Council may promulgate such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
§ 138-29. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any provision of this
chapter or any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $100 for each
offense or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
§ 138-30. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to parking lots owned and/or operated by the
City of Rye, New York, or to those parking lots within the control of the
Westchester County Park Commission or the Rye Town Park Commission.
§ 138-25 PARKING LOTS § 138-30
138:421
Chapter 141
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms — See Ch. 95.
Noise — See Ch. 133.
Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 149.
§ 141-1. Loitering and loafing.
It shall be unlawful for persons to congregate, stand, loaf or loiter in or
upon any street, sidewalk or other public place so as to obstruct the same
or to hinder, prevent or annoy persons passing or attempting or desiring to
pass therein or thereon; to congregate, stand, loaf or loiter in or in front
of any hall, lobby, doorway, passage or entrance of any public building,
theater, public hall, hotel, store, shop or other like building or place of
public assemblage so as to obstruct the same or hinder, prevent or annoy
persons passing along or into or out of the same or attempting or desiring
to do so.
§ 141-2. Disturbances in public places and assemblages.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, aid or countenance or assist in
making any improper noise, or to incite or engage in any riot or disturbance,
or to indulge or engage in improper conduct or conversation in or upon
any street, sidewalk or other public place or in any theater or place of
amusement or in any room or building in which any number of persons are
lawfully assembled.
§ 141-3. Parades and processions.
All processions or parades occupying or marching in any street or public
place within the city to the exclusion or interruption of other citizens in their
individual right or use thereof are forbidden unless a written permit is first
obtained from the Clerk.
§ 141-4. Public bathing.
Public bathing in any of the waters within the city, except those under
the control of Westchester County Park Commission, unless in a suitable
bathing dress or covering is hereby prohibited. Walking or appearing upon
the public highways within the city in bathing or other similar scant
costume unless the wearer of such costume shall also wear suitable outer
garments or covering properly fastened over the same and covering the
body and limbs is hereby prohibited.
§ 138-30 RYE CODE § 141-5
141:422
§ 141-5. Coasting and playing games. [Amended 6-16-1976 by Ord.
No. 7-1976]
Coasting, ballplaying, roller skating or any other game, amusement or
exercise in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the
city, except in or upon such street or place designated by the Council,
which interferes with the free, safe and convenient use of such street,
sidewalk or other public place, and skateboarding on any through highway,
is prohibited.
§ 141-6. Billposting.
The posting of any advertisement, notice or bill within the limits of any
public street or highway or upon any public property within the city without
the consent of the Council is hereby prohibited, provided that this section
shall not apply to the posting of any notice which is required by law to be
posted.
§ 141-7. Defacing public notices.
It shall be unlawful willfully to deface, cover over, tear down, change or
destroy any advertisement, notice or ordinance posted by order of the
Council or any official of the city.
§ 141-8. Trespassing. [Amended 11-21-1956]
Any person who shall enter upon, intrude on, drive on or over the real
property of another, private or public, without the authority or consent of
the owner thereof or the person entitled to or in possession thereof, shall be
subject to a fine not exceeding $10 for the first offense and not more than
$25 for each subsequent offense.
§ 141-9. Clotheslines. [Added 8-16-1961 by Ord. No. 12-1961]
No clotheslines, drying racks, poles or other similar devices for hanging
clothes, rags or other fabrics shall be erected or maintained in a front yard
or side yard abutting a street. If there is a practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship in drying clothes elsewhere on the premises, a permit shall be
issued by the City Clerk permitting the use of said front or side yard for
such purpose upon approval of and a finding by the Building Inspector
that drying of clothes elsewhere on the premises would create a practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship. If a permit is denied, the applicant may
appeal to the Board of Appeals of this city. The provisions of this section
shall be applicable to existing conditions.
§ 141-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 141-9
141:423
Chapter 144
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses — See Ch. 125.
§ 144-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHARITABLE — The purpose of an organization which has received a letter
of determination approving tax exempt status under Title 26 of the United
States Code § 501(c)(3) or the purpose of a school club, recognized and
affiliated with a public or private school, having a program with annual
campaigns to support the public or private school club.
COMMERCIAL — The purpose of solicitation which is not noncommercial,
as defined in this section.
CORPORATION — The meaning consistent with the New York State
Business Corporation Law and the New York State Not for Profit
Corporation Law.
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS — A building or store in which or
where the person transacts business and deals in the goods, wares and
merchandise he or she hawks, peddles or solicits for during regular
business hours.
HAWKER AND PEDDLER — Any person, either principal or agent, who,
from any boat or in any public street or public place or by going from house
to house or place of business to place of business, on foot or on or from
any animal or vehicle, sells or barters, offers for sale or barter or carries or
exposes for sale or barter any goods, wares or merchandise, except milk,
newspapers, periodicals, books and pamphlets.
NONCOMMERCIAL — The purpose of solicitation which is charitable, as
defined in this section, religious or political.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, league, fraternal organization, joint-stock company, estate,
trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group acting
as a unit. The word "person" shall include the definition of corporation.
SOLICITATION —
The act of any person, whether a resident of the City or not, traveling
by foot, vehicle or any other type of conveyance who goes from house
to house, business to business, from place to place or in or along any
highway, street or sidewalk within the City either:
A.
§ 141-9 RYE CODE § 144-1
141:424
SOLICITOR — Any person, whether a resident of the City or not, engaged
in solicitation.
§ 144-2. Exemptions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to apply to any of the
following:
Requesting, either directly or indirectly, money, credit, funds,
contributions, personal property or anything of value;
(1)
Taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of any goods,
wares, merchandise or services of any kind, or description for
future delivery or for services to be performed in the future, either
in person or by distributing flyers and leaflets; and
(2)
Selling and making immediate delivery of any goods, wares,
merchandise or services of any kind or description, commonly
referred to as "peddling."
(3)
Solicitation shall not include the following so long as the person is
not requesting, either directly or indirectly, money, credit, funds,
contributions, personal property or anything of value:
A person communicating or otherwise conveying ideas, views or
beliefs or otherwise disseminating oral or written information to a
person willing to directly receive such information, provided that
such information is of a political, religious or charitable nature;
(1)
A person seeking to influence the personal belief of the occupant
of any residence or business in regard to any political or religious
matter;
(2)
A person seeking to obtain, from an occupant of any residence or
business, an indication of the occupant's belief in regard to any
political or religious matter;
(3)
A person conducting a poll, survey or petition drive in regard to any
political matter; and
(4)
A person carrying, conveying, delivering or transporting dairy
products, newspapers, or other goods to regular customers on
established routes or to the premises of any person who had
previously ordered such products, goods or services and is entitled
to receive the same.
(5)
B.
A. A sale conducted pursuant to an order of any court.
B. A wholesaler selling articles to dealers or merchants who have an
established place of business in the City of Rye.
C. A child 18 years of age or under who resides within the City or Rye and
who solicits or peddles on behalf of a charitable, religious, athletic,
social, educational or civic organization, including but not limited to the
§ 144-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 144-2
141:425
§ 144-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a hawker, peddler or solicitor,
as herein defined, without first having obtained a license from the Clerk.
The license shall be carried on the person of the licensee at all limes while
engaging in peddling or soliciting and shall be exhibited by the licensee to
any person on demand. A picture of the licensee shall appear on the valid
license.
§ 144-4. Certificate for equipment.
The application for a license shall be accompanied by a certificate from the
Sealer of Weights and Measures of the County of Westchester, certifying
that all weighing and measuring devices to be used by the applicant have
been examined and approved.
§ 144-5. License application.
To obtain a license to solicit, peddle or hawk within the City of Rye, a person
shall make a written application to the Clerk in a form prescribed by the
Clerk and provide the following information:
Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, Cub Scouts, Brownie Scouts, clubs, classes or
organizations sponsored by any school located within the City of Rye of
which such child is a member.
D. The peddling of meats, fish, fruit and farm produce by farmers and
persons who produce such commodities on their own land, provided
that they have otherwise complied with all applicable licensing and
health and safety requirements of any other competent governmental
body or agency, as well as the Zoning Code of the City, and the sale
takes place from a stationary location upon property owned or leased
by the seller of such goods.
E. A not-for-profit organization's sale of food ancillary to a fundraising
event, such as a picnic or carnival, that lasts no longer than five
consecutive days. This exemption shall not apply to any door-to-door
peddling or soliciting.
F. Any person holding a license pursuant to Section 32 of the General
Business Law, "Licenses to veterans of the armed forces of the United
States."
A. The full name of the applicant, including any nicknames commonly
used, home address, telephone number, any mobile telephone number
or email address used on a regular basis, date of birth and social
security number.
B. A valid driver's license with a clearly delineated license number and
state of issuance or other acceptable proof of identification;
§ 144-2 RYE CODE § 144-5
141:426
§ 144-5.1. Criminal background check.
This section shall only apply to commercial solicitation.
C. If the applicant works for another person or entity of any nature, the
name, address, telephone number, email address, and website address
of the person or entity to the extent such exists;
D. A brief description of the solicitation business to be conducted, and the
intended area where the business is to be conducted if less than the
entire residential area of the City;
E. Two photographs, two inches by two inches in size, full face on a white
background, taken of the applicant within the prior sixty-day period of
time which accurately reflect the appearance of the applicant on the
date of the application;
F. An affidavit that the applicant is not disqualified because of prior
criminal history and whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
crime and, if so, under what name, with a listing of such conviction,
including crime jurisdiction, date and sentence imposed.
G. If the solicitor is a minor (under the age of 16), a notarized
authorization by the applicant's parent or legal guardian. The
authorization form is part of the application form.
H. A description of the vehicle which the applicant wishes to use in
carrying out his business or occupation as well as the name of the
vehicle owner and registration details.
I. County Health Department permit number, if a food vendor.
J. If peddling or soliciting for a corporation, the state in which it is
incorporated and the names of its officers along with a copy of its
certificate of incorporation.
A. The City of Rye shall initiate a criminal history background check of
prospective solicitors, including those persons acting on behalf of an
employer or other person.
B. The criminal background check shall not be initiated without the
written consent of the person.
C. A license shall not be issued to any person who refuses to consent to or
cooperate in the securing of a criminal history record background
check.
D. Each applicant shall submit two sets of fingerprints and any other
necessary information to L-1 Identity Solutions (or other outsourcing
agency under contract with the New York State Division of Criminal
Justice Services [DCJS]) for processing. In addition, a certified check or
money order, in the amount specified by and made payable to DCJS to
§ 144-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 144-5.1
141:427
§ 144-5.2. Expiration; renewal; revocation; denial; appeal.
The following provisions shall apply to licenses for commercial solicitation:
cover the cost of processing fingerprints, shall accompany the
application.
E. The City of Rye Police Commissioner and/or his designee shall be
responsible for reviewing the criminal history record information
(CHRI) disseminated by DCJS. All applicants requiring a background
check must have the results of their background check reviewed by the
Police Commissioner and/or his designee prior to submitting their
application to the City Clerk.
F. If a prospective applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity, any decision regarding such prospective applicant's fitness for
a license must be made upon consideration of New York State
Correction Law §§ 701 to 703-b and §§ 751 to 753.
A. All licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be
reviewed annually and may be renewed thereafter, unless sooner
revoked.
B. Prior to the expiration of a license and upon application for renewal of
the license, the Clerk shall determine if the applicant, peddler or
solicitor has acted in compliance with the applicable provisions of this
chapter and conditions of the license.
C. The license may be renewed upon a determination that the solicitor or
peddler has substantially complied with the terms and conditions of the
permit and the requirements of this chapter.
D. Renewal fees shall be established by a resolution of the City Council
and may be amended from time to time.
E. If it is determined that the solicitor or peddler has not been in
compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter, the license shall
not be renewed.
F. The Clerk may revoke any license granted under the provisions of this
chapter for any of the following reasons:
(1) The applicant provided false, misleading or misrepresented
information in procuring the license;
(2) The applicant or any person who worked on behalf of or with the
applicant failed to comply with the requirements of this chapter;
(3) The applicant or any person working on behalf of or who worked on
behalf of or with the applicant is convicted of violating any federal,
state or local law while in the course of operating under the license;
§ 144-5.1 RYE CODE § 144-5.2
141:428
§ 144-6. License fee.
The annual license fees shall be set annually by resolution of the City
Council before adoption of the budget for the following year for each license
issued pursuant to this chapter.
(4) The activities for which the license was granted were or are being
conducted in a manner that is detrimental to the public health,
safety, peace or welfare.
G. When a license has been revoked, no other license shall be issued under
the provisions of this chapter to the same applicant within one year of
the date of revocation.
H. An application for a license under this chapter may be denied for the
following reasons:
(1) The applicant fails to cooperate with or consent to the criminal
background check as stated in this chapter.
(2) An applicant's background check reveals a conviction for any
criminal offense including, but not limited to, violent crimes, sexual
assault, possession of a controlled substance, theft, fraud or
burglary.
(3) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the application for
the license.
(4) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying out the applicant's trade, business or occupation.
(5) Any violation of this chapter.
(6) Carrying out of the licensed business, trade or occupation in an
unlawful manner or in such a way as to breach the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, welfare or safety of the public.
(7) The license shall not be transferable or assignable. In the event
that a licensee shall permit any other person to possess or use such
license, such license shall automatically be revoked, and the
licensee shall thereby be guilty of violating this chapter, and no
application for a further license may be made for a period of one
year from the date of revocation.
(8) Any applicant who has had a license denied or revoked by the Clerk
may appeal to the City Manager, in writing, within 30 days of the
receipt of the denial or revocation. The City Manager will
thereafter hold a hearing within 45 days of receipt of the demand
for such hearing to review the determination of the Clerk.
§ 144-5.2 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 144-7
141:429
§ 144-7. Name and address on vehicle.
Every vehicle used by a licensed hawker, peddler or solicitor in or about
his or her business shall have the name of the licensee and his or her
address plainly, distinctly and legibly painted in letters and figures at least
two inches in height in a conspicuous place on the outside of the sides of
every such vehicle, and such name and address shall be kept so painted
plainly and distinctly at all times while such vehicle is in use during the
continuance of the license.
§ 144-8. Restrictions.
A licensed hawker, peddler or solicitor shall:
§ 144-8.1. Restricted hours.
No person while conducting the activities of peddler or solicitor shall enter
upon any private residence, knock on doors, or otherwise disturb persons in
their residence between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
§ 144-9. Written orders; duplicates.
All orders taken by licensed solicitors who demand, accept or receive
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery shall be in writing,
in duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the amount paid in advance, and
A. Not falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quantity, character or
quality of any article offered for sale; or offer for sale any unwholesome,
tainted or diseased provisions or merchandise.
B. Keep the vehicle and receptacles used by him in a clean and sanitary
condition and the foodstuffs and edibles offered for sale well covered
and protected from dirt, dust and insects.
C. Not blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other noisy device to attract
public attention to his or her wares, or shout or cry out his or her wares.
D. Not stand nor permit the vehicle used by him or her to stand in one
place in any public place or street for more than 10 minutes or in front
of any premises for any time if the owner or lessee of the ground floor
thereof objects.
E. Not sell any confectionery or ice cream within 250 feet of any school
property between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days.
F. Not permit any vehicle used by him or her to stop or remain on any
crosswalk.
G. Not create or maintain any booth or stand, or place any barrels, boxes,
crates or other obstructions, upon any street or public place for the
purpose of selling or exposing for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise.
§ 144-7 RYE CODE § 144-9
141:430
one copy shall be given to the purchaser at the time the deposit of money is
paid to the solicitor.
§ 144-10. "Do not knock" registry.
§ 144-11. Unwanted solicitations prohibited.
A. Any owner or occupant of property located in the City who wishes to
prohibit soliciting on the premises shall complete a form available in the
City Clerk's office and on the City's website. The completion of the form
will allow the owner/occupant's premises to be included on a list of
properties that do not permit solicitation (herein referred to as the "donot-
knock registry" or "registry").
B. In order to be removed from the registry, the owner and/or occupant
must complete a form indicating that he/she does not want his/her
property to be included on the registry.
C. Any owner and/or occupant who has requested enlistment on the donot-
knock registry, pursuant to this chapter, shall be able to purchase
from the City, for a nominal fee, a sticker or sign for display indicating
enlistment on the do-not-knock registry.
D. All solicitors shall obtain the current do-not-knock registry at the time
of issuance of a permit or at the time of registration to solicit pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter.
E. Solicitors shall not solicit at any premises identified on the then current
do-not-knock registry.
F. It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor to check each residence for
the presence of such signage and to obtain updated copies of the
registry.
A. It is unlawful for any person to go upon, ring the bell, knock on the door
of or attempt to gain admission to the premises of any residence,
dwelling or apartment in the City of Rye where the owner, adult
occupant or other person in control thereof has expressed his objecting
to such activity either by explicit instructions, oral or written, or by
posting a sticker or sign indicating the location is listed on the City's donot-
knock registry pursuant to § 144-10, or by posting a sign or decal
bearing the words "No Solicitation" or words of similar import such as:
"No Solicitors," "No Solicitation," "No Soliciting," "No Peddlers," or "No
Trespassing," provided the signage has letters at least one inch in
height, and is posted conspicuously so that it can be seen by persons
approaching the front entry of the residence or at the front doorway, or
by persons assisting a solicitor who has such a visual impairment as to
be unable to see the sign.
B. Activities related to a service requested by the owner or occupant of the
property and undertaken in the ordinary course of business, including
but not limited to deliveries of utility notices, telephone directory
§ 144-9 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 144-11
141:431
§ 144-11.1. Penalties for offenses.
My violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in § 1-15 of the Code of the City of Rye and as otherwise provided
herein.
Chapter 145
PUBLIC OFFICERS INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter — See Charter. Code of ethics — See Ch. 15.
§ 145-1. Legislative purpose.
In 1981 the City Council of the City of Rye recognized the increasing
litigation exposure faced by public employees and officers and conferred the
defense and indemnification benefits contained in § 18 of the Public Officers
Law on Rye public officials and employees on August 19 of that year by a
unanimously adopted resolution. The City Council wishes to reaffirm and
codify that action and to provide additional indemnification and defense
protection pursuant to law.
§ 145-2. Section 18 benefits.
The full benefits of § 18 of the Public Officers Law shall apply to public
officials and employees of the City of Rye, and the City of Rye shall be held
liable for the costs incurred under the provisions of that section, as well as
the costs incurred under § 145-3 of this chapter.
§ 145-3. Additional indemnification.
The city will provide for the defense of any city officer or employee in any
civil action or proceeding arising out of any alleged act or omission in which
it is alleged that the officer or employee has violated the civil rights of the
claimant, petitioner or plaintiff under Section 1981 and 1983 of the United
States Civil Rights Act. The city shall indemnify and save harmless such
officer or employee in the amount of any judgment or settlement of claim
obtained against such officer or employee, including punitive and exemplary
damages. Such legal defense and indemnification shall be provided where
deliveries, regular newspaper deliveries, work order notices and
service inquiries, are presumed to be requested or invited for the
purpose of this section.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the distribution of
leaflets, pamphlets or other literature such as commercial, political or
religious material distributed in a lawful manner.
§ 144-11 RYE CODE § 145-3
145:432
the officer or employee at the time of such alleged act or omission was
acting in good faith and within the scope of his public employment, powers
and duties. The provisions of this section shall be in addition to any other
statute, local law or enactment providing legal defense and indemnification
in civil actions brought against such officer or employee.
Chapter 147
RECORDS MANAGEMENT
§ 147-1. Program established; designation of officer.
There shall be a records management program established under the aegis
of the City of Rye Clerk. The City Clerk is designated as the city's Records
Management Officer. The officer will be responsible for administering the
noncurrent and archival public records and storage areas for the city in
accordance with local, state and federal laws and guidelines.
§ 147-2. Powers and duties.
A. The City Records Management Officer shall have all the necessary
powers to carry out the efficient administration, determination of value,
use, preservation, storage and disposition of the noncurrent and
archival public records kept, filed or received by the officers and
departments of the City of Rye.
B. The Records Management Officer shall:
(1) Continually survey and examine public records to recommend their
classification so as to determine the most suitable methods to be
used for the maintaining, storing and servicing of archival material.
"Archival material" shall be:
(a) Obsolete and unnecessary records according to New York
State Archives Records Retention and Disposition Schedules
(MU-1) thereby subject to disposition;
(b) Information containing administrative, legal, fiscal, research,
historical or educational value which warrant their permanent
retention; or
(c) Records not subject to disposition according to state law.
(2) Establish guidelines for proper records management in any
department or agency of city government in accordance with local,
state and federal laws and guidelines.
(3) Report annually to the City Council on the powers and duties herein
mentioned, including but not limited to the cost-benefit ratio of
programs effectuated by the program.
§ 145-3 RECORDS MANAGEMENT § 147-2
147:433
§ 147-3. Records Advisory Board.
There shall be a Records Advisory Board designated to work closely with
and provide advice to the Records Management Officer. The Board shall
consist of representatives appointed by the Mayor or City Manager. (It may
consist of the City Auditor, the City Historian, one or two representatives of
the City Council or others who may be beneficial to the duties of a Records
Advisory Board.) The Board shall meet periodically and have the following
powers and duties:
(4) Oversee all requests for records storage equipment, microfilm
equipment, etc., and coordinate and participate in planning for the
expansion of micrographics and automated data processing
systems.
(5) Establish an inactive records storage area for the storage,
processing and servicing of all noncurrent and archival records for
all city departments and agencies.
C. The Records Management Officer shall perform the following functions
with respect to the city:
(1) Advise and assist city departments in reviewing and selecting
records to be transferred to the inactive records storage area for
storage and/or preservation.
(2) Continually survey and examine public records to determine the
most suitable methods to be used for the creating, maintaining,
storing and servicing of archival materials.
(3) Establish and maintain an adequate repository for the proper
storage, conservation, processing and servicing of archival records.
(4) Promulgate rules governing public access to and use of records in
the archives, subject to the approval of the Records Advisory
Board.
(5) Develop a confidentiality policy for archival records designated
confidential, provided that such policy does not conflict with any
federal or state statutes.
(6) Provide information services to other City of Rye offices.
(7) Develop a procedure whereby historically important records are to
be identified at the point of generation.
(8) Collect archival materials which are not official City of Rye records
but which have associational value to the city or a close
relationship to the existing archival collection. Such collecting shall
be subject to archive space, staff and cost limitations and to the
potential endangerment of such materials if they are not collected
by the archives.
§ 147-2 RYE CODE § 147-3
147:434
§ 147-4. Custody.
The Records Management Officer shall maintain physical custody and
official responsibility of all records in his/her possession. Department heads
shall retain constructive control and authority over all department records,
regardless of their physical location.
§ 147-5. Replevin.
The City Attorney may take steps to recover local government records
which have been alienated from proper custody and may, when necessary,
institute actions of replevin.
§ 147-6. Disposal of records.
No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by a department of
the city unless a records disposal form has been executed. Records will not
be destroyed if they are required for any pending audit, litigation or other
investigation.
§ 147-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARCHIVES — Those official records which have been determined by the
Records Management Officer and Advisory Committee to have sufficient
historical or other value to warrant their continued preservation by the city.
RECORDS — Any documents, books, papers, photographs, sound
recordings, microfilm or any other materials, regardless of physical form
or characteristics, made or received pursuant to law or ordinance or in
connection with the transaction of official city business.
RECORDS MANAGEMENT — The planning, controlling, directing,
organizing, training, promotion and other managerial activities involved in
records maintenance, use and disposition, including records preservation,
disposal, records centers or other storage facilities.
A. Provide advice to the City Records Management Officer on the
development of the records management program.
B. Review the performance of the program on an ongoing basis and
propose changes and improvements.
C. Review retention periods not covered by the SARA Schedule MU-1 or
retention period changes recommended by department heads.
D. Provide advice on the appraisal of records for archival value and to be
the final sign-off entity as to what is or is not archival.
§ 147-3 RECORDS MANAGEMENT § 147-7
147:435
RECORDS DISPOSITION —
INACTIVE RECORDS STORAGE AREA — An establishment maintained by
the city primarily for the storage, servicing, security and processing of
records which must be preserved for varying periods of time and need not
be retained in active office space and equipment.
SERVICING — Making information in records available to any city
department for official use or to the public.
Chapter 149
REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED
§ 149-1. Disposal methods.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow a discarded
refrigerator or one not in use to remain in any place in the City of Rye
accessible to children unless the latching or locking mechanism on the door
or doors of the same has been removed or unless the door or doors of the
same are bolted and locked in such a manner that it is impossible to open
the same by use of the hands.
§ 149-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of § 149-1 hereof shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined in a
sum not to exceed $50 or be imprisoned for not more than 10 days, or both.
Chapter 153
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 197.
The removal by the city, in accordance with approved records control
schedules, of records no longer necessary for the conduct of business
by such agency through removal methods which may include:
(1) The disposal of temporary records by destruction or donation; or
The transfer of records to the inactive records storage area for
temporary storage of inactive records and permanent storage of
records determined to have historical or other sufficient value
warranting continued preservation.
(2)
A.
B. The transfer of records from one city agency to any other city agency.
§ 147-7 RYE CODE § 149-2
149:436
ARTICLE I
Registration
[Adopted 10-4-1978 by Ord. No. 3-1978 as Art. 7 of Ch. 3 of the
General Ordinances]
§ 153-1. Registration required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, maintain or operate in
the City of Rye a residential care facility providing resident service and
twenty-four-hour supervision for mentally, emotionally, physically or socially
disabled persons or for persons in need of supervision or juvenile
delinquents, whether or not supervised by a state or federal agency, unless
the premises wherein the same is conducted, maintained or operated and
the residents and staff of said premises are registered in the manner
prescribed herein.
§ 153-2. Certificate of registration: application; expiration.
§ 153-3. Inspection of premises.
The issuance of a certificate of registration may be delayed until the City
Manager has caused an inspection of the premises to be registered to
be made by the departments of the city to determine whether or not
said premises comply with all laws and with the rules and regulations of
the Building Department, Police Department and Fire Department, insofar
as the same are applicable thereto, and any conditions imposed by the
Planning Commission.
A. The certificate of registration prescribed by this article shall be issued
by the City Clerk. Application for such certificate of registration shall be
made on a form containing the following information:
(1) The nature or type of such community residence for the disabled,
including the class of disabled persons it is intended to serve.
(2) The title of the sponsoring agency responsible for the operation of
such community residence.
(3) The geographical area in which such community residence is
located, including but not limited to street address, municipality,
local school district and health systems agency.
(4) The number of clients or residents authorized to live within such
community residence.
(5) The licensing authority of such community residence.
(6) The staff-client ratio in said home, including the names, ages and
addresses of staff members.
B. Each certificate shall expire on the 31st day of December.
§ 153-1 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 153-4
153:437
§ 153-4. Posting of certificate.
Every facility registered in accordance with the provisions of this article
shall immediately post such certificate of registration and keep same posted
while in force in a conspicuous place in the premises mentioned in the
application for such certificate.
§ 153-5. Amended certificate of registration.
Within 30 calendar days prior to a change in registration characteristics
as stated in certificate of registration, the operator of the facility shall file
an application for the issuance of an amended certificate of registration
with the City Clerk and shall, upon receipt of an amended certificate of
registration, post said certificate in accordance with the provisions of
§ 153-4 of this article. The issuance of an amended certificate of registration
may be delayed if the City Manager has determined that there are violations
of a state, county or city law, ordinance or regulation for which the premises
has been cited directly affecting the health, safety and welfare of the
occupants of the premises or the neighborhood, which violations have not
been corrected or cannot be expected to be corrected prior to the anticipate
date of the change in staff or residents.
§ 153-6. Anticipated delay in issuance of certificate.
In the event that the City Manager finds that under § 153-3 or 153-5 of
this article the certificate cannot be expected to be issued in time for the
anticipated date of occupancy of the premises stated in the application
because of uncorrected violations which would endanger the health, safety
and welfare of the occupants of the building or the neighborhood, he shall
serve notice upon the owner and other parties of interest in the premises
of the anticipated delay, either personally or by certified mail, and describe
the nature of the conditions found to exist. The notice shall also contain
the time and place at which the owner and other parties of interest will be
given an opportunity to propose a schedule of corrective actions, which, if
acceptable to the City Manager, will allow the issuance of the certificate of
registration, or to submit a written statement acknowledging or denying the
violations and their intent to occupy the premises prior to the issuance of a
certificate of registration.
§ 153-4 RYE CODE § 153-6
153:438
Chapter 154
RETAIL CHECKOUT BAGS
§ 154-1. Purpose.
The intent of this chapter is to improve the environment in Rye by
encouraging the use of reusable checkout bags and banning the use of
plastic bags for retail checkout of purchased goods. Retail establishments
are encouraged to make reusable bags available for sale.
§ 154-2. Justification.
Nonbiodegradable plastic bags often are discarded into the environment
and end up polluting our waterways, clogging sewers, endangering marine
life and causing unsightly litter. These bags last hundreds of years in
landfills and are a potential source of harmful chemicals when they do break
down.
§ 154-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CHECKOUT BAG — A carryout bag that is provided to a customer at the
point of sale. The term "checkout bag" does not include plastic produce bags
or plastic bags measuring 28 inches by 36 inches or larger in size.
PLASTIC PRODUCE OR GARMENT BAG — A flexible container made of
very thin plastic material with a single opening that is used to transport
clothing from a dry cleaner, produce, meats or other items selected by
customers to the point of sale.
RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG — A paper bag that should have the following
characteristics:
RETAIL SALES — The transfer to a customer of goods in exchange for
payment occurring in retail stores, sidewalk sales, farmers' markets, flea
markets and restaurants. The term "retail sales" does not include sales of
goods at yard sales, tag sales, other sales by residents at their home, and
sales by not-for-profit organizations.
REUSABLE BAG — A bag with handles that is specifically designed and
manufactured for multiple reuse and is:
A. Contains no old-growth fiber;
Is 100% recyclable overall and contains a minimum of 40% postconsumer
recycled content; and
B.
Displays the words "Reusable" and "Recyclable" on the outside of the
bag.
C.
A. Made of cloth or other fabric; and/or
§ 153-6 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 154-3
153:439
§ 154-4. Restriction on checkout bags.
§ 154-5. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective six months following its adoption to
allow retail establishments to dispose of their existing inventory of plastic
checkout bags and convert to alternative packaging materials.
§ 154-6. Penalties for offenses; continuing violations.
Chapter 157
SANITARY REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 71.
Dogs — See Ch. 76.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 87.
Housing standards — See Ch. 108.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 113.
Laundromats — See Ch. 121.
Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 149.
Sewers — See Ch. 161.
B. Made of durable plastic that is at least 2.25 mils thick.
A. Any person engaged in retail sales shall provide only reusable bags and/
or recyclable paper bags as checkout bags to customers.
B. Nothing in this section shall preclude persons engaged in retail sales
from making reusable bags available for sale to customers.
A. In the event that there is noncompliance with this chapter, the owner of
the property or the owner's agent or the person performing such
violation shall be notified in writing and shall forthwith stop with the
violating activity. Such notice shall be in writing and may be served
upon a person to whom it is directed either by delivering it personally to
him or her or by posting same upon a conspicuous portion of the
property and sending a copy of same by certified mail.
B. The penalty for each violation shall be up to $150.
C. Each occurrence of a violation, and each day that such violation
continues, shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to a
separate penalty and may be cited as such.
§ 154-3 RYE CODE § 154-6
153:440
ARTICLE I
Animals
§ 157-1. Animals at large. [Amended 3-7-1945]
No person shall permit any horse, cattle, unmuzzled dog, fowl or other
animal to run at large upon any street or other public place in the city,
except that the provision herein contained as to any unmuzzled dog shall
apply only during the period of the disease known as rabies or other
emergency when certified by the State Commissioner of Health or other
duly authorized body or officer.
§ 157-2. Harboring animals. [Amended 3-7-1945]
The harboring or maintenance of any animals within the city, by reason of
which the peace or order of the city or the health or property of any person
therein is unduly affected or damaged, and the harboring or maintaining
of any female dog during any mating period thereof unless such dog is so
confined as to prevent a nuisance, are hereby prohibited.
§ 157-3. Disposal of dead animals.
Upon the death of any animal within the city, except when the same is
properly and lawfully killed for food, the owner or person having control
thereof shall immediately dispose of the carcass in a manner so as to avoid
any unsanitary condition.
§ 157-4. Use of terms. [Added 5-7-1947]
The word "poultry" as used in §§ 157-5 and 157-6 herein shall mean and
include domestic fowl such as chickens, turkeys, ducks, guinea fowl and
geese.
§ 157-5. Keeping of poultry. [Added 5-7-1947]
No person shall build, erect, maintain or keep any poultry shed, yard or
enclosure nor any poultry therein within the City of Rye located less than
25 feet from any boundary line or the nearest dwelling. All poultry pens,
yards, houses and enclosures shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition
and all accumulations of filth in and about the same removed at least
twice a week. The Health Officer of the City of Rye or his representative is
hereby authorized and directed to make such inspection as may from time
to time be necessary for the purpose of determining whether or not any
such poultry pen, yard, house or enclosure is being kept and maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition. Whenever the Health Officer or his
representative shall deem it necessary to require any additional precaution
or care to be exercised by the owner or other person in possession of
any such poultry pen, yard, house or enclosure in order that the same
may be kept in a clean, sanitary condition or to remedy any unclean or
unsanitary condition, he shall serve a written notice upon such owner or
other person, setting forth in detail his instructions for the maintenance
§ 157-1 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-5
153:441
of said poultry pen, yard, house or enclosure or for the correction of any
unclean or unsanitary condition therein. If the person upon whom such
notice is served shall fail within a reasonable time to comply with said notice
to the satisfaction of the Health Officer or his representative, the Health
Officer or his representative may declare any such poultry yard, pen, house
or enclosure to be a public nuisance and order its abatement and removal.
Failure on the part of any person to comply with any notice under this
section or otherwise to comply with the provisions hereof shall constitute a
violation of this section.
§ 157-6. Existing structures used for poultry. [Added 5-7-1947]
Any building, structure, yard, shed or enclosure existing at the time
§§ 157-4 and 157-5 take effect and used for the keeping of poultry as herein
defined shall not be affected hereby, but such use may continue unless the
same becomes a nuisance and is offensive to an adjoining property owner
or occupant thereof, and for the purposes hereof said continued use shall
be deemed prima facie a nuisance or offensive if it is made to appear, by
affidavit of an adjacent owner or occupant, that it materially interferes with
or deprives said owner or occupant of the reasonable use and enjoyment of
his or her property.
§ 157-5 RYE CODE § 157-6
153:442
ARTICLE II
Camps
§ 157-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMOBILE TOURIST PARK OR CAMP — Any plot of ground where
accommodation is provided for one or more automobile trailers or house
cars used or arranged to be used for living or sleeping quarters.
AUTOMOBILE TRAILER OR HOUSE CAR — Any vehicle used or arranged to
be used for living or as sleeping quarters, mounted on wheels and movable
or propelled either by its own power or drawn by another power vehicle.
TOURIST PARK OR CAMP — Any plot of ground upon which one or more
camp cottages or cabins used for or arranged to be used for the
accommodation of transients by the day, week or month are located.
UNIT — That portion of a tourist park or camp or automobile tourist park or
camp set apart for the use of an individual cottage, cabin, automobile trailer
or house car.
§ 157-8. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, operate or conduct
within the city any tourist park or camp or any automobile tourist park
or camp, or any combination of such, unless duly licensed so to do as
hereinafter provided and except in strict compliance with this article and all
other provisions of law and ordinances applicable thereto.
§ 157-9. Application for license. [Amended 12-20-2000 by L.L. No.
15-2000]
An application for a license provided for under the preceding section shall
be made by filing with the Clerk a written application on a blank form
prepared and furnished by the city, together with detailed plans and
specifications of all buildings, structures, plumbing, sewer and drainage
systems and lighting and any other information required by the Building
Inspector. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee of $50 for every
five units or fewer, plus $10 for each additional five units; but if a license
is subsequently issued, said fees shall be applied on account of the license
fee, and in the event a license is not issued, such investigation fee shall be
retained by the city.
§ 157-10. Review by Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall examine and investigate the statements
contained in such application, together with the plans and specifications,
and shall report to the Council his/her recommendations thereon.
§ 157-7 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-11
153:443
§ 157-11. Public hearing.
The Council shall consider the report of the Building Inspector and may for
that purpose hold a public hearing, on notice prescribed by said Council,
upon such application and shall determine whether the proposed tourist
park or camp or automobile tourist park or camp complies with the
provisions of this article.
§ 157-12. License issuance; fees. [Amended 2-2-1977 by Ord. No.
2-1977; 12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 15-2000]
If such application is acted upon favorably by the Council, it shall direct the
Clerk to issue a license to the applicant upon payment of the following fees:
§ 157-13. Expiration of license.
Each license issued pursuant to this article shall expire on the 31st day
of December. The fee for such license shall not be prorated for any lesser
period than one year, and such license shall always be on display in the
office of the tourist park or camp or automobile tourist park or camp.
§ 157-14. Drainage.
A tourist park or camp or automobile tourist park or camp shall be located
on a well-drained site of adequate size, which shall be free from heavy or
dense growth of brush or weeds. The land shall be properly graded so as to
ensure rapid drainage during and following rain and freedom from stagnant
pools of water, and each such park or camp must be accessible to the public
sewer, and each trailer, house car, cottage or cabin, or by whatever other
name known, placed or located thereon, used for or designed to be used
for living or sleeping quarters, shall have a separate connection for sewage
purposes and be connected with the city sewer.
§ 157-15. Construction.
Each unit in which a camp, cottage or cabin is erected or placed or which
accommodates an automobile trailer or house car shall be not less than 30
by 50 feet in area, which area shall be clearly defined by markers at each
corner. No cottage or cabin used or arranged for use for living quarters or
sleeping quarters shall be less than 280 square feet, of which no dimension
shall be less than 14 feet, and such cottage or cabin shall not be less than
eight feet high from the floor to the ceiling and shall have not less than
27 square feet of ventilating openings or windows, all being adequately
screened. If the floor be of wood, it shall not be less than 12 inches above
the level of the ground. The roof of each cottage or cabin shall extend
sufficiently beyond the exterior walls so that all roof water shall fall free of
the walls. Each cottage or cabin and each automobile trailer or house car
A. For a tourist park or camp: $60 per unit.
B. For an automobile tourist park or camp: $60 per unit.
§ 157-11 RYE CODE § 157-15
153:444
shall not be less than 20 feet from any property line and from any other
building, structure, cottage, cabin or automobile trailer or house car.
§ 157-16. Roads.
All entrances and exits from any park or camp shall be well marked and
so arranged as not to constitute a traffic hazard. All driveways within the
tourist camp shall be hard-surfaced, not less than 25 feet in width, well
marked in the daytime and lighted at night and so located that each unit in
the camp is readily accessible to a driveway.
§ 157-17. Toilet facilities.
No tourist park or camp and no automobile tourist park or camp shall
provide toilets, urinals, slop basins, washbasins, showers or baths, but each
unit in such park or camp shall be separately equipped with such facilities
and so constructed therein that each can be separately connected with the
city sewer.
§ 157-18. Plumbing.
All plumbing and sanitary installations shall be made in accordance with
the Plumbing and Building Codes of the city30 and any other law, rule,
regulation or ordinance of the city applicable thereto.
§ 157-19. Water supply.
The only water supply for such park or camp shall be the water supply used
by the city at large.
§ 157-20. Garbage receptacles.
A covered metal garbage pail and a covered metal rubbish container of
adequate size shall be provided for each unit.
§ 157-21. Records required.
Every tourist park or camp or automobile tourist park or camp shall be
under the management of the licensee, who must be of good reputation
and character and who shall manage such camp from an office located
on the premises. There shall be maintained in such office a bound book
containing a record of the names of persons accommodated at the camp,
their occupation, dates of arrival and departure, their home address, the
license number and make of their automobile or other vehicle; such record
shall at all reasonable times be available for inspection by the Building
Inspector and any police officer of the city.
30.Editor's Note: Ch. 68, Building Construction.
§ 157-15 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-22
153:445
§ 157-22. Duties of licensee.
It shall be the duty of the licensee of any such park or camp:
§ 157-23. Zoning requirements.
No license shall be granted for the construction or operation of such a park
or camp in violation of the Zoning Ordinance31 or other ordinances of the
city.
§ 157-24. Revocation of license.
The Mayor or the Building Inspector may revoke or suspend the license
granted upon authority of this article for failure to comply with any
provision hereof or any law or regulation relating to any such camp or park.
A. To provide for the daily collection and removal of garbage and other
waste material.
B. To prohibit the placing or storage or unsightly materials or vehicles of
any kind.
C. To provide for the cleaning of the grounds in connection with such camp
or park so as to maintain the same in a proper sanitary condition at all
times.
D. To take such other measures as may be deemed necessary by the
Health Officer, by the Westchester County Department of Health or by
the Building Inspector to preserve the health, comfort and safety of all
accommodated in the camp or park and of the general public.
E. To prevent any animal from running at large within or outside the park
or camp.
F. To report to the Health Department of the city and to the Westchester
County Department of Health all cases of communicable diseases
affecting any occupant of the camp or park.
G. To prevent the committing of any nuisance on the park or camp
premises and to report immediately to the proper authorities all acts of
a disorderly character committed by any person or persons inside of the
camp or park, and to that end to maintain proper policing thereof.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Zoning.
§ 157-22 RYE CODE § 157-24
153:446
ARTICLE III
Solid Waste
[Added 12-18-1991 by L.L. No. 21-199132]
§ 157-25. Purpose; definitions.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish rules and regulations
governing the collection and disposal of garbage and other waste.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — Containers fabricated of aluminum and
commonly used for soda, beer or other beverages.
BLUE BOX — The recycling container obtainable from the Department
of Public Works.
BULKY METALS — Stoves, refrigerators, dishwashers, dryers, washing
machines, air-conditioning units, boilers, freezers, water tanks, lawn
mowers, metal duct work, aluminum siding, metal window and door
frames and other large metal appliances.
BULKY WASTE — Beds, mattresses, chairs, tables, wood, windows,
linoleum and other large items not otherwise defined.
DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Concrete, masonry, wood plaster, aluminum
or other siding material, wire, asphalt, ceramics, tiles, Sheetrock,
stones, bricks, clay pipe, concrete pipe and any other by-product of
a new construction activity, renovation and rebuilding or other
modification to a house, appurtenances and grounds.
GLASS BOTTLES — Transparent or translucent jars, bottles and
containers which are primarily used for packaging and bottling of
various products, but only those glass bottles that are green, amber or
clear in color.
MUNICIPALLY COLLECTED SOLID WASTE — Household waste and
other waste materials routinely produced in a household and used
household items. This material shall not include other materials defined
as bulky metals, bulky wastes, demolition debris, glass bottles,
newsprint and yard organics.
NEWSPRINT — The common, inexpensive machine-finished paper
made chiefly from wood pulp used for newspapers. This term excludes
glossy newspaper inserts, books and magazines as well as other paper
products.
RECYCLABLES — Glass bottles, aluminum cans, metal food containers,
newsprint, plastic, leaves and bulky metals, as defined in this
subsection, and such other materials for which separate recycling
collection is provided by the Department of Public Works.
32.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Art. III, Collection of Refuse.
§ 157-25 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-25
153:447
§ 157-26. Preparation of wastes for collection.
Every person in possession of or responsible for premises used for
residential purposes shall prepare and segregate all material intended for
collection by the Department of Public Works as follows:
YARD ORGANICS — Grass clippings, leaves, branches and other like
organic garden materials. Excluded are tree trunks, root systems, tree
stumps, logs, main branches and other large growing vegetation.
A. Municipally collected solid waste shall be placed in watertight metal or
plastic containers having a capacity not to exceed 32 gallons, with tightfitting
metal or plastic covers. The weight of any such container and its
contents shall not exceed 60 pounds. No portion of any such container
shall be located below the surrounding grade level or in any enclosure,
except as specifically permitted by the Department of Public Works.
B. Bulky waste material which is not self-contained shall be placed in
suitable containers so as to prevent scattering or, if too large to be
placed in containers, shall be bundled and securely tied. The bundles
shall not exceed four feet in any dimension, and neither a container and
its contents nor a bundle shall weigh in excess of 60 pounds.
C. Newsprint and other recyclables for which separate collection is
provided shall be separated from other municipally collected solid
waste and shall be placed in a blue box. Collection shall be made in
accordance with rules promulgated by the Department of Public Works
with the approval of the City Manager. Newsprint used to wrap solid
waste and contaminated newsprint shall not be included in such
bundles and shall be disposed of with household waste.
D. The owner of a multiple-family building shall designate a common area
in which recyclable materials are to be accumulated by residents in
such building and shall be responsible for the placement of recyclable
materials for collection.
E. Yard organics shall be separated from other municipally collected solid
waste. Leaves, grass clippings and other similar organic materials shall
be placed in plastic or biodegradable paper bags for collection in
accordance with rules promulgated by the Department of Public Works
with the approval of the City Manager. Yard organics shall be placed at
the curb readily accessible to a refuse collection truck.
(1) Leaves will be bagged separate from other yard organics.
(2) Branches not exceeding four inches in diameter shall be securely
tied in bundles no longer than three feet in length, not larger than
18 inches in diameter and not exceeding 50 pounds in weight for
collection with yard organics.
§ 157-25 RYE CODE § 157-27
153:448
§ 157-27. Placement and collection procedures.
All material intended for collection by the Department of Public Works shall
be placed where it will be readily accessible for collection as follows:
§ 157-28. Limitations on collections and acceptable wastes.
A. Municipally collected solid waste must be set outside of the building in
a convenient place where it shall not be offensive to the public, except
that in areas abutting municipal car parks all garbage and trash must
be placed outside of the building in a fireproof enclosed structure
sufficient in size to handle all garbage and trash from the property,
designed to provide convenient emptying of containers and removal of
other garbage, boxes or trash, having latched doors and placed in a
location convenient for the collection thereof. Such enclosure shall be
coordinated with or integrated into a face of the building, and the
appearance of the enclosure shall be subject to the approval of the
Board of Architectural Review.
B. Other material shall be placed at the curb readily accessible to a refuse
collection vehicle.
C. Newspaper and other recyclables shall be placed at curbside only.
D. There will be no collection from residence where snow and ice have not
been cleared from access pathways or driveways.
E. No material of any kind shall be placed at curbside, along the shoulder
of a street or on any part of a street more than 24 hours in advance of a
scheduled collection.
F. If vehicles are required to enter private property for the collection of
material, such entry will be at the sole risk of the property owner.
G. From the time of placement of garbage and other waste for collection,
such material shall be municipal property. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to collect, pick up or cause to be collected
or picked up any such material without the express written
authorization of the City of Rye. Each such collection or pickup shall
constitute a separate violation.
H. Nothing herein shall prevent any person from making arrangements for
the private collection of materials, provided that such materials to be
collected privately shall not be placed at the curb immediately
preceding the day for municipal collection of such materials.
A. The Department of Public Works shall not pick up wood over four inches
in diameter or over three feet long; tree stumps; tree trunks; firewood;
railroad ties; telephone poles; demolition or discarded debris, such as
lumber, concrete, plaster, dirt, rock, brick, asphalt or large wooden
crates or boxes; stones or quantities of sod; flammable or highly
combustible matter, such as cleaning establishment wastes or other
§ 157-27 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-28
153:449
§ 157-29. Transportation vehicles; licenses.
industrial wastes found to contain varnish, paint, thinners or other
dangerous materials; sawdust; explosives; ammunition; oil drums,
either full or empty; cans or barrels containing combustible liquids;
rubber tires of any size; rubber wastes; automotive or similar batteries;
tar paper roofing; tar cans; dead animals; or any hazardous waste as
defined by Article 27 of the Environmental Conservation Law and the
regulations promulgated thereunder.
B. Effective April 1, 1992, the Department of Public Works shall not pick
up from any one dwelling unit or commercial location during any
collection more than:
(1) Two thirty-two-gallon containers, or the equivalent thereof.
(2) Two cubic yards of bulky waste, except by special arrangements.
C. The Department of Public Works shall not pick up any material
classified as toxic waste by 6 NYCRR 366, the identification and listing
of hazardous wastes pursuant to Article 27, Title 9, of the
Environmental Conservation Law or any ensuing legislation more
restrictive than currently in force.
D. No person shall transport and attempt to dispose within the City of Rye
any waste material originating outside the City of Rye.
E. No business owner, operator or employee shall place in a public waste
receptacle maintained by the city any waste material that originates
from a residence or the operation of a place of business.
A. No person shall engage in the business of operating any vehicle used
for carrying garbage or other refuse materials over or upon the public
streets of the city unless such vehicle, while being so used, is equipped
with a metal body or a body securely lined with metal and with a closely
fitted metal cover therefor so as to prevent the escape therefrom of any
such garbage or other refuse being carried therein.
B. No materials shall be allowed to be tied or attached to the outside of the
vehicle, on the tailboard or elsewhere except highly flammable articles
and the like which must be carried on the tailboard. Anything herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding, a permit may be granted by
the City Engineer for:
(1) Carrying on the outside of the enclosed body:
(a) Bulky waste or bulky metals as defined in this article.
(b) Ashes in substantial receptacles fitted with tight covers.
(2) Collecting from the business districts where the waste materials
are bulky in a flat-body vehicle. The vehicle must have a canvas
§ 157-28 RYE CODE § 157-29
153:450
§ 157-30. Dumping on private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or dump or cause to be
placed, deposited or dumped automobiles, automobile bodies, bottles, dead
animals, garbage, grass, flammable materials, junk, leaves, lumber, metal,
plaster, putrescible substances, tin cans or waste matter of any nature on
any privately owned lot for the purpose of abandonment or otherwise.
§ 157-31. Dumping in streets or streams.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or place or cause
to be thrown, deposited or placed, in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place or any public property or into any stream, canal or
other watercourse or any waters within the city, automobiles, automobile
bodies, ashes, bottles, boxes, broken crockery, dead animals, excrement,
filth, garbage, flammable materials, junk, leaves, lumber, metal, offal,
plaster, putrescible substances, rags, shavings, shells, stones, straw, tin
cans, wood or any rubbish or waste of any kind or to cause any obstruction
or injury thereto or nuisance therein.
§ 157-32. Obstructing sewers and drains.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit or cause to be thrown
or deposited into any drain, catch basin, sewer or gutter within the city
any substance which may cause obstructions or injury thereto or nuisance
covering which shall be securely fastened so as to prevent the
escape therefrom of any materials being carried therein.
C. Vehicles shall be kept at all times in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be subject to inspection at any time by the Health Officer.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate any
vehicle for carrying solid waste or other refuse materials unless duly
licensed so to do as hereinafter provided and except in strict
compliance with this article and all other provisions of laws and
ordinances applicable thereto.
E. An application for a license under this section shall be made by filing
with the Clerk a written application, on a form prepared and furnished
by the city, fully describing the vehicle or vehicles to be used for said
purpose, the name and address of the licensee, the liability insurance
covering such vehicle or vehicles, proof of workmen's compensation
insurance and any other pertinent information as may be required.
F. If such application is approved by the County Department of Health, the
City Clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant upon payment of a
permit fee in the sum of $10 per vehicle, which license shall expire on
the 31st day of December annually, and the fee shall not be prorated for
any lesser period than one year.
§ 157-29 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-32
153:451
therein. It shall also be unlawful for any person to divert or stop the flow of
any drain or sewer.
§ 157-33. Compactor.
All disposal at the city's compactor shall be subject to such rules and
regulations as may be adopted by the Department of Public Works with
the approval of the City Manager, and the violation of any of such rules
and regulations, in addition to any other penalty that might otherwise
be applicable to such violation, shall be just cause for cancellation and
termination by the City Manager, after a hearing, of the privilege of wasting
at the city's compactor by virtue of a permit.
§ 157-34. Fees. [Amended 12-1-1999 by L.L. No. 11-1999]
§ 157-35. Authority of City Manager.
The City Manager shall have the authority, subject to the approval of
the City Council, to further limit or waive the above restrictions on the
quantities and types of wastes collected and to adopt regulations relating
to garbage and bulky waste which, when adopted and approved, shall have
the same status as the provisions of this article.
§ 157-36. through § 157-37. (Reserved)
A. A fee in an amount as established by resolution of the City Council may
be charged for bulky metals and bulky waste placed at curbside for
collection in excess of the amount allowed by § 157-28, in accordance
with the rules and regulations established by the Department of Public
Works with the approval of the City Manager.
B. Because collection of bulky metals and bulky waste or excessive
materials is a service benefiting the property, the cost of collection may
be levied against the property and may become a continuing lien. A
statement of fees and penalties in accordance with this section shall be
served upon the owner of the property, either personally or by mailing
addressed to the last known property owner as the name and address
appear on the assessment roll of the City of Rye. If the amount stated is
not paid within 30 days after demand, the City Assessor shall, in the
preparation of the next assessment roll, assess such amount upon such
property, and this amount shall be levied, collected and enforced in the
same manner as taxes upon said property for city purposes are levied,
collected and enforced.
§ 157-32 RYE CODE § 157-36
153:452
ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)33
33.Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Dumping, was repealed 12-18-1991 by L.L. No. 21-1991. See
now Art III, Solid Waste.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-36
153:453

ARTICLE V
Fumigation
§ 157-38. Use of cyanide in fumigation.
No person shall use or cause to be used any hydrocyanic acid, cyanogen or
cyanide gas for the purpose of fumigating any building or other enclosed
space in the city without a permit from the Clerk or otherwise than in
accordance with the terms of said permit or the regulations as herein
provided.
§ 157-39. Rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations governing the fumigation of any building or
enclosed space in the city by hydrocyanic acid, cyanogen or cyanide gas
shall be those adopted by the United States Department of Agriculture.
§ 157-40. Applications and permits.
Applications to use hydrocyanic acid, cyanogen or cyanide gas for
fumigating purposes shall be made on the blank forms furnished by the
Clerk. Permits issued as provided herein shall remain in force until the 31st
day of December, unless sooner revoked by the Council.
§ 157-41. Notification of fumigation.
It shall be the duty of every holder of a permit issued in accordance with
the provisions of this article to notify the Police and Fire Departments of
the city of the location of the building or enclosed space to be fumigated,
as well as its character and use and the date and time when fumigation will
be performed. This notification shall be given as aforesaid at least 24 hours
prior to the commencement of such fumigation. No such fumigation shall
be performed unless the Police and Fire Departments have been notified in
accordance with the requirements of this regulation.
§ 157-42. Premises to be vacant.
No building or enclosed space shall, during the period of fumigation, be
occupied by human beings. It shall be the duty of the holder of the permit
to make or cause to be made a careful examination of all parts of such
building or enclosed space in order to verify that no human beings have
remained therein and that all necessary precautions have been undertaken
to safeguard the lives and health of all persons occupying buildings
adjoining that in which the fumigation is to be performed.
§ 157-43. Sealing of openings.
All crevices, cracks or openings in the building or portion thereof fumigated
leading to the outer air or into adjoining buildings shall be effectively sealed
so as to prevent the escape of gas during the process of fumigation.
§ 157-38 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-44
153:455
§ 157-44. Materials and operator.
The materials used in fumigating shall be placed in one or more receptacles
of adequate size in the room or rooms to be fumigated after all openings,
except the one used for entry and exit of the operator, are properly sealed.
The operator placing the sulfuric acid and cyanide shall be properly
protected and safeguarded by suitable properly tested mask and gloves. He
alone shall be allowed in the room or rooms to be fumigated during the
placing of the chemicals and until fumigation is completed and the premises
are properly ventilated and made safe for occupancy.
§ 157-45. Danger signs.
§ 157-46. Watchmen.
During the period fumigation is in process a capable, alert watchman or
watchmen shall remain on duty at the entrance or entrances to the building
or enclosed space fumigated and until the fumigation is completed and the
premises are properly ventilated and made safe for occupancy.
A. Prior to the fumigation, suitable warning signs shall be posted on all
doors or entrances to the premises to be fumigated, as follows:
(Skull and Crossbones)
DANGER
FUMIGATING WITH CYANIDE GAS
DEADLY POISON
(Skull and Crossbones)
ALL PERSONS WARNED
TO KEEP AWAY
B. Such signs shall be printed in red ink on white cardboard, letters to be
at least two inches in size. At night such signs shall be illuminated so as
to make the reading matter thereon plainly legible.
§ 157-44 RYE CODE § 157-46
153:456
ARTICLE VI
Infected Trees and Shrubs
§ 157-47. Maintenance of infected trees or shrubs.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any occupied or unoccupied lot or
land or any part thereof in the city to permit or maintain on any such lot
or land any trees, shrubs or bushes or parts thereof which are infected
or infested with caterpillars, tent caterpillars, insects, worms, maggots,
parasites, larvae or grub of lepidopterous insects or other creeping
segmented animals which cause or tend to cause disease, destruction or
damage to such trees, shrubs or bushes by devouring the bark or foliage
thereof and which spread by passing from such trees, shrubs or bushes to
other trees, shrubs or bushes, thereby causing destruction and damage to
the property of others and becoming unsightly and a public nuisance.
§ 157-48. Destruction of insects or animals causing disease.
It shall be the duty of the owner of any lot or land to destroy and remove,
by cutting, burning, spraying, killing or by other effectual method, all such
caterpillars, tent caterpillars, insects, worms, maggots, parasites, larvae or
grub of lepidopterous insects or other creeping segmented animals which
cause disease, destruction or damage to such trees, shrubs or bushes or
parts thereof, as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of
the preceding section.
§ 157-49. Performance of work by city; costs.
If the provisions of the foregoing sections are not complied with, the Clerk
shall serve or cause to be served a written notice by mail upon the owner
of any such lot or land, requiring such owner to comply with the provisions
of this article. If the person upon whom notice is served fails, neglects
or refuses to destroy and remove, by cutting, burning, spraying, killing or
by other effectual method, all such caterpillars, tent caterpillars, insects,
worms, maggots, parasites, larvae or grub of lepidopterous insect or other
creeping segmented animals which cause or tend to cause disease,
destruction or damage, within five days after service of such notice, the
Engineer or other duly appointed officer or employee of the city shall cause
such caterpillars, tent caterpillars, insects, worms, maggots, parasites,
larvae or grub lepidopterous insects or other creeping segmented animals
to be destroyed and removed by cutting, burning, spraying, killing or by
other effectual method, and the actual cost thereof and any other additional
cost in connection therewith shall be certified by the Engineer or other duly
appointed officer or employee of the city to the Assessor of the city and
shall thereupon become and be a lien upon the lot or land on which such
caterpillars, tent caterpillars, insects, worms, maggots, parasites, larvae or
grub of lepidopterous insects or other creeping segmented animals were
located, and shall be added to and become and form a part of the taxes next
to be assessed and levied upon such lot or land and shall bear interest at the
same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner
§ 157-47 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-49
153:457
as taxes. The assessment of the cost of the work done by the city against
the property involved shall be in addition to the penalties imposed herein
for any violation of or noncompliance with any provision of this chapter or
any rule, regulation, order or special direction duly made thereunder.
§ 157-50. Powers regarding Dutch elm disease. [Amended
7-20-1960]
The Common Council of the City of Rye hereby elects to exercise and
enjoy, by its appropriate officers and employees, the powers and immunities
prescribed and granted in Sections 164, 165 and 167 of Article 14 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law with respect and in regard to the Dutch elm
disease within the limits of said city.
§ 157-51. Removal of trees affected by disease. [Added 8-15-1962 by
Ord. No. 9-1962]
Where a tree, shrub or bush located on private property in the City of
Rye is infected or infested with Dutch elm disease or any other disease
which causes or tends to cause destruction or damage to the property of
others, the City Clerk shall serve a written notice by mail upon the owner
of such property, as it appears on the assessment roll of said city, requiring
said owner to remove said tree, shrub or bush, and upon failure to do so
within 30 days after service of said notice or within such additional time
as may be permitted by the City Engineer, the Engineer shall cause such
diseased tree, shrub or bush to be removed, and the actual cost of such
removal, plus the reasonable cost for inspection, notification, advertising
and other additional costs in connection therewith, shall be certified by the
Engineer to the Assessor of the city and shall thereupon become and be
a lien upon the property on which such tree, shrub or bush was located,
and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such property and shall bear interest at the same
rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as
taxes. The assessment of the cost for the work done by the city against the
property involved shall be in addition to the penalties imposed herein for
any violation of or noncompliance with any provision of this chapter or any
rule, regulation, order or special direction duly made thereunder.
§ 157-49 RYE CODE § 157-51
153:458
ARTICLE VII
Weeds
§ 157-52. Cutting and removal.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any lot or land in the city to permit
or maintain on any such lot or land or on or along the sidewalk or street
adjacent to the same between the property line and the curb or middle of
the street, or for 10 feet outside the property line, if there be no curb, any
growth of weeds, grass or other rank vegetation to a greater height than 12
inches on the average, or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush.
It shall also be unlawful for any owner to cause, suffer or allow poison ivy,
ragweed or other poisonous plants or plants detrimental to health to grow
on any such lot or land in such manner that any part of such ivy, ragweed
or other poisonous or harmful weed shall extend upon, overhang or border
any public place, or allow seed, pollen or other poisonous particles or
emanations therefrom to be carried through the air into any public place.
§ 157-53. Duty of owner.
It shall be the duty of the owner of any lot or land to cut and remove
or cause to be cut and removed all such weeds, grass or other rank,
poisonous or harmful vegetation as often as may be necessary to comply
with the provisions of the preceding section, provided that cutting and
removing such weeds, grass and vegetation at least once in every three
weeks between May 15 and September 15 shall be deemed to be a
compliance with this article; and provided further that the provisions herein
contained for the complete clearance from land of grass, weeds and other
poisonous or harmful vegetation shall apply only to lots or plots of one acre
or less, and as to all other parcels, there must be a minimum clearance of
150 feet from street lines and 100 feet from adjacent property lines.
§ 157-54. Performance of work by city; costs.
If the provisions of the foregoing sections are not complied with, the Clerk
shall serve written notice by mail upon the owner of any such lot or land
to comply with the provisions of this article. If the person upon whom
the notice is served fails, neglects or refuses to cut and remove or cause
to be cut and removed such weeds, grass or other vegetation within five
days after service of such notice, or if no person can be found in the city
who either is or claims to be the owner of such lot or land or who either
represents or claims to represent such owner, the Engineer shall cause such
weeds, grass and other vegetation on such lot or land to be cut and removed
and keep a record of the cost thereof, and the actual cost of such cutting
and removal, plus the reasonable cost for inspection and other additional
costs in connection therewith, shall be certified by the Engineer to the
Assessor of the city and shall thereupon become and be a lien upon the
property on which such weeds, grass or other vegetation were located,
and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such lot or land and shall bear interest at the same
§ 157-52 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-54
153:459
rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as
taxes. The assessment of the cost for the work done by the city against the
property involved shall be in addition to the penalties imposed herein for
any violation of or noncompliance with any provision of this chapter or any
rule, regulation, order or special direction duly made thereunder.
§ 157-54 RYE CODE § 157-54
153:460
ARTICLE VIII
Miscellaneous
§ 157-55. Sale of ice.
All persons engaged in the sale of ice within the city shall file with the Clerk
before the first day of June in each year a complete written list of the places
from which the ice sold is originally obtained, and the Clerk shall be notified
immediately of any change in the source of supply. No ice shall be sold
which comes from a contaminated source or from a source so situated that
it may become contaminated.
§ 157-56. Smoke and offensive particles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow dense smoke to escape
or be discharged from any building, vessel, stationary engine, motor vehicle
or place within the city, except that this provision shall not apply to the
discharge of smoke for a period not exceeding six minutes in any one hour
whenever the successful operation and management of any fire necessarily
requires such discharge. No person shall cause or allow cinders, soot,
dust, gas, steam or offensive odors to escape or be discharged from any
building, vessel, engine, vehicle or place to the detriment or annoyance of
any person.
§ 157-57. Nuisances.
Whatever is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health, and whatever
renders or is likely to render soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome,
are declared to be nuisances and to be illegal. In addition, the following
acts, conditions and things are specifically declared to constitute nuisances:
A. The deposit or accumulation of house refuse, offal, garbage, excrement,
dead animals or other offensive matter upon any private property; the
storage of putrid or decaying animal or vegetable matter in any house,
cellar, outbuilding, vault or other receptacle (save in properly
constructed and duly authorized cesspools or privy vaults); the overflow
of any foul liquids or the escape of any gases to any extent hazardous to
health or offensive to persons living or passing in the vicinity thereof.
B. Any building or part thereof which is unclean or overcrowded or not
provided with adequate means of ingress and egress or not sufficiently
supported, ventilated, provided with toilet facilities and water, sewered,
drained or lighted.
C. A polluted well, spring or stream, or the pollution of any body of water
which is or may be used for drinking purposes.
D. The discharge of sewage from any house or building into or upon any
street, public place, stream, ditch or other watercourse, surface or
subsurface groundwater drain or stormwater drain.
§ 157-55 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-58
153:461
§ 157-58. Manure piles and pits.
No manure heap shall be permitted within 75 feet of any dwelling for a
period longer than 48 hours. At all times, stored manure shall be so covered
that flies cannot obtain access to it, or it must be treated effectively with
some fly-repelling substance. Manure pits must be made watertight, kept
dry and provided with covers of wood or iron which must be closed at all
times save when the pit is being charged or emptied. They must not be used
as receptacles for sewage or liquids.
§ 157-59. Keeping of hogs.
The keeping of hogs or pigs within 300 feet of any dwelling is forbidden.
§ 157-60. Filled land.
No sunken places shall be filled, nor any land built up, with any materials
containing any putrescible animal or vegetable matter.
§ 157-61. Diversion of watercourses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to divert or stop the flow of any stream,
canal or any other watercourse within the city without the permission of the
Council.
§ 157-62. Excavations.
No person shall make any excavation or remove any topsoil, earth, sand,
gravel, rock or other material from any property in such a manner as to
create a condition which is detrimental or tends to be detrimental to the
health or general welfare of the public. If an excavation or the removal
of topsoil, earth, sand, gravel, rock or other material causes stormwater
to accumulate on the premises or dust to fly which, in the opinion of the
Building Inspector, is detrimental to the public, the Building Inspector may
serve a notice upon the owner of the premises requiring the removal of
such condition. If the person upon whom the notice is served fails to remove
the condition existing within five days after the service of the notice, the
Building Inspector shall cause the condition to be abated, and the cost of
such work shall be assessed upon the property where the condition existed
and shall be enforced and collected in the same manner as the general city
tax and as a part thereof.
§ 157-63. Heating of occupied buildings. [Added 1-19-1949]
A. It shall be the duty of every person who shall have contracted or
undertaken or shall be bound to heat or to furnish heat for any building
or portion thereof occupied as a home or place of residence of one or
more persons, or as a business establishment where one or more
persons are employed, to heat or to furnish heat for every occupied
room in such building or portion thereof so that a minimum air
temperature may be maintained therein as follows: 70º F. between the
§ 157-58 RYE CODE § 157-63
153:462
§ 157-64. Use of DDT. [Added 7-16-1969 by Ord. No. 3-1969]
No person shall use dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane, commonly known as
"DDT," or permit the same to be used, within the City of Rye as a pesticide
or sterilant on any tree, bush, shrub or any other vegetation on soil, on any
lake, pond, stream, marsh or any other water area or in any receptacle.
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. and 60º F. between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. This section shall not apply to buildings or portions
thereof used and occupied for trades, businesses or occupations where
high or low air temperatures are essential and unavoidable.
B. For the purpose of this section, whenever a building is heated by means
of a furnace, boiler or other apparatus under the control of the owner,
agent or lessee of such building, such owner, agent or lessee, in the
absence of a contract or agreement to the contrary, shall be deemed to
have so contracted, undertaken or to be bound to furnish heat in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
C. The term "air temperature" shall mean that temperature of the
atmosphere obtained at the approximate center line of any interior wall
at a point approximately 66 inches above the average floor level of the
room. The term "contract" as used in this section shall be taken to mean
and include a written or verbal contract.
D. The written report of the Health Officer or his duly authorized
representative on questions of fact under this section shall be
presumptive evidence of the facts so stated and shall be received as
such in all courts and places.
§ 157-63 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-64
153:463

ARTICLE IX
Enforcement
§ 157-65. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 4-1-1942]
Any person who shall violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any
provision of this chapter or any rule, regulation, order or special direction
duly made thereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine
of not more than $100 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment, and each day such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 157-65 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-65
153:465

ARTICLE X
Swimming Pools
[Added 6-19-1959; amended 8-3-1967 by Ord. No. 3-1967;
12-5-1979 by Ord. No. 7-1979; 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 4-2009]
§ 157-66. Compliance required.
No swimming pool shall be constructed, installed or maintained on any
premises within the City of Rye unless it complies with the provisions of this
article.
§ 157-67. Use of terms.
"Swimming pool" as used in this Code means any structure intended for
swimming, recreational bathing or wading that contains water over 24
inches (610 mm) deep. This includes in-ground, aboveground and on-ground
pools; hot tubs; spas; portable pools; temporary pools and fixed-in-place
wading pools.
§ 157-68. Application for permit.
§ 157-69. Construction; maintenance.
A. No person shall construct or install a swimming pool without having
first applied for and received approval from the Board of Architectural
Review and received a permit from the Building Inspector. Such
applications shall be accompanied by plans that specifications that in
sufficient detail show the following:
(1) Pool dimensions, depths, and the distance of the pool from all lot
lines, pool fencing, existing and proposed structures and septic
tanks and their fields, if any.
(2) Pool construction, including details of materials to be used, water
supply, type and size of filter system, pump details and capacity,
drainage, waste disposal facilities and pool piping layout.
(3) Pool fencing, lighting layout and estimated cost.
(4) For public pools provide proof of Westchester County Health
Department reviews and/or approvals.
B. Plans shall be prepared or approved and signed by a registered
architect or licensed professional engineer.
C. The Building Inspector, after finding that the application and plans and
specifications comply with the provisions hereof, shall approve the
issuance of a permit for the construction or installation of such pool.
A. Every pool shall be constructed of materials sufficient to ensure against
collapse thereof and leakage of water therefrom.
§ 157-66 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-69
153:467
§ 157-70. Water supply.
Cross-connection between the piping system of a swimming pool and a
potable water system is prohibited. If water for any pool is supplied from a
potable water system, the inlet or fill pipe shall be located at least six inches
above the overflow of such pool.
§ 157-71. Drainage.
§ 157-72. Abandonment of pools.
If the use of any swimming pool shall be abandoned or permanently
discontinued, the owner shall completely fill the pool and return the surface
of the ground to its original grade and to approximately the same condition
as existed before the pool was constructed.
§ 157-73. Existing pools.
Swimming pools existing on the effective date of this article shall comply
with §§ 157-69D, 157-71B and 157-72 of this article.
B. Filter pumps and mechanical devices used in connection with any pool
shall be set back from the adjoining premises in accordance with the
Zoning Code and shall be so constructed as not to interfere with the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of the occupants of the
adjoining premises.
C. Aprons of suitable material shall be installed around the pool and shall
be pitched to drain water away therefrom.
D. All pool facilities shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition.
E. All pools shall be constructed in accordance with the latest editions of
the Building Code of New York State and the Residential Code of New
York State as amended from time to time. Such requirements are
incorporated herein by reference.
A. A swimming pool shall be provided with at least one metal grated outlet
for drainage of pool water and for backwash water disposal. Such outlet
shall have an area of openings at least four times the cross-sectional
area of the drainpipe. The drainpipe shall be equipped with a gate valve
located outside the walls of the pool and be connected to a storm sewer
if it is available, and the backwash shall drain to a sanitary sewer if it is
available. If a storm sewer or sanitary sewer is not available, the
Building Inspector, with the approval of the City Engineer, will
designate the disposal method or methods.
B. Pool water discharged into a brook or stream must comply with the
disinfection and bacteriological regulations issued by the Health Officer
of the City or, if none, by the Westchester County Department of Health.
§ 157-69 RYE CODE § 157-74
153:468
§ 157-74. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector and health officials to enforce
the provisions of this article. They may enter premises for the purpose of
determining compliance herewith.
§ 157-75. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 157-76. through § 157-79. (Reserved)
§ 157-74 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-76
153:469

ARTICLE XI
Littering
[Added 11-7-1962 by Ord. No. 11-1962]
§ 157-80. Definitions and usage.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given
herein:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used
or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft"
shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection
receptacle on private premises.
CITY — The City of Rye.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter
of literature:
Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing; or
(1)
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment or other activity for the purpose of
either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
or
(2)
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an
admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit;
but the terms of this provision shall not apply where an admission
fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of
defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind when either of the
same is held, given or takes place in connection with the
dissemination of information which is not restricted under the
ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and
good order; provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall
be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any
meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind
without a license where such license is or may be required by any
law of this state or under ordinance of this city; or
(3)
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is
distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private
benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or
distributor.
(4)
§ 157-80 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-80
153:471
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited,
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by
general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office
Department of the United States in accordance with federal statute or
regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording
officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, includes
any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less
than four issues per year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper,
magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced
original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the
aforesaid definitions of a "commercial handbill" or "newspaper."
OPEN PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any land that is not covered by or
within an enclosed building or structure.[Added 8-3-1967 by Ord.
No. 3-1967]
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or
any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted
to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveway,
porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such
dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys
or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds and buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial
wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
§ 157-80 RYE CODE § 157-80
153:472
§ 157-81. Litter in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized
private receptacles for collection or in official city dumps.
§ 157-82. Use of receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.
§ 157-83. Sweeping litter into gutters.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot
or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.
§ 157-84. Merchants to keep sidewalks free of litter.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises
free of litter.
§ 157-85. Litter thrown from vehicles.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the city or upon private
property.
§ 157-86. Litter from trucks.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
B. Usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
§ 157-80 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-86
153:473
other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any
street, alley or other public place any mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.
§ 157-87. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park
or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
herein.
§ 157-88. Litter in lakes and fountains.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or any body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city.
§ 157-89. Distributing handbills in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city.
Nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill
in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any
sidewalk, street or other public place within the city for any person to hand
out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial
handbill to any person willing to accept it.
§ 157-90. Placing handbills on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without
charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 157-91. Depositing handbills on vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 157-92. Posting of premises.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone
thereon not to do so or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words: "no peddlers or
agents," "no advertisement" or any similar notice indicating in any manner
§ 157-86 RYE CODE § 157-92
153:474
that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or have
their right of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills left upon such
premises.
§ 157-93. Distributing handbills at inhabited premises.
§ 157-94. Dropping litter from aircraft.
No person in any aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any
litter, handbill or any other object.
§ 157-95. Posting of notices.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree or upon any public structure or building, except as
may be authorized or required by law.
§ 157-96. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner
or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place or upon any private property.
§ 157-97. Maintenance of premises by owner.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
A. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are
inhabited except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly
to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such
private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private
premises which are not posted as provided in this article, such person,
unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place
or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises
if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such
handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks,
streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so
used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
B. Exemption for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor to
newspapers, as defined herein, except that newspapers shall be placed
on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public
place or upon private property.
§ 157-92 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-97
153:475
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 157-98. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the city, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 157-99. Removal of litter from private property by city.
A. Notice to remove. The City Manager is hereby authorized and
empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property
within the city or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of litter
located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public health,
safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by registered or certified mail,
addressed to said owner at his last known address.
B. Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare within 10 days after receipt of written
notice provided for in Subsection A above, or within 20 days after the
date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the city Post
Office Department because of its inability to make delivery thereof,
provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of
such owner or agent, the City Manager is hereby authorized and
empowered to pay for the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal
by the city.
C. Charge included in tax bill. When the city has effected the removal of
such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost
thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the date
of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior thereto,
shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular tax
bill forwarded to such owner by the city, and said charge shall be due
and payable by said owner at the time of payment of such bill.
D. Filed statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due the city is
not paid by such owner within 30 days after the disposal of such litter,
as provided for in Subsections B and C above, then and in that case the
City Manager shall cause to be filed with the Assessor of the city a
sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work,
the date the work was done and the location of the property on which
said work was done. The filing of such sworn statement shall constitute
a lien on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the
amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for
collection, until final payment has been made. Said costs and expenses
shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes
and, further, shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of 5% in the event
same is not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which said
charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements filed in
accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence
§ 157-97 RYE CODE § 157-99
153:476
§ 157-100. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $100 or by
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work
has been done properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to
every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest,
constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in
the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by
law.
§ 157-99 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 157-100
153:477
Chapter 161
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 108.
Laundromats — See Ch. 121.
Sanitary regulations — See Ch. 157.
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 167, Art. II.
Surface water control — See Ch. 173.
§ 157-100 RYE CODE § 157-100
153:478
ARTICLE I
Use of Public Sewers
[Adopted 9-20-1950 as Section 4-3.5 of Ch. 4 of the General
Ordinances]
§ 161-1. Use required; exceptions; inspections.
Where a public sewer is available and accessible in a street, alley, easement
or thoroughfare to a building or premises abutting thereon, the liquid
wastes from any plumbing system in said building shall be discharged into
the public sewer unless otherwise prohibited, except that where a place of
residence is so located that a gravity connection from the plumbing above
the first floor thereof to the street sewer is not possible or such place of
residence is located more than 150 feet from the nearest public sewer, a
separate sewerage system may be maintained which otherwise complies
with city, county or state health laws, codes or regulations. Immediately
after the construction of a sewer connection every sewage tank, cesspool
or privy vault shall be emptied, cleaned, disinfected and filled with clean
mineral soil, rock or gravel. Where a public sanitary sewer is not accessible,
a building permit shall not be issued without submission of a copy of
the written approval of the Westchester County Commissioner of Health,
indicating that the premises may be adequately sewered by a separate
sewage disposal system. The further approval of the Common Council of
the City of Rye is required for such separate disposal systems. In addition
thereto there shall be an annual inspection of all private sewage disposal
systems by a contractor duly approved by the Westchester County
Commissioner of Health on all properties bordering on all watercourses,
including Long Island Sound, Milton Harbor and all tributaries thereto,
and wherever else directed by the Sanitation Committee of the Common
Council. A written certificate of such inspection shall be submitted to said
Committee for such action thereon as it may direct.
§ 161-2. Duty of owner. [Added 12-17-1980 by Ord. No. 6-198034]
Where an owner of any building is required to discharge sewage or other
liquid wastes from any plumbing system into a public sewer as required
by § 161-1 of this Code, he shall maintain such plumbing system within the
building and from the building to the point of connection with the public
sewer main, so as not to expose or discharge the sewage contents or other
deleterious liquid or matter therefrom to the atmosphere, except through
legally permissible vents, or on the surface of the ground, public or private,
or into any storm sewer or drain or into any watercourse or body of water.
§ 161-2.1. Sewer use. [Added 11-2-1983 by L.L. No. 11-1983]
The City of Rye and all users of the city's sanitary sewer system shall be
subject to all applicable rules and regulations contained in the Westchester
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 161-2 through 161-5 to become
§§ 161-5 through 161-8, respectively.
§ 161-1 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 161-2.1
153:479
County Environmental Facilities Sewer Ordinance No. 1, as amended. A
copy of Sewer Ordinance No. 1, as last amended, is available for review in
the office of the City Clerk of the City of Rye.
§ 161-3. Performance of work; costs; collection. [Added 12-17-1980
by Ord. No. 6-198035]
§ 161-4. Penalties for offenses. [Added 12-17-1980 by Ord. No.
6-198036]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day such violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. If the provisions of the foregoing sections are not complied with, the
City Manager or the Building Inspector shall cause written notice to be
served personally upon the owner or by mailing the same to the name of
the last known owner of the premises where the building is located as
the same appears on the assessment roll of the City of Rye for the last
calendar year. If the owner fails, neglects or refuses to correct the
conditions and remove the violations so as to comply with the provisions
of this article within 10 days after service of such notice, then in that
event, the city may cause the plumbing system to be repaired or
replaced so as to comply with the provisions of this article, and the cost
or expense of doing said work, plus an administrative charge of $100,
shall be ascertained, and a report thereof shall be forthwith filed with
the City Comptroller and City Assessor. The total cost of the same shall
be paid by the owner to the city within 30 days after demand. The
owner shall have the right to a hearing before the City Manager with
respect to the total cost of the work as set forth in said report within 10
days after service by mail of a copy of said report.
B. The total cost of said work, as the same shall appear from the report on
file with the City Comptroller, may be sued for and recovered from said
owner in a civil suit.
C. The total cost of said work shall become and be a lien on the property
benefited by the work done on the plumbing system, and, if the owner
thereof shall fail to pay the total cost of the work within 30 days after
demand, the City Assessor shall, in the preparation of the next
assessment roll, assess such amount upon such property, and the same
shall be levied, collected and enforced in the same manner as taxes
upon said property for city purposes are levied, collected and enforced.
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 161-2 through 161-5 to become
§§ 161-5 through 161-8, respectively.
36.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 161-2 through 161-5 to become
§§ 161-5 through 161-8, respectively.
§ 161-2.1 RYE CODE § 161-4
153:480
ARTICLE II
Sewer Rents
[Adopted 12-18-1963 by L.L. No. 9-1963; amended in its entirety
10-4-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
§ 161-5. Imposition of sewer rent.
§ 161-6. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the definitions set forth herein shall be
controlling:
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — The system for the collection of sewage,
including all sewer mains, pumping stations, appurtenances or other
facilities, which are owned, operated and maintained by the City of Rye,
whether in or outside the City.
SEWER RENTS — A schedule of annual charges established and imposed
by the City of Rye for the use of the sanitary sewer system.
SYSTEM USERS — The record owners of real properties that have sanitary
facilities which discharge into the sanitary sewer system, whether the
properties are located in or outside of the City of Rye.
TOTAL WATER CONSUMPTION — The total volume of water delivered to
a property by the water source for which a sewer user is responsible. The
total volume of water shall be the sum of the volume of water metered by,
or otherwise calculated by, the water source
WATER CONSUMPTION — The consumption of water, measured in
hundreds of cubic feet (CCF); one CCF equals 748 gallons.
WATER SOURCE — Any entity that delivers water to a property such as
united water westchester or its successors in interest or assigns.
A. Pursuant to Article 14-F of the General Municipal Law, there is hereby
established and imposed a plan of sewer rents applicable to the City of
Rye's sanitary sewer system. Such plan shall consist of annual charges
against properties that utilize the City's sewers. The annual sewer rents
as provided for in this chapter shall be applied to pay the costs of the
operation, maintenance, upkeep, repair and replacement of the
sanitary sewer system. The purpose of this article is to preclude the
cost of the sanitary sewer system from being funded solely from the
property tax and to more equitably distribute such cost on all
properties, including tax exempt properties.
B. In addition to any charges provided by law, the owner of any real
property within the City of Rye served by a sewer system maintained by
a municipality other than the City of Rye shall pay to the City of Rye a
sewer rent for the use of such sewer system. Such sewer rent shall be at
the rate of $210 per connection thereto or shall be such pro rata
amount allocable to such property as the City of Rye shall be required to
pay for the use of such sewer system.
§ 161-5 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 161-7
153:481
§ 161-7. Collection of sewer rent; lien.
All sewer rents imposed hereunder shall be levied, connected and enforced
in the same manner and at the same time as provided for the collection
and enforcement of City taxes. If such sewer rents are not paid when due,
it shall be the duty of the City Comptroller to charge and collect interest
thereon at the same rates specified for the collection of City taxes. Such
sewer rents shall constitute a lien upon the real property served by such
sewer system, and such lien shall be prior and superior to every other
lien or claim except the lien of an existing tax, assessment or other lawful
charge.
§ 161-8. Sewer rent; adjustments; changes.
§ 161-9. Annual costs of the sanitary sewer system.
The annual operation and maintenance costs of the sanitary sewer system
shall be determined as part of the City' budget process. The annual costs
shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Sewer rent. System users shall pay an amount based on the actual
water consumption as determined by the water source using a water
meter or other measuring device, or an estimated amount if the water
source is unable to obtain a reading.
B. Adjustment. System users may apply to the City Manager for an
adjustment of the amount of water consumption. Such application shall
in writing, accompanied by any prescribed filing fee, and include all
evidence to support the degree and amount of water usage that is
claimed to be applied for uses that do not result in discharges into the
sanitary sewer system. The Manager may grant an adjustment on an
appeal as provided hereinafter, but in no event shall such adjustment
exceed 10% of the water consumption.
C. Changes. The initial rate of the sewer rent shall be established by
resolution of the City Council after public hearing on five days' notice.
Subsequent changes to the rate of the sewer rent and amount of
penalty shall be made in the same manner.
A. Personnel services, including salaries and fringe benefits.
B. Contractual services.
C. Repairs and replacement to the sanitary sewer system.
D. Materials and supplies.
E. Utilities.
F. Building repair and maintenance.
G. Equipment.
§ 161-7 RYE CODE § 161-9
153:482
§ 161-10. Billing and payments.
§ 161-11. Disposition of sewer rents.
Revenues derived from sewer rents, including interest, shall be credited to
a special fund to be known as the "Sewer Rent Fund." Moneys in such fund
shall be used for the payment of charges the City of Rye shall be required
to pay for the use of such system.
§ 161-12. Exemption.
The property of the City of Rye is solely exempt from the obligation to pay
sewer rent.
H. Testing and sampling.
I. Insurance.
J. Indebtedness.
K. Auditor's fees.
L. Reserve Fund.
M. Contingency.
A. System users shall be billed by the City or entity to which billing
authority has been designated on a frequency established by the City.
B. Sewer rents shall be paid to the City of Rye.
C. Sewer rent bills shall be sent to system users to the address to which
real estate bills would be sent.
(1) The failure of a system owner to receive a bill shall not excuse
nonpayment thereof, nor shall it act as a waiver of a penalty
imposed herein prescribed.
(2) A system user that intends to convey property shall notify the City
or entity to which billing authority has been delegated sufficiently
in advance of the closing title for a final reading and new ownership
information.
D. System users may be afforded the option of receiving e-bills or direct
deposit of payments. System users may request that a tenant receive
bills, and such additional notice may be given as an accommodation.
E. Any adjustments granted, issued or agreed upon with regard to actual
water consumption shall be indicated to system users and reflected in
the next succeeding bill.
§ 161-9 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES § 161-13
153:483
§ 161-13. Agreement with water sources.
Together with United Water Westchester, the City of Rye has petitioned the
New York State Public Service Commission for authorization to contract
with the water company to utilize its water consumption data, perform
billing functions, as well as provide any other services necessary to
administer this chapter. Similarly, the City of Rye has petitioned the
Westchester Joint Water Works Board to utilize its water consumption data,
perform billing functions, as well as provide any other services necessary
to administer this chapter for those users receiving water from Westchester
Joint Water Works.
§ 161-14. Applicable rules and regulations.
The owner and occupant of real property served by such sewer system
shall be subjected to the rules and regulations of the City of Rye and the
municipality maintaining such sewer system relating to the use of such
sewer system, insofar as applicable.
§ 161-13 RYE CODE § 161-14
153:484
Chapter 162
STORM SEWER SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 100.
Sewers — See Ch. 161.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 170.
Surface water, erosion and sediment
control — See Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 197.
§ 162-1. Purpose/intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the City of Rye through the regulation of
connections to the City's municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and
the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the (MS4) to the maximum
extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation's (NYSDEC) SPDES General
Permit (GP-02-02) for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems. The
objectives of this chapter are:
§ 162-2. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning is stated in a
definition applicable to only a portion of this chapter, the following terms
will have the meanings set forth below:
A. To meet the requirements of the SPDES General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02, or as amended or revised;
B. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such
systems are not designed to accept, process or discharge
nonstormwater wastes;
C. To prohibit unauthorized and illicit connections, activities and
discharges to the MS4;
D. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter; and
E. To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater,
grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products,
hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the MS4.
§ 161-14 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 162-2
162:485
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CITY — The City of Rye, New York.
CITY ENGINEER — The City Engineer of the City of Rye, New York.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CODE — Code of the City of Rye, New York.
CONNECTION PERMIT — An authorization for connection as well as a
discharge permitted under § 162-13 of this chapter, as well as a discharge
permitted under a SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued
to the discharger and administered under the authority of the NYSDEC. This
permit is subject to special terms and conditions by the City Engineer. The
permit will expire on or before the expiration of the NYSDEC SPDES permit,
waiver or order or upon change of ownership or use of the property.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities requiring authorization under a
NYSDEC SPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction
activity, GP-02-01, as amended or revised, or activities covered by erosion
and sediment control or pollution prevention plan laws, ordinances or
regulations of the City. These activities include construction projects
resulting in land disturbance equal to or greater than the area stipulated
in statutes or regulations of the state, county or the City, whichever is
most restrictive. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
COUNTY — The County of Westchester.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL — New York State-licensed professional engineer
or licensed architect.
GENERAL PERMIT — An authorization for the connection as well as the
discharge of stormwater or authorized nonstormwater,per § 162-6A of this
chapter, from properties occupied by private dwellings.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT ACTIVITY — Any action or condition, active or passive, that results
in nonstormwater entering the City's MS4.
§ 162-2 RYE CODE § 162-2
162:486
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface
or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4,
including, but not limited to:
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any discharge through an unauthorized connection,
and any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the MS4, except as
exempted in § 162-6 of this chapter.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM — A facility serving one or
more parcels of land or residential households, or a private, commercial or
institutional facility that treats sewage or other liquid wastes for discharge
into the groundwaters of New York State, except where a permit for such
a facility is required under the applicable provisions of Article 17 of the
Environmental Conservation Law.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities requiring the SPDES permit for
discharges from industrial activities except construction, GP-98-03, as
amended or revised.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system owned by the City or
another municipal entity.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances and retention and infiltration facilities; (including
roads with drainage systems, curbs and gutters on municipal streets,
manholes, catch basins, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains,
stormwater basins, drainage reserve areas, drywells or any other
component of a stormwater system) that is:
MUNICIPALITY — A county, town, City, village or other unit of government.
Any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including
treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater and wash water to
enter the MS4, and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency;
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency;
B.
C. Any building or structure floor drain or trench drain; and
D. Any unauthorized connection as defined elsewhere in this section.
A. Owned or operated by the City or another municipal entity;
Designed or used for collecting or conveying or storing or infiltrating or
managing stormwater;
B.
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
D.
§ 162-2 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 162-2
162:487
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
OFFICE OF THE CITY ENGINEER — Office of the City Engineer of the City
of Rye.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, dredged spoil, filter
backwash, solid waste, incinerator residue, treated or untreated sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, hazardous materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal, agricultural waste and
ballast discharged into water which may cause or might reasonably be
expected to cause pollution of the waters of the state in contravention of the
standards. Also, paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive
fluids; hazardous or nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes; yard wastes
including branches, grass clippings and leaves; refuse, rubbish, garbage,
litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations so that
same may cause or contribute to pollution; and discharges of soaps,
detergents, or floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; sewage,
fecal coliforms and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal
wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building,
structure or site improvements; cement, gravel, sand, silt, mud, other soils,
and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
Discharge compliance with water quality standards. The condition that
applies where an MS4 has been notified that the discharge of
stormwater authorized under its MS4 SPDES permit may have caused
or has the reasonable potential to cause or contribute to the violation
of an applicable water quality standard. Under this condition the MS4
must take all necessary actions to ensure future discharges do not
cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards.
A.
303(d) listed waters. The condition in an MS4 SPDES permit that
applies where the MS4 discharges to a NYSDEC 303(d) listed water.
Under this condition, the MS4's stormwater management program
must ensure no increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d)
listed water.
B.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy. The condition in an MS4
SPDES permit where a TMDL including requirements for control of
stormwater discharges has been approved by EPA for a water body or
C.
§ 162-2 RYE CODE § 162-2
162:488
STATE — State of New York.
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the NYSDEC
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, subsurface drainage and
snowmelt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — The City Engineer of
the City of Rye (or the person serving in the capacity of the City Engineer)
or his/her authorized deputies, agents or representatives, including
employees of other City Departments, as appropriate. The SMO is to
enforce this chapter, review stormwater pollution prevention plans, forward
the plans to the applicable municipal board and inspect stormwater
management practices.
STORMWATER SPECIAL PERMIT — An authorization for the connection
as well as the discharge of stormwater or authorized nonstormwater, per
§ 162-6A of this chapter, from all properties occupied by other than private
dwellings.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial
use) are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the NYSDEC as
required by Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. 303(d) listed waters are
estuaries, lakes and streams that fall short of state surface water quality
standards and are not expected to improve within the next two years.
TMDL — Total maximum daily load.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The maximum amount of a pollutant
allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses of the
water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTION — A permanent or temporary unapproved
direct or indirect conveyance to the City's MS4. Any connection, pipe,
hose, or other conveyance that is not documented on plans, maps, or
equivalent records signed by the City Engineer or that is not approved by a
watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If the discharge from the
MS4 did not meet the TMDL stormwater allocations prior to September
10, 2003, the MS4 was required to modify its stormwater management
program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified
in the TMDL is achieved.
The condition in an MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL is approved in
the future by EPA for any water body or watershed into which an MS4
discharges. Under this condition the MS4 must review the applicable
TMDL to see if it includes requirements for control of stormwater
discharges. If an MS4 is not meeting the TMDL stormwater allocations,
the MS4 must, within six months of the TMDL's approval, modify its
stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the
pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
D.
§ 162-2 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 162-2
162:489
permit issued by the City Engineer, is considered unauthorized regardless
of whether the discharge is otherwise allowed by this chapter.
UNCONTAMINATED — Free of pollutants (see definition of "pollutant").
WASTEWATER — Water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with
pollutants, and is or will be discarded.
§ 162-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to discharged connections to the City's MS4. This
includes activities that result in discharge, seepage or deposition into the
City's MS4, and all water entering the MS4 generated on any developed and
undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement
agency and allowed by a discharge or connection permit or other document
approved by the City Engineer. This chapter shall also apply to discharges
and connections entering another MS4 that is tributary to the City's MS4.
§ 162-4. Responsibility for administration.
The City Engineer of the City of Rye, as the Stormwater Management
Officer (SMO) for the City, or duly authorized deputies, agents or
representatives, including employees of other City departments, as
appropriate, shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 162-5. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
chapter.
§ 162-6. Discharge prohibitions.
Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the City's MS4 any materials other than stormwater, except
as provided in § 162-6A. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any
illicit (illegal) discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as described as
follows:
A. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter, unless they are subsequently determined to
be substantial contributors of pollutants: waterline flushing or other
potable water sources, uncontaminated landscape irrigation or lawn
watering, existing diverted stream flows, rising groundwater,
uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains,
uncontaminated crawl space or basement sump pump discharges, airconditioning
condensate, uncontaminated irrigation water, springs,
water from individual residential car washing, natural riparian habitat
§ 162-2 RYE CODE § 162-6
162:490
§ 162-7. Prohibition of unauthorized connections.
or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, residential
street wash water, water from fire-fighting activities, and any other
water source not containing pollutants. Such exempt discharges shall
be made in accordance with an appropriate plan for reducing
pollutants.
B. Discharges approved in writing by the City Engineer to protect life or
property from imminent harm or damage, provided that such approval
shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other applicable
laws, codes and requirements, and further provided that such
discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under such
conditions as the City Engineer may deem appropriate to protect such
life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and intent
of this chapter.
C. Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws or codes
is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the City
Engineer prior to the time of the test.
D. The prohibition shall not apply to any discharge permitted under a
SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the NYSDEC,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements
of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws, codes and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for
any discharge to the MS4 by the City Engineer.
A. Connections to the City's MS4 without a permit are prohibited.
(1) Any connection to the City's MS4 is considered to be an
unauthorized connection unless it has been approved by a permit
issued by the City Engineer or documented on a plan or map that
has been approved by the City Engineer. This constraint applies to
all connections, permanent or temporary, regardless of whether the
discharge is otherwise permitted by this chapter.
(2) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
unauthorized connections to the City's MS4 is prohibited.
(3) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, connections
made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law, code or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(4) A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage or other pollutants to the
City's MS4 or allows such a connection to continue.
(5) The connection of interior floor drains and trench drains at the
entrances to buildings or other structures is prohibited.
§ 162-6 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 162-7
162:491
§ 162-8. Prohibition against failing individual sewage treatment
systems.
No persons shall operate a failing individual sewage treatment system in
areas tributary to the City's MS4. A failing individual sewage treatment
system is one which has one or more of the following conditions:
§ 162-9. Prohibition against activities contaminating stormwater or
maintaining or using an unauthorized connection to the City's MS4.
B. Remedy unauthorized connections. Where the City Engineer has
identified an unauthorized connection as defined in § 162-2 of this
chapter, the City Engineer may require that a proper permit be
obtained or that the connection be removed at the property owner's
expense.
A. The backup of sewage into a structure.
B. Discharges of treated or untreated sewage onto the ground surface.
C. A connection or connections to a separate stormwater sewer system.
D. Liquid level in the septic tank above the outlet invert.
E. Structural failure of any components of the individual sewage
treatment system that could lead to any of the other failure conditions
as noted in this section.
F. Contamination of off-site groundwater.
A. Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those
types of activities that:
(1) Cause or contribute to a violation of the City's MS4 SPDES permit.
(2) Cause or contribute to the City being subject to the special
conditions as defined in § 162-2 of this chapter.
(3) Cause or contribute to the City's MS4 receiving pollutants as
defined in § 162-2 of this chapter.
(4) Cause or contribute to the City's MS4 receiving discharges from an
undocumented or unauthorized connection (whether permanent or
temporary).
B. Such activities include failing individual sewage treatment systems as
defined in § 162- 8 of this chapter, improper management of pet waste
or any other activity that causes or contributes to violations of the City's
MS4 SPDES permit authorization.
C. Upon notification to a person that he/she is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the City's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization or cause or contribute to pollutants being discharged to
the City's MS4, that person shall take all reasonable actions to correct
§ 162-7 RYE CODE § 162-9
162:492
§ 162-10. Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater
pollutants by the use of best management practices.
such activities such that he/she no longer causes or contributes to
violations of the City's MS4 SPDES permit authorization, or causes or
contributes to pollutants to be discharged or deposited into the City's
MS4.
A. Best management practices. Where the City Engineer has identified
illicit discharges, as defined in § 162-2 of this chapter,or activities
contaminating stormwater, as defined in § 162-7 of this chapter, the City
Engineer may require implementation of Best Management Practices
(BMPs) to control those illicit discharges and activities.
(1) The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at its own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials, pollutants or other
wastes into the MS4 through the use of structural and
nonstructural BMPs.
(2) Any person responsible for a property or premises which is, or may
be, the source of an illicit discharge as defined in § 162-2 of this
chapter or an activity contaminating stormwater as defined in
§ 162-9 of this chapter, may be required to implement, at said
person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to
reduce or eliminate the source of pollutant(s) to the MS4.
(3) Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance
with the provisions of this section.
B. Individual sewage treatment systems. Response to special conditions
requiring no increase of pollutants or requiring a reduction of
pollutants.
C. Where individual sewage treatment systems are contributing to the
City's MS4 being subject to the special conditions as defined in § 162-2
of this chapter, the owner or operator of such individual sewage
treatment systems shall be required to:
(1) Maintain and operate individual sewage treatment systems as
follows:
(a) Inspect the septic tank annually to determine scum and sludge
accumulation. Septic tanks must be pumped out whenever the
bottom of the scum layer is within three inches of the bottom of
the outlet baffle or sanitary tee or the top of the sludge is
within 10 inches of the bottom of the outlet baffle or sanitary
tee.
(b) Avoid the use of septic tank additives.
§ 162-9 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 162-10
162:493
§ 162-11. Suspension of access to MS4.
(c) Avoid the disposal of excessive quantities of detergents,
kitchen wastes, laundry wastes and household chemicals; and
(d) Avoid the disposal of cigarette butts, disposable diapers,
sanitary napkins, trash and other such items.
(2) Repair or replace individual sewage treatment systems as follows:
(a) In accordance with 10 NYCRR Appendix 75A to the maximum
extent practicable.
(b) A design professional licensed to practice in New York State
shall prepare design plans for any type of absorption field that
involves:
[1] Relocating or extending an absorption area to a location
not previously approved for such.
[2] Installation of a new subsurface treatment system at the
same location.
[3] Use of alternate system or innovative system design or
technology.
(c) A written certificate of compliance shall be submitted by the
design professional to the City at the completion of
construction of the repair or replacement system.
A. The City Engineer may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4. The City Engineer shall notify the person of
such suspension within a reasonable time thereafter, in writing, of the
reasons for the suspension. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the City Engineer may take
such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
MS4 or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge or unauthorized
connection. Any person discharging to the City's MS4 in violation of this
chapter may have his/her MS4 access terminated if such termination
would abate or reduce an illicit discharge or result in the remedy of an
unauthorized connection. The City Engineer will notify a violator in
writing of the proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons
therefor. The violator may petition the City Engineer for a
reconsideration and hearing. Access may be granted by the City
Engineer if he/she finds that the illicit discharge has ceased and the
discharger has taken steps to prevent its recurrence or that the
discharger has obtained proper permission for the connection. Access
§ 162-10 RYE CODE § 162-11
162:494
§ 162-12. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the City Engineer prior to the allowing of discharges to the
MS4.
§ 162-13. Connection permits.
may be denied if the City Engineer determines in writing that the
illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to recur or the unauthorized
connection has not been remedied. A person commits an offense if the
person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this
section without the prior approval of the City Engineer.
A. General. Any connection to the City's MS4 requires a permit issued by
the City Engineer. Applications for permits shall be made on forms
provided by the office of the City Engineer. Permit applications shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, analyses, calculations or
other information considered pertinent by the City Engineer. The City
considers connection to its MS4 as a last resort to solve flooding
problems. Before approving a connection, the City will require that
applicants use on-site best management practices to handle stormwater
and other authorized nonstormwater discharges to the maximum extent
practicable. The office of the City Engineer will assess the adequacy of
the applicant's on-site stormwater disposal management practices.
B. Permit types.
(1) General permit. An authorization for the connection as well as the
discharge of stormwater or authorized nonstormwater, per
§ 162-6A of this chapter, from properties occupied by private
dwellings.
(2) Connection permit. An authorization for connection as well as
discharge authorized under § 162-13 of this chapter, as well as for a
discharge permitted under a SPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under
the authority of the NYSDEC. This permit is subject to special
terms and conditions by the City Engineer. The permit will expire
on or before the expiration of the NYSDEC SPDES permit, waiver
or order or upon change of ownership or use of the property.
(3) Special permit. An authorization for the connection as well as the
discharge of stormwater or authorized nonstormwater, per
§ 162-6A of this chapter, from all properties occupied by other than
private dwellings.
C. Permit fees. The following fee schedule:
(1) General permit:
§ 162-11 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 162-13
162:495
(a) Application and filing fee: $25.
(b) Inspection fee: none.
(2) Section 162-6D permit:
(a) Application and filing fee: $250.
(b) Inspection fee: $500.
(3) Special permit:
(a) Application and filing fee: $250.
(b) Inspection fee: $500.
D. Inspection. All connections to the City's MS4 shall be subject to the
approval and inspection by the City. The applicant must notify the Office
of the City Engineer at least 48 hours prior to commencing work and at
least 48 hours prior to final restoration.
E. Indemnification. The property owner shall indemnify and save the City
harmless from any loss, damage or expense, claims or suits arising out
of and in connection with the installation and connection to the City's
MS4. In addition, the City makes no guarantee that its MS4 will not
become surcharged or otherwise overburdened and that water from the
MS4 will not back up through the connection onto the owner's property.
By making a connection, the applicant/owner assumes all of the risk
and liability that may arise from it.
F. Permit transfers. General permits may be transferred with the sale of a
residential property, provided the use does not change. The new
property owner shall comply with the terms and conditions of the
transferred permit. Special permits are not transferable without
approval of the City Engineer.
G. Work within City roads. Any connection made within or involving work
within a City road will also comply and be subject to any and all
applicable codes and regulations pertaining to permits for work on and
within City streets and roads. A permit under this chapter does not
relieve the applicant from the permits under the foregoing codes and
regulations.
H. Other permits required. A connection permit issued pursuant to this
chapter does not relieve the applicant from any and all other permits,
permissions, or compliance with rules and regulations that may be
required by federal, state, county, town, City government agencies or
other public or private parties. This permit does not supersede any of
the above.
I. Permit rules and regulations. The City Engineer may promulgate rules
and regulations for the permitting process within the constraints of this
chapter.
§ 162-13 RYE CODE § 162-14
162:496
§ 162-14. Access and monitoring of discharges.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the City Engineer
must inspect to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the
authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there exists,
or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition that
constitutes a violation of this chapter.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities public
and private subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may
be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a
discharger has security measures in force that require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to the SMO.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
and copying of records as may be required to implement this
chapter.
(3) The City shall have the right to set up on any facility subject to this
chapter such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the City
Engineer to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
stormwater discharge.
(4) The City Engineer has the right to require the facilities subject to
this chapter to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at
its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the City access to a facility subject
to this chapter are a violation of this chapter. A person who is the
operator of a facility subject to this chapter commits an offense if
the person denies the City reasonable access to the facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this
chapter.
(6) If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued
hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 162-14 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 162-15
162:497
§ 162-15. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the City Engineer in person or by
telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in
person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and
mailed to the City Engineer within three business days of the telephone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment
shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
three years.
§ 162-16. Enforcement.
A. Notice of violation. When the City Engineer finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter or
a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, he/she may order compliance
by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice
may require without limitation any or all of the actions listed below:
(1) The elimination of illicit or unauthorized connections or discharges;
(2) That violating discharges, practices, operations, activities, or
connections shall cease and desist;
(3) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(4) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(5) Payment of a fine; and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. If
abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
§ 162-15 RYE CODE § 162-16
162:498
§ 162-17. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal within 15 calendar
days of its issuance. The City Engineer shall hear the appeal within 30 days
after the filing of the appeal, and within five days of making his/her decision,
issue a decision by certified mail to the discharger. The City Engineer may
conduct the hearing and take evidence or may designate any officer or
employee of the Office of the City Engineer to do so.
§ 162-18. Corrective measures after appeal.
§ 162-19. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the City Engineer may
petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person
B. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed two months, or both, for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,000 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed two months, or both; and upon conviction for a
third or subsequent offense all of which were committed within a period
of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $2,000 nor more than
$5,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed two months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this chapter shall be deemed
misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
A. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or in the event of an appeal, within five
business days of the decision of the City Engineer, then the City
Engineer shall request the owner's permission for access to the subject
private property to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to
abate the violation and/or restore the property.
B. If refused access to the subject private property, the City Engineer may
seek a warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to
enter upon the property to determine whether a violation has occurred.
Upon determination that a violation has occurred, the City Engineer
may seek a court order to take any and all measures reasonably
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The cost of
implementing and maintaining such measures shall be the sole
responsibility of the discharger.
§ 162-16 STORM SEWER SYSTEM § 162-19
162:499
from activities which would create further violations or compelling the
person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 162-20. Alternative remedies.
§ 162-21. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored
at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 162-22. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this chapter and regulations are not exclusive of any
other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law
and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek
cumulative remedies.
Chapter 164
SHOPPING CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 167.
A. Where a person has violated a provision of this chapter, he/she may be
eligible for alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon
recommendation of the Corporation Counsel and concurrence of the
City Engineer, where:
(1) The violation was unintentional.
(2) The violator has no history of previous violations of this chapter.
(3) Environmental damage was minimal.
(4) Violator acted quickly to remedy violation.
(5) Violator cooperated in investigation and resolution.
B. Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following:
(1) Attendance at compliance workshops.
(2) Storm drain stenciling or storm drain marking.
(3) River, stream or creek cleanup activities.
§ 162-19 RYE CODE § 162-22
164:500
§ 164-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, the following words shall have the
meanings set forth herein:
CART — Includes any cart, basket, container or other device made of wire,
metal, wood or other material, mounted on wheels, manually operated and
used generally for carting or carrying merchandise or other property.
CITY — The City of Rye.
PERSON — Includes a natural person of either sex, corporation,
partnership, association, joint-stock company, society and any other entity
capable of being sued.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes a street, avenue, road, highway, alley, lane,
concourse, driveway, culvert, bridge, mall, sidewalk, crosswalk, park,
square and municipal parking area.
§ 164-2. Identification of carts.
Every person who owns or makes available to the public in connection with
the conduct of business or trade any cart shall mark or cause the same
to be marked and identified conspicuously with the name and address of
the owner. Such identification shall be in the form of a metal tag securely
fastened to the cart or a cutting or stamping on the frame of the cart.
§ 164-3. Unattended carts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, his agent or employee to leave or suffer
or permit to be left unattended any cart, either owned by him or in his
possession, custody or control, upon any public place.
§ 164-4. Removal of carts by police.
The Chief of Police of the city shall remove or cause to be removed any cart
found upon any public place and shall take the same or cause same to be
taken to property of the city where it shall be held until redeemed, sold or
otherwise disposed of as hereinafter provided.
§ 164-5. Notice to owner.
Whenever the Chief of Police shall take possession of any cart containing
identification of ownership, a notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to such
person advising him that such cart is held by the Chief of Police and that
said cart may be redeemed upon payment of $5 to the Chief of Police.
§ 164-6. Redemption of carts.
The cart may be redeemed by the owner thereof at any time prior to the
sale, dismantling, destruction or disposal thereof, and he shall be entitled
§ 162-22 SHOPPING CARTS § 164-6
164:501
to receive such cart upon payment of the sum of $5. In addition, the person
seeking to redeem shall be required to pay the cost of advertising the
sale thereof, if any. No cart shall be delivered to the person seeking to
redeem unless proof is submitted establishing, to the satisfaction of the
Chief of Police, such person's ownership or right to possession. Any delivery
to a person apparently entitled thereto shall be a good defense to the city
against any other person claiming to be entitled thereto.
§ 164-7. Sale of carts at public auction.
When any cart remains in the custody of the Chief of Police for a period
of three months after removal and with respect to which no person has
presented to the Chief of Police proof establishing to his satisfaction such
person's ownership or right to possession, the City Clerk shall give public
notice in the official newspaper of the city that at a specified place and time,
not less than five days after such notice is published, such cart will be sold
at public auction. The said sale shall be conducted by the Chief of Police or
by any employee of his department designated by him. The Chief of Police
shall have the power to fix an upset price and other terms and conditions
of conducting the public auction, except that the upset price shall not be in
excess of the sum of $5 plus the cost of advertising the sale of the cart.
§ 164-8. Disposition of unsold carts.
If a cart shall remain unsold at public auction, the Chief of Police may
reoffer it again for sale at a subsequent public auction held pursuant to this
chapter or he may dismantle, destroy or otherwise dispose of such cart.
Any sale or other disposition of such cart pursuant to this chapter shall be
without any liability on the part of the city to the owner of the cart or other
person lawfully entitled thereto or having an interest therein.
§ 164-9. Proceeds of redemption or sale.
Upon redemption or sale of a cart, the Chief of Police shall pay over to the
Comptroller of the city the proceeds thereof with an itemized statement of
the costs and expenses thereof. The Comptroller shall retain and credit the
general fund of the city with so much of the proceeds as equals the costs
and expenses of such sale, plus $5 for the cart sold or redeemed to cover the
cost of removing and storing the cart. The remainder of the money, if any,
realized from such sale shall be paid without interest to the lawful owner
thereof.
§ 164-10. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any cart which may come
into the possession or custody of the Police Department pursuant to any
other ordinance, law or regulation.
Chapter 165
§ 164-6 RYE CODE § 164-10
165:502
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Architectural review — See Ch. 53. Zoning — See Ch. 197.
§ 165-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations for the design,
construction, installation and maintenance of signs in the City of Rye in
order to maintain and protect the attractive and harmonious visual image
of the community; permit effective identification of businesses to encourage
economic prosperity; protect the aesthetic environment from the
unrestricted proliferation of signs and visual clutter; protect property
values; and protect the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 165-2. Board of Architectural Review approval.
A. Signs requiring a sign permit shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered or maintained only after approval by the Board
of Architectural Review as to design, colors, materials, illumination,
location and size and:
(1) When granted a sign permit from the Building Inspector.
(2) Upon payment of the required fee as established by the City
Council.
B. The Board may approve signs, provided that such action shall be by
majority vote of the entire Board.
C. The Board, as a condition of approval, may recommend changes that
are more restrictive than the limits of this chapter.
D. If a sign permit application is disapproved, the applicant may appeal
the decision pursuant to Chapter 53, § 53-10. The applicant shall
request written findings based upon the evidence presented to the
Board that the sign would, if erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered or maintained, be contrary to the purposes of this chapter as set
forth in § 165-1 by reason of, but not limited to, any of the following:
(1) Design distinctly out of character with store units in the same
building, existing development in the affected vicinity or adjacent
residential neighborhoods, landmarked buildings or districts.
(2) Colors that appear inappropriate because they cover too large an
area of the sign or are in conflict with the colors of the subject
building or surrounding buildings.
(3) Material that detracts from the surrounding architectural
elements.
§ 164-10 SIGNS § 165-2
165:503
§ 165-3. Enforcement.
(4) Illumination that is inappropriate due to intensity, color and/or
glare.
(5) Location and/or size inconsistent with that of other signs and
awnings on the same building or surrounding buildings or the
architectural detail of the subject building or surrounding
buildings.
(6) A design which conflicts with other applicable city regulations.
A. No sign permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector until approval
has been granted by the Board of Architectural Review.
B. The property owner is responsible for all signs displayed or erected on
his or her property, is responsible for properly maintaining such signs
and is responsible for removal of signs if no sign permit has been
obtained.
C. The Building Inspector will notify the property owner of failure to
properly maintain signs. Failure to comply with the Building Inspector's
order to repair or refurbish a sign is a violation of this chapter.
D. Any sign requiring approval which has been erected, constructed,
altered, reconstructed or maintained without a sign permit must be
removed at the property owner's expense. In addition, such action or
other failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter is a violation
subject to the following quasi-criminal and/or civil penalties:
(1) Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation and shall be punished, for
each offense, by a fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment
for not more than 15 days, or both. Each week of a continuing
violation constitutes a separate violation subject to the above
penalties.
(2) Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or order to
remove pursuant to Subsection E below shall be liable for a civil
penalty of not more than $1,500 for each such violation. Each week
of continuing violation constitutes a separate violation subject to
the above penalty.
E. This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector in keeping with
its provisions and the Building Inspector's rules and regulations.
(1) The Building Inspector shall send written notification of violation of
this chapter by certified mail, return receipt requested, in the
following manner:
(a) To the tenant and property owner of a building displaying a
nonapproved sign.
§ 165-2 RYE CODE § 165-3
165:504
§ 165-4. Zoning district definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT — Those properties located in the "A" or
"B" Parking Districts of the City of Rye, those properties located in business
districts on the Boston Post Road between Peck Avenue and Central Avenue
and those in business districts on Theodore Fremd Avenue between Locust
Avenue and Purchase Street. (See accompanying map.) 37
NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICTS — Those properties located in a
B-1, B-3, B-4, B-5, B-6 or MC Zoning District and properties containing the
following institutions: churches, schools, hospitals, senior housing, parks
and wildlife reservations, unless located in the Central Business District as
defined in this chapter.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS — All areas not defined in this chapter as being
in the Central Business District or in neighborhood business districts.
§ 165-5. Signs, definitions; restrictions; exceptions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SIGN —
(b) To the property owner of an unoccupied building or property
displaying an illegal sign.
(2) The property owner or tenant shall remove the sign within two
weeks of the date on which the violation notification was
postmarked.
SIGN — Any material, structure, device or part thereof containing
any advertisement, announcement, notice, graphic symbol, illustration,
insignia, picture or representation intended or arranged to be seen
from any point outside of the property on which it is located.
A.
AREA OF SIGN:
For signs painted on or applied to a building wall, window or
awning, the smallest rectangle that encompasses all the lettering
and graphic symbol, or the lettering and graphic symbol together
with any background of a different color or material from the
natural color or material of the surface on which it is painted or
applied.
(1)
For freestanding and projecting signs, the smallest rectangle that
encompasses the face of the sign, exclusive of the pole, post or
base. Each face with signage is counted into the aggregate area
allowed.
(2)
B.
37.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of Ch. 197, Zoning.
§ 165-3 SIGNS § 165-5
165:505
Restrictions for all wall, window, awning and freestanding signs on
a single property:
(a) Maximum aggregate area: 70 square feet.
(b) Maximum number: three.
(3)
AWNING — A structure made of any fabric material or one incorporated
into a frame, attached to a building and projecting over a sidewalk or
over the property on which the building is situated. An awning with
lettering and/or graphic symbol may be a primary or secondary sign.
Types of awnings:
RETRACTABLE AWNING — Any awning supported solely by
the wall of a building which can be raised to position flat
against the building when not in use.
(a)
MARQUEE — Any nonretractable awning supported solely by
the wall of a building.
(b)
CANOPY — Any awing attached to a building, carried by a
frame supported by the ground or pavement.
(c)
(1)
Restrictions:
Awnings may not project over a street or right-of-way other
than the sidewalk.
(a)
Lettering or graphic symbol shall be either on the front or on
the sides of the awning.
(b)
Primary sign, maximum height of letters and graphic symbol:
eight inches.
(c)
Secondary sign, maximum height of letters and graphic
symbol: three inches.
(d)
Retractable awning.
Minimum vertical clearance above the sidewalk: seven
feet.
[1]
[2] Minimum horizontal clearance to curbline: 18 inches.
(e)
Marquee.
Minimum vertical clearance above the sidewalk: eight
feet.
[1]
[2] Minimum horizontal clearance to curbline: four feet.
(f)
Canopy.
Minimum vertical clearance to grade at entrance: eight
feet.
[1]
(g)
(2)
C.
§ 165-5 RYE CODE § 165-5
165:506
[2] No projection over a sidewalk or right-of-way.
[3] Limitation: one per building lot.
[4] Prohibited on Purchase Street.
BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION:
NAME OF BUSINESS — The common, formal or legal name by
which the permitted business occupant wishes to be known
(Scott's, Scott Pharmacy, Scott Pharmacy, Inc.).
(1)
NAME OF FRANCHISE — The name used under license by the
business occupant to identify a brand of goods or services offered
(if not selected as name of business) (Sav-a-Lot Supply Cartel).
(2)
GENERIC DESCRIPTION — The business nature of the permitted
occupancy (Drugs and Sundries).
(3)
GRAPHIC SYMBOL — The graphic design not including the name
of the business (drawing of a Scottie).
(4)
TAG LINE — The motto or slogan ("Affordable Health Care Starts
Here").
(5)
D.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign on supports placed on or anchored in
the ground and not attached to a building or other structure.
Types of freestanding signs:
MONUMENT SIGN — Has a base affixed to the ground or is
mounted on short supports.
(a)
POLE SIGN — Has vertical pole(s) with the sign securely
affixed.
(b)
POST-and-ARM SIGN — Has a vertical post to which a
perpendicular arm is attached and from which the sign hangs.
(c)
(1)
Restrictions:
(a) One freestanding sign allowed per property.
(b) Maximum size: 20 square feet per face.
Maximum height of a monument sign:
[1] Base or supports: two feet.
[2] Top: five feet.
(c)
(d) Maximum height of a pole sign: 10 feet to top of sign.
(e) Maximum height of a post and arm sign: 10 feet to top of sign.
(2)
E.
§ 165-5 SIGNS § 165-5
165:507
Minimum distance to side or rear property line that does not
abut a street: 10 feet.
(f)
HEIGHT —
For signs: the vertical distance from the average established grade
at the location of the sign to the top of that sign.
(1)
For lettering: the height of the capital letter or the height of the "x"
lower case letter, whichever is smaller.
(2)
F.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — In a Residential District may be affixed to
the structure or be freestanding, and identifies:
A one-family, two-family or multifamily residence denoting the
name of the resident, the permitted professional, home occupation
and/or building name.
(1)
A memorial or historic building denoting the name or building and/
or date of erection.
(2)
A nonconforming use in a residential district denoting the name of
use.
(3)
Restrictions:
One-family, two-family or multifamily residence:
Regulation
Signs Affixed to a
Structure
Freestanding
Signs
Maximum number 1 per residence 1
Maximum size 1 square foot per
residence; 20
square feet
maximum,
whichever is
smaller
1 square foot per
residence; 20
square feet
maximum,
whichever is
smaller
Maximum height n/a 3 feet if 15 or less
from street; 4 feet if
more than 15 feet
from street
Maximum height of
lettering
3 inches 3 inches
(a)
(b) Memorial or historic structure:
(4)
G.
§ 165-5 RYE CODE § 165-5
165:508
Regulation
Signs Affixed to a
Structure
Freestanding
Signs
Construction Cut into masonry
surface,
constructed of
bronze or material
compatible with the
structure
Monument or postand-
arm
Maximum size n/ a 12 square feet
Maximum height n/a 10 feet
Maximum height of
lettering
4 inches 4 inches
Nonconforming use:
Regulation Signs Affixed to a
Structure
Freestanding Signs
Maximum number 1 1 per street
frontage providing
access to property
Maximum size 20 square feet 6 square feet per
street frontage
Maximum height n/a 3 feet if 15 feet or
less from street; 4
feet if more than 15
feet from street
Maximum height of
lettering
3 inches 3 inches
(c)
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Includes two types of illumination:
Exterior illumination has a light source directed only toward the
sign.
(1)
(2) Interior illumination has the light source contained within the sign.
Restrictions:
Exterior illumination: only white light with shielded source not
visible from street, sidewalk or adjacent property.
(a)
Interior illumination: Illumination shall be confined to the
lettering of the name of business or franchise, and this
lettering shall appear white when illuminated; none of the
background, other lettering or graphic symbol shall be
illuminated.
(b)
Prohibited: unshielded neon; flashing rotating or intermittent
illumination, except time and temperature signs.
(c)
(3)
H.
§ 165-5 SIGNS § 165-5
165:509
INFORMATION SIGN — May contain but is not limited to the owner's
name, phone number and/or hours of operation.
Restrictions:
(a) Only on a window or a door.
Maximum coverage: 5% percent of window glass size or overall
door size.
(b)
(c) Maximum height of lettering: two inches.
(1)
I.
PRIMARY and SECONDARY SIGNS:
PRIMARY SIGN — The establishment's principal sign, whether on
a wall, window, awning or freestanding, identifying the business to
passersby, communicating the most pertinent information.
(1)
SECONDARY SIGN — Provides similar information to the primary
sign and shall be smaller in scale.
(2)
RESTRICTIONS:
A primary sign shall have a maximum of three of the following
five elements: name of business; name of franchise; generic
description; graphic symbol; tag line.
(a)
A secondary sign shall have a maximum of two of the following
four elements: name of business; name of franchise; generic
description; graphic symbol.
(b)
One primary sign per property except:
[1] Corner property. (See "wall sign," "window sign."
Symmetrical windows on either side of door. (See "window
sign.")
[2]
(c)
If name of business and name of franchise are both used on the
sign, one must be significantly smaller than the other.
(d)
All store units in the same building shall have their signs
designed so that they shall be compatible and consistent in
scale and in placement.
(e)
No more than two different colors shall be used in any
lettering.
(f)
(3)
J.
PROJECTING SIGN — A primary sign attached to the facade of a
building which can be read from either side.
Restrictions:
(a) Maximum size: eight square feet.
(b) Maximum projection: four feet.
(1)
K.
§ 165-5 RYE CODE § 165-5
165:510
(c) Maximum height: 14 feet.
(d) Minimum clearance above sidewalk: nine feet.
(e) Limit: one per property.
(f) Each face is counted into aggregate area allowed.
(g) No internal illumination is allowed.
Projecting signs shall be allowed only in the Central Business
District.
(h)
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign used to advertise the sale, lease or rental
of real property in Residential, Neighborhood Business or Central
Business Districts. Real estate signs are temporary; however, for the
purposes of this chapter they are considered distinct from temporary
signs.
Restrictions for all districts:
Real estate signs are limited to identifying the owner or
owner's agent and/or phone number and "for sale/lease/rent."
(a)
(b) May not be illuminated.
(c) Must be removed one week after the sale/lease/rental.
(d) Allowable colors: single-color lettering on white background.
(1)
Other restrictions:
Regulation
Residential
Districts
Neighborhood
Businesses
and Central
Business
Districts Vacant Lots
Maximum
number
1 1 per street
frontage
1 per street
frontage
Maximum size 12 inches in
height by 18
inches in width
9 square feet 1 1/2 square
feet per
potential
building lot
Maximum
height of
lettering
3 inches 4 inches 4 inches
Maximum
height,
freestanding
3 feet 4 feet 4 feet
(2)
L.
§ 165-5 SIGNS § 165-5
165:511
TEMPORARY SIGN — -Displayed only for a maximum, specified period
of time, is not permanently mounted and may contain advertising or
promotional information related to a permitted occupancy.
Restrictions:
(a) Prohibited in residential districts.
(b) Only allowed inside a window.
(c) May not be illuminated.
Maximum aggregate area: 20% of total window glass area on
any given facade.
(d)
(e) Maximum length of time of installation: three weeks.
(1)
M.
WALL SIGN — Painted on or attached to the outside wall of a building.
Restrictions:
Maximum size for primary facade: two square feet per lineal
foot of facade; maximum 30 square feet.
(a)
Maximum size for side or rear facade: one square foot per
lineal foot of facade, or 40% of area of sign on primary facade,
whichever is smaller.
(b)
(c) Maximum height lettering: 12 inches.
(d) Maximum projection: eight inches.
(e) Maximum number: two.
(1)
Exception:
Allowable size for primary signs on corner property: two signs;
each may be half of the sum of sizes allowable for primary and
side facades.
(a)
(2)
N.
WINDOW SIGN — Lettering or designs affixed to or painted on a
window or located inside in such a way as to be visible from the
sidewalk or street. "Window" shall include the entire glassed area
within the frame.
Restrictions if a window sign is the primary sign:
(a) Maximum size: 20% of window size.
(b) Maximum height of lettering: 12 inches.
(1)
Restrictions if a window sign is the secondary sign:
(a) Maximum size: 5% of window.
(b) Maximum height of lettering: three inches.
(2)
O.
§ 165-5 RYE CODE § 165-5
165:512
§ 165-6. Prohibited signs in all districts.
§ 165-7. Signs in Residential Districts.
Exceptions if a window sign is the primary sign:
In a corner situation, one window on each facade may have
primary signs of equal size within the maximum allowable:
20% of window.
(a)
In a symmetrical situation, one window on either side of a
door may have primary signs of equal size within the maximum
allowable: 20% of window.
(b)
(3)
A. All signs not specifically permitted are prohibited. Prohibited signs
include but are not limited to:
(1) Off-premises signs or signs not related to the use of the premises
upon which signs are located.
(2) Signs in a public right-of-way.
(3) Signs mounted to extend above a parapet wall.
(4) Signs mounted or painted on a roof.
(5) Billboards.
(6) Portable signs, sandwich boards, wheel-mounted signs.
(7) Construction, contractor and/or professional signs at construction
sites.
(8) Signs mounted on or otherwise affixed to any tree, stone or other
natural object.
(9) Signs mounted on or otherwise affixed to utility poles or fences.
(10) Signs in motion: promotional decorations, banners, pennants,
ribbons, balloons, streamers, spinners or similar moving, fluttering,
revolving or noise-making devices.
(11) Signs that may be confused with or obstruct the view of any traffic
sign or signal or obstruct a sight distance at any street intersection.
B. Existing signs which do not meet the requirements of this chapter must
be brought into conformance and approved by the Board of
Architectural Review by December 31, 2003.
C. For other signs prohibited in Residential Districts, see § 165-7.
D. For other signs prohibited in Neighborhood Business Districts, see
§ 165-8.
E. For other signs prohibited in the Central Business District, see § 165-9.
§ 165-5 SIGNS § 165-7
165:513
§ 165-8. Signs in Neighborhood Business Districts.
A. Permitted without a sign permit. The following signs are exempt from
sign permit requirements under this chapter:
(1) Identification sign affixed to structure for one-family, two-family or
multifamily residence, memorial or historic structure.
(2) Identification sign that is a freestanding monument sign or postand-
arm sign are for one-family or two-family residence.
(3) Real estate sign.
B. Permitted with sign permit. The following signs must be approved by
the Board of Architectural Review and must have a sign permit from the
Building Department:
(1) Identification sign that is a freestanding monument sign or postand-
arm sign for multifamily residence, memorial or historic
structure or nonconforming use.
(2) Identification sign affixed to structure for nonconforming use.
C. Prohibited:
(1) Wall signs.
(2) Window signs.
(3) Projecting signs.
(4) Freestanding pole signs.
(5) Signs with interior illumination.
(6) Temporary signs.
(7) Awnings, except retractable; lettering prohibited.
A. Permitted without sign permit. The following signs are exempt from the
sign permit requirements under this chapter:
(1) Signs permitted without a sign permit in Residential Districts; see
§ 165-7A.
(2) Temporary signs.
(3) Informational signs.
(4) Any sign that is not in Subsection A(1), (2) or (3) above requires
approval by the Board of Architectural Review and must have a
sign permit from the Building Department.
§ 165-7 RYE CODE § 165-8
165:514
§ 165-9. Signs in Central Business District.
B. Permitted with sign permit. The following signs must be approved by
the Board of Architectural Review and must have a sign permit from the
Building Department:
(1) Signs permitted with a sign permit in Residential Districts; see
§ 165-7B.
(2) Awnings.
(3) Business identification signs.
(4) Freestanding signs.
(5) Wall signs.
(6) Window signs.
(7) Illumination for signs.
C. Prohibited:
(1) Projecting signs.
A. Permitted without sign permit. The following signs are exempt from
sign permit requirements under this chapter:
(1) Signs permitted without a sign permit in Residential Districts; see
§ 165-7A.
(2) Signs permitted without a sign permit in Neighborhood Business
Districts; see § 165-8A.
(3) Any sign that is not in Subsection A(1) or (2) above requires
approval by the Board of Architectural Review and must have a
sign permit from the Building Department.
B. Permitted with sign permit. The following signs must be approved by
the Board of Architectural Review and must have a sign permit from the
Building Department:
(1) Signs permitted with sign permit in Residential Districts; see
§ 165-7B.
(2) Signs permitted with sign permit in Neighborhood Business
Districts; see § 165-8B.
(3) Projecting sips.
C. Prohibited:
(1) Canopy facing onto Purchase Street.
§ 165-8 SIGNS § 165-10
165:515
§ 165-10. Severability.
If any phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion of this
chapter or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is
declared void, unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, then such word,
phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection or other portion, or the
proscribed application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining
provisions of this chapter, and all applications thereof, not having been
declared void, unconstitutional or invalid, shall remain in full force and
effect.
Chapter 167
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 149.
Shopping carts — See Ch. 164.
Trees — See Ch. 187.
§ 165-10 RYE CODE § 165-10
165:516
ARTICLE I
Encroachments and Obstructions
[Adopted 2-4-1942 as Art. 1 and a portion of Art. 5 of Ch. 5 of the
General Ordinances]
§ 167-1. General prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any person to encumber or obstruct any street,
sidewalk or other public place within the City, except for immediate transfer
into or from the premises, or to erect or maintain any encroachment or
projection in, over or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place,
without a permit from the Clerk.
§ 167-2. Removal of soil and trees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig, remove or carry away, or cause to
be dug, removed or carried away, any stone, earth, soil, sand, sod, gravel,
shade or ornamental trees from any street, sidewalk or other public place
within the City without a permit from the Clerk.
§ 167-3. Awnings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any awning over any
sidewalk unless the lowest point of the awning is at least seven feet above
the surface of the sidewalk.
§ 167-4. (Reserved)38
§ 167-5. Erection and maintenance of poles and wires.
No person not otherwise authorized by law to do so shall erect or maintain
on or over any street or sidewalk within the City any telegraph, telephone,
electric light or other poles, or string wires in, over or upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place, or over or in front of any building within the
City, without the consent of the Council. All telephone, telegraph, electric
light and electric power poles, where the same are located upon the public
highway within the City, shall be marked with the name or initials of the
owner of said poles in distinct and legible letters and characters and in such
manner as the Council may prescribe.
§ 167-6. Removal of buildings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause or permit to be
removed, or to aid or assist in removing, any building or structure or part
thereof along, over, across or through any street or other public place within
the City without first having obtained the consent of the Council.
38.Editor's Note: Former § 167-4, Barbwire fences prohibited, was repealed 12-1-1999 by L.L.
No. 8-1999. See now Ch. 90, Fences and Walls.
§ 167-1 SIGNS § 167-6
165:517

ARTICLE II
Excavation in Streets
[Adopted 9-16-1970 by L.L. No. 1-1970 as Art. II of Ch. 5 of the
General Ordinances; amended it its entirety 6-18-1986 by L.L. No.
9-1986]
§ 167-7. General provisions.
A. Definition and usage.
(1) Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purposes of this article, have the meanings herein indicated:
CITY — The City of Rye.
CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL — The Council of the City of Rye.
CITY ENGINEER — The City Engineer of the City of Rye or his duly
authorized representative.
CORPORATION COUNSEL — The Corporation Counsel of the City
of Rye or his duly authorized representative.
DRAINAGE SERVICE LINE — The pipe or conduit laid between its
connection point on a stormwater drain and a building or property
for the purpose of conducting waste other than domestic sewage
and other than injurious water liquids from said building into said
stormwater drain.
INVERT — The lowest point in the internal cross section of a
sanitary sewer, stormwater drain, house sewer or drain.
PERMIT — The written permission issued by the City Clerk with
the approval and signature of the City Engineer, specifeically
authorizing a person, firm or corporation to perform certain work
in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and Code of the
City of Rye.
PERMITTEE — The person, firm or corporation obtaining a permit,
or his duly authorized representative.
SANITARY SEWER — The lateral or street sewer or manhole built
thereon in a public street, highway, sidewalk area, easement or
other public area and under the control of the City.
SEWER SERVICE LINE — The pipe or conduit laid between its
connection point on a sanitary sewer and a building for the purpose
of conducting domestic sewage and noninjurious water liquids from
the said building into said sanitary sewer.
SIDEWALK DRAIN or CURB DRAIN — The pipe or other conduit
laid under or across the sidewalk area between the curb or curbline
and the property line for the purpose of conducting roof and
surface water from buildings and ground into the gutter.
§ 167-7 SIGNS § 167-7
165:519
STORMWATER DRAIN — The lateral or main stormwater drain in
a public street, highway, sidewalk area, easement or other public
area under the control of the City.
STREET — Any street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, parking, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, every class of
public road, square, public way, and includes any private road open
to public motor vehicle traffic.
(2) Word usage.
(a) The words "directed," "required," "permitted," "ordered,"
"designated," "selected," "prescribed," "determined,"
"certified," "specified" or words of like import used in this
article shall mean respectively, the direction, requirement,
permission, order, designation, selection, prescription,
determination, certification or specification of the City
Engineer.
(b) The words "approved," "authorized," "acceptable,"
"satisfactory," "equal," "necessary," "adequate" "suitable,"
"competent" or words of like import used in this article shall
mean respectively, approved by, authorized by, acceptable to,
satisfactory to, equal to, or necessary, adequate, suitable or
competent in the opinion of the City Engineer.
(c) A "public service corporation," for the purpose of this article, is
a gas and electric corporation, water corporation, telephone
corporation or cable television corporation operating an
agency or agencies for public service, subject to the
jurisdiction, supervision and regulations prescribed by or
pursuant to the Public Service Law of the State of New York.
B. Administration by City Engineer. The City Engineer shall administer
and enforce all of the provisions of this article. He shall have the power
to adopt rules, regulations and supplemental requirements, with the
consent of the City Council, to secure the intent and purposes of this
article.
C. Restrictions as to performance of work.
(1) A permittee shall not begin or carry on any part of the work
provided to be done under any permit issued in accordance with
the provisions of this article until the permittee has complied with
all provisions of the Ned York State Industrial Code Rule 53 (12
NYC RR 53) and Article 36 of the New York State General Business
Law.
(2) Exceptions to the foregoing will be for emergencies governed by
§ 167-9F of this article or as described in 12 NYCRR 53.
(3) The City Engineer shall not be required to inspect any work done
under the provisions of this article unless the permittee shall have
§ 167-7 RYE CODE § 167-7
165:520
given said City Engineer not less than 24 hour's notice before
beginning work.
(4) No work under the permit shall be performed on Saturdays,
Sundays or holidays except with the prior approval of the City
Engineer or in the event of an emergency as described herein.
D. Restrictions during periods of heavy traffic.
(1) No street openings, street obstructions or maintenance operations
will be allowed in streets, at the discretion othe City Engineer, on
days in which periods of unusually heavy traffic occur, except in
cases of emergency specifically certified by the City Engineer.
(2) In the event that openings have not been backfilled and
satisfactorily resurfaced, or obstructions removed, on Saturdays,
Sundays or holidays or during periods of unusually heavy traffic
volume, or at the expiration of the effective period of the permit as
provided herein, the City reserves the right to backfill and
resurface such openings or to remove such obstructions, by
contract or otherwise, at the permittee's own expense.
E. Expenses incurred by the City.
(1) Any expense that may be incurred by the City in connection with
the work to be done under the provisions of the permit and/or in the
enforcement of this article shall be deducted from the deposit as
herein otherwise provided for. If, for any reason, the amount on
deposit is insufficient to pay for the expense incurred by the City,
the City Engineer shall not issue another permit to said permitee
for any work in any part of the City until the expense incurred by
the City is paid by the permittee.
(2) The City Engineer may, at his discretion, assign a representative to
inspect, on behalf of the City, the work to be done under the
provisions of any permit granted to a permittee, in which case such
permittee shall pay, in addition to the fees provided in § 167-9D, to
the City, by check payable to the City of Rye, a weekly amount to be
determined and established by the City Engineer for each week or
fraction thereof that such work shall be in progress as payment for
such inspection.
(3) Said permittee shall be billed by the City of Rye for any inspection
and/or expenses incurred by the City by reason of any failure or
default on the part of said permittee, as determined and certified
by the City Engineer and such bill shall be paid within 30 days after
the same shall have been billed by the City. This subsection shall
not apply to a public service corporation. (For a public service
corporation, see § 167-9F).
F. Materials.
§ 167-7 SIGNS § 167-7
165:521
(1) All materials used or incorporated in any work done under the
provisions of this article shall conform to such specifications as may
be set forth by the City Engineer.
(2) In general, the current standard specifications of the Engineering
Department shall be followed and materials are subject to the prior
approval of the City Engineer before they are incorporated in the
work.
(3) Materials shall, at the discretion of the City Engineer, be submitted
to such tests as may, in his opinion, be necessary to determine their
quality and acceptability. Such tests may be made in any laboratory
designated by the City Engineer, and the City shall be reimbursed
by the permittee for any expense incurred by said City on account
of such tests.
G. Requirements. All work related to any permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be performed by the permittee at said
permittee's own expense and strictly in accordance with the provisions
of the Code of the City, the applicable rules and regulations as may be
set forth by the City Engineer and to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer.
H. Permit to be exhibited. The permit must be in possession of the parties
actually doing the work and must be exhibited to the City Engineer or
any authorized representative of the City upon request.
I. Permit revocable. The City Engineer shall have the right to revoke or
cancel the permit at any time should the permittee fail to comply with
any of the terms, agreements, covenants and conditions thereof.
J. Permit not transferable. The permit shall not be assigned or transferred
except upon the written prior consent of the City Engineer.
K. Cleaning up. The permittee shall clean up and remove promptly from
the site of the work, upon completion thereof, all surplus excavated
material and debris and shall leave the site of the work in a neat and
orderly condition. Where topsoil, seeded areas or sod are disturbed in
the course of the work, the permittee shall restore the ground surfaces
to satisfactory condition.
L. Waiver or payment of fees by public service corporations. A public
service corporation as defined in this article shall not be required to pay
the fees otherwise prescribed in this article where said corporation is
required to relocate its facilities at its own cost and expense in
connection with and within the limits of a street improvement project or
other public works project carried on by the City of Rye, County of
Westchester or State of New York when said relocation is made
necessary by said project.
M. Noise, dust and debris. Each permittee shall conduct and carry out his
work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and
§ 167-7 RYE CODE § 167-7
165:522
§ 167-8. Sidewalks, curbs and driveways.
annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property.
The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest
extent practicable in the performance of the work, noise, dust and
unsightly debris, and, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
shall not use, except in case of an emergency as herein otherwise
provided, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient
volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring
property.
N. Preservation of monuments. The permittee shall not disturb any surface
monuments found within his excavation area. Any monument that is
damaged or disturbed as a result of work performed by a permittee
shall be reset and certified as to location by a New York State licensed
land surveyor at the permittee's expense.
O. Nonliability of City. This article shall not be construed as imposing upon
the City or any official or employee any liability or responsibility for
which an excavation permit is issued hereunder; nor shall the City or
any official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such
liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder,
the issuance of any permit or the approval of any excavation work.
P. Penalties for offenses. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $100 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Permit required.
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall construct, remove, replace or
repair a sidewalk, curb or driveway within the limits of any public
street, highway or other public property, without first obtaining a
written permit for such work.
(2) A permit will not be required, however, if an existing driveway is to
be resurfaced.
(3) Such permit shall be valid for an effective period not to exceed 60
days. Such effective period may be extended if so requested in
writing by the permittee prior to the expiration thereof, for such
additional period as the City Engineer, at his discretion, may
authorize and after payment of an additional fee in the same
amount as the original.
B. Application for permit. Any person, firm or corporation desiring a
permit for such work shall make application therefor to the City
Engineer upon forms provided for that purpose. Said application shall
contain the names and addresses of the applicant and of the owner of
the property in front of which or for whom the work is performed, the
§ 167-7 SIGNS § 167-8
165:523
location of such property, the sheet, block and lot designation thereof,
the extent and nature of the work to be done, together with such
necessary sketches and additional information as the City Engineer
may require and a signed statement by the applicant that said applicant
agrees to perform the work for which the permit is granted strictly in
accordance with the conditions of the permit, the provisions of the Code
of the City and the applicable rules and regulations of the Engineering
Department and that the City is to be saved harmless from any loss,
injury or damage arising out of the granting of the permit or from
any negligence or fault of said applicant, his servants or agents, in
connection with any of the work done or in connection with said permit.
C. Insurance required.
(1) No permit for any work described in § 167-8A of this article shall be
issued by the City Clerk until the applicant shall have first placed
on file with the City Clerk, without cost to the City, an insurance
policy designating the City of Rye as sole insured. Said insurance
policy shall have the following limits; $100,000 for any one person
and $500,000 for any one accident for personal injury and at least
$50,000 for any one accident and $100,000 in the aggregate for
property damage.
(2) The policy shall include a contractual "hold harmless" clause,
exactly as follows: "The contractor shall, during the performance of
his work, take all necessary precautions and place proper guards
for the prevention of accidents, shall put up and keep all night
suitable and sufficient lights, and shall indemnify and save
harmless the City and its employees, officers and agents, from all
claims, suits and actions and all damages and costs to which they
may be put by reason of death or injury to all personal or property
of another resulting from unskillfulness, willfulness, negligence or
carelessness in the performance of the work, or in guarding and
protecting the same, or from any improper methods, materials,
implements or appliances used in its performance or construction,
or by or on account of any direct or indirect act or omission of the
contractor or his employees or agents, and whether or not any
active or passive or concurrent or negligent act or omission by the
City or any of its employees, officers or agents may have directly or
indirectly caused or contributed thereto."
D. Fees. No permit for the construction, removal, replacement or repair of
the sidewalk, curb or driveway shall be issued by the City Clerk until
the applicant shall have paid to the City Clerk, in cash or by check
payable to the City of Rye, a fee of $30 or 10% of the amount of the
deposit, whichever is greater, when such work or any part thereof is to
be performed in streets, except that no fee shall be required for the
construction, removal, replacement or repair of a curb location within
the limits of a county road under the jurisdiction of the County
Commissioner of Public Works or within the limits of a state highway
§ 167-8 RYE CODE § 167-8
165:524
under the jurisdiction of the State Commissioner of Transportation.
[Amended 12-16-1992 by L.L. No. 19-1992]
E. Deposits.
(1) No permit for the construction, removal, replacement or repair of a
sidewalk, curb or driveway shall be issued by the City Clerk until
the applicant shall have first paid to the City Clerk, in cash or by
check payable to the City of Rye, a deposit in the amount to be
determined in accordance with the following unit prices for work to
be done as determined by the City Engineer:
(a) Sidewalk to be constructed, removed or replaced, for each
square foot: $2.
(b) Driveway to be constructed, removed or replaced, for each
square foot: $2.
(c) Curb to be constructed, removed or replaced, for each linear
foot: $12.
(d) Depressed curb. For lowering, raising or cutting curb, or
setting depressed curb for driveway entrance, for each linear
foot: $12.
(2) The deposit shall be retained by the City until the final completion
of the work to be done pursuant to the terms of the permit, as
security for the faithful performance by the applicant of all the
terms, agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit on the
applicant's part to be done or performed.
(3) Upon the failure or default by the permittee of any of the terms,
agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit on its part to
be done and performed, said deposit may be used by the City for
any expense incurred by the City by reason of such failure or
default on the part of the permittee.
(4) Any balance left after the expense of such failure or default, as
determined by the City Engineer shall be refunded to the
permittee.
F. Work to conform City specifications. Sidewalks, curbs and driveways
shall be constructed, removed, replaced or repaired in accordance with
such grades and specifications as may be determined or set forth by the
City Engineer, and the permittee shall perform the work so as to meet
the grade and alignment of the adjoining sidewalk, curb or driveway
and/or such established line and grade as may be determined by the
City Engineer and in accordance with his directions.
G. Depressed curb for driveway entrance.
(1) Upon prior written approval of the City Engineer and subject to the
provisions of this article, existing curbs may be lowered, as
§ 167-8 SIGNS § 167-8
165:525
provided hereunder, for the purpose of providing driveway
entrances or exits.
(2) The City Engineer shall not grant a permit to lower any curb or
change the grade of any sidewalk for the purpose of providing a
driveway entrance if, in his opinion, the actual or intended use of
such driveway entrance would endanger pedestrians or create a
traffic hazard.
(3) Prior to the issuance of a permit for a depressed curb fronting an
existing building, the permittee shall obtain written approval from
the Building Inspector, stating that the use created by the proposed
depressed curb is not in violation of Chapter 197 of the Code of the
City of Rye.
(4) Bluestone and granite curbs may be cut. Concrete curbs shall not
be cut. If the curb is not cut to the satisfaction of the City Engineer,
it shall be removed and replaced.
(5) The cutting or lowering of existing curbs or the construction of new
depressed curbs for the purpose of providing driveway entrances
or exits will not be allowed unless the permittee shall provide and
install in each case, during the effective period of the permit, an
adequate driveway ramp or apron between said curb and the
abutting property line and extending over the entire width of the
existing or proposed driveway.
(6) Said driveway, ramp or apron shall be surfaced with reinforced
concrete seven inches in thickness or not less than three inches of
bituminous surfacing material over four inches of crushed stone of
satisfactory workmanship and construction.
(7) The portion of a curb so depressed shall not exceed 25 feet in
length, or lesser limits as shall be established by City Engineer at
his discretion.
(8) The portion of driveway ramp or apron common with the sidewalk
and forming a part thereof shall consist of reinforced concrete
seven inches in thickness.
(9) When a depressed curb or portion thereof is no longer used or
needed for driveway entrance purposes, the owner of property
fronting thereon shall, upon the written order of the City Engineer
and within 30 days following such written order, raise and restore
such depressed curb and apron or such portion thereof to its full
height to conform to adjoining curbs and sidewalks or to such
grade as shall be established by the City Engineer.
H. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic is to be
adequately protected by the permittee by means of suitable protective
barricades and lighted yellow flashing lights around the work and the
§ 167-8 RYE CODE § 167-8
165:526
§ 167-9. Procedures for street openings.
work is to be so arranged as to cause a minimum of inconvenience and
hazard to such pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
A. Permit required.
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall open or cause to be opened, by
cutting or excavating, the surface or soil of any street, highway,
sidewalk area or public ground for any purpose whatsoever without
first obtaining a written permit for street opening; except, however,
that the construction, removal, replacement or repair of a sidewalk,
curb or driveway shall be done under a permit for a sidewalk, curb
or driveway, as set forth in § 167-8 of this article, in lieu of a permit
for street opening.
(2) No person, firm or corporation shall make or cause to be made any
connection into a sanitary sewer or stormwater drain in an
easement or right-of-way across private property, said sanitary
sewer or stormwater drain forming a part of the sewer, drainage or
water distribution system, respectively, of the City of Rye, without
first obtaining from the City Engineer a written permit for a street
opening.
(3) Such permit shall be valid for an effective period not to exceed one
year, to be determined and specified therein by the City Engineer.
Such effective period may be extended, if so requested in writing
by the permittee prior to the expiration thereof, for such additional
period as the City Engineer, at his discretion, may authorize and
after payment of an additional fee in the same amount as the
original.
(4) All insurance required originally must still be in force when
restoration is performed.
B. Application for permit.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation desiring a permit for a street
opening shall make application therefor to the City Engineer for
each such opening of forms provided for that purpose.
(2) Said application shall contain the names and addresses of the
applicant and of the owner of the property in front of which or for
whom the work is to be performed, the location of such property,
the sheet, block and lot designation, the size and purpose of the
opening to be made and the maximum size of such opening, the
date or dates when the work is to be performed, the type of
pavement or surface to be disturbed, together with such necessary
sketches and additional information as the City Engineer may
require and a signed statement by the applicant that the said
applicant agrees to perform the work for which the permit is
granted strictly in accordance with the conditions of the permit, the
§ 167-8 SIGNS § 167-9
165:527
provisions of the Code of the City and the applicable rules and
regulations of the Engineering Department.
C. Insurance required. No permit for a street opening shall be issued by
the City Clerk until the applicant shall have first complied with the
requirements of § 167-8C of this article.
D. Fees. No permit for a street opening shall be issued by the City
Engineer until the applicant shall have first paid to the City Engineer, in
cash or by check payable to the City of Rye: [Amended 4-4-1990 by
L.L. No. 9-1990; 12-16-1992 by L.L. No. 19-1992; 12-18-1996 by
L.L. No. 15-1996; 12-18-2002 by L.L. No. 11-2002; 6-15-2011 by
L.L. No. 3-2011]
(1) A deposit to be determined as provided hereunder and as set forth
in the fee schedule; and
(2) A fee as set forth in the fee schedule or 10% of the amount of the
deposit, whichever shall be greater, except that whenever a
permittee has filed a bond in lieu of a deposit, in accordance with
Subsection F of this section, said fee shall be established on a per
linear foot basis of street opening measured along the length of the
street opening or the fee as set forth in the fee schedule, whichever
shall be greater. No fee shall be charged to a public service
corporation for the installation or relocation of poles. Said fee is to
cover the cost of issuing and recording the permit and the
supervision and inspection of the work done in connection
therewith; and
(3) A surcharge for each street opening permit. The surcharge shall be
set annually by the City Council as set forth in the fee schedule.
(4) Test holes (keyhole openings). The fee for test holes is set forth in
the fee schedule.
E. Deposits. [Amended 12-18-2002 by L.L. No. 11-2002]
(1) The amount of deposit for street openings shall be computed in
accordance with the following unit prices for pavements or other
areas to be disturbed or work to be done, as determined by the City
Engineer, except that no deposit shall be required in the case of an
opening made in an area other than a sidewalk, located within the
limits of a county road under the jurisdiction of the County
Commission of Public Works, or within the limits of a state highway
under the jurisdiction of the State Commissioner of Transportation,
nor shall a deposit be required for connecting to a stormwater
drain or other structure under the jurisdiction of said County
Commissioner of Public Works or State Commissioner of
Transportation:
(a) Concrete or reinforced concrete pavement to be disturbed, for
each square yard: $200.
§ 167-9 RYE CODE § 167-9
165:528
(b) Asphalt surfaced pavement to be disturbed, for each square
yard: $120.
(c) Sidewalks, asphalt, to be disturbed, for each square foot: $5.
(d) Sidewalks, other types, to be disturbed, other than for the
installation of underground storage tanks, for each square
foot: $5.
(e) Curbing, asphalt, to be disturbed, for each linear foot: $10.
(f) Curbing, other types, to be disturbed, for each linear foot: $10.
(g) All other types of pavement to be disturbed, for each square
yard: $75.
(h) Unpaved surfaces, of any type, to be disturbed, for each square
yard: $50.
(i) Structures. Connection to an existing manhole, catch basin or
other structure, for each separate connection: $150.
(j) Structures. Construction of new manhole, catch basin or other
structure, for each separate structure: $1,000.
(k) Test borings on any public street or other public area, for each
boring hole: $25.
(l) Connection of sewer or drainage service line to sanitary sewer
or stormwater drain, for each separate connection: $250.
(m) Installation of underground storage tanks or vaults in sidewalk
area: in an amount to be recommended by the City Engineer
and set annually by the City Council before adoption of the
budget for the following year.
(n) Driving small pipes under pavements or sidewalks (amount of
deposit to be based on area which would have been disturbed if
work had been performed by open-cut trenching method)
minimum amount of deposit for each street opening: $500.
(2) When the permittee exceeds maximum size of opening or work
specified in permit, said permittee shall, when so ordered and
before proceeding with the work, pay to the City Clerk such
additional amounts of deposit as the City Engineer may require.
Failure on the part of the permittee to comply promptly with said
order will be considered sufficient cause for revocation of the
permit.
(3) Disposition of deposits. The amount of deposit shall be retained by
the City for the duration of the period of maintenance as defined
hereinbelow.
§ 167-9 SIGNS § 167-9
165:529
(4) Upon the failure or default by the permittee of any of the terms,
agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit on the
permittee's part to be done or performed, said deposit may be used
by the City for any expense incurred by the City by reason of such
failure or default on the part of the permittee.
(5) Any balance left, after the expense of such failure or default as
determined by the City Engineer, shall be refunded to the
permittee.
(6) Period of maintenance. The period of maintenance shall be
considered as a period of 24 months after the date of final
completion, as determined by the City Engineer, of the work to be
done pursuant to the terms of the permit; except, however, that in
the event that the termination of said twenty-four-month period
falls within the months of December, January, February, March or
April, then the period of maintenance shall be considered as
extending until the first day of the following May.
(7) The permittee shall be responsible for the entire work and shall
keep every portion of said work in perfect order and repair during
the entire period of maintenance, and should said permittee fail to
make needed repairs to the work or to adequately maintain
surfaces disturbed by said permittee, the City Engineer reserves
the right, at said City Engineer's discretion and without prior
notice to the permittee, to cause such repairs to be made or such
surfaces to be maintained by the City's own forces or by contract or
otherwise in which case the City shall be reimbursed for any
expense incurred thereby in accordance with the provisions of
§ 167-7D of this article and the permittee shall have no claim
against the City for the loss of anticipated profits or for any losses
by reason thereof.
F. Public service corporation.
(1) Unless otherwise agreed upon between a public service
corporation and the City of Rye, a public service corporation may,
in lieu of deposit hereinbefore specified for a street opening, file
and keep on file with the City Clerk a bond in the amount of
$15,000. Said bond shall have a minimum rating of A+13 as
contained in Best's Key Rating Guide and said bond is to be
approved as to form, amount and sufficiency of surety by the
Corporation Counsel. Said bond is to be retained as security for the
faithful performance by the applicant of all the terms, agreements,
covenants and conditions of the permit on the applicant's part to be
done or performed.
(2) Said bond provided for hereinabove shall be considered as a
deposit, and the provisions of § 167-9E of this article in regard to
the disposition of deposits shall apply to a public service
§ 167-9 RYE CODE § 167-9
165:530
corporation in the same manner as specified for other permittees
in said § 167-9E of this article.
(3) A public service corporation may, in lieu of the insurance
hereinbefore specified for a street opening, file and keep on file
with the City Clerk an agreement, approved as to form and content
by the Corporation Counsel, to indemnify and save harmless the
City of Rye from claims, suits, actions, proceedings, losses, injuries,
damages and costs of every name and description arising out of or
resulting from any act or omission on the part of such public
service corporation under any permit granted to it or from any
negligence or fault of such public service corporation, its
contractors, agents, servants or employees in connection with
sidewalk, curb or driveway work or repairs or street openings or
any work related thereto and to also defend on behalf of the City
any such suits, actions or proceedings which may be instituted
against the City of Rye.
(4) The City Engineer may, at his discretion, assign a representative to
inspect on behalf of the City the work to be done under the
provisions of any permit granted to a public service corporation,
without any fee in addition to the fees provided in § 167-9D, where
a bond is filed in lieu of a deposit.
(5) Said public service corporation shall be billed by the City for any
expenses incurred by the City by reason of any failure or default on
the part of said corporation as determined and certified by the City
Engineer and any such bill shall be paid within 30 days after same
shall have been billed by the City.
(6) In case of emergency due to breakage of pipes, etc., street
openings may be made by a public service corporation prior to
obtaining a permit for street opening; provided, however, that said
public service corporation shall have filed the required bond and
evidence of insurance or indemnity agreement as specified in this
section and in § 167-8C of this article, and provided further that
said public service corporation shall make application for the
necessary permit not later than 24 hours (Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays not included) after said opening has been commenced. In
any such case, the public service corporation shall notify the City
prior to performing any work.
G. Protection of existing structures. It shall be the duty of the person, firm
or corporation by whom any street opening is to be made for any
purpose whatsoever, to notify the operators of all underground facilities
48 hours prior to commencing any work within the City of Rye in
conformance with Rule No. 53 of the Industrial Code of the State of
New York.
H. Damage of existing improvements. All damage done to existing
improvements during the progress of the excavation work shall be
§ 167-9 SIGNS § 167-9
165:531
repaired by the permittee. Materials for such repair shall conform
to the requirements of any applicable code or ordinance. If, upon
being ordered, the permittee fails to furnish the necessary labor and
materials for such repairs, the City Engineer shall have the authority
to cause said necessary labor and materials to be furnished by the City
and the cost shall be charged against the permittee.
I. Maintaining and protecting traffic.
(1) The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable barricades and
fences around all of his or its work while excavation or other work
is in progress and shall arrange his or its work in such a manner as
to cause a minimum of inconvenience and delay to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic. The City Engineer may require that the work be
so arranged as to make possible the complete removal of
obstructions to traffic on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays and, at
the discretion of the City Engineer, during periods of unusually
heavy traffic volume. In the event that such requirement is not
complied with by the permittee, the City Engineer may, at his
discretion, cause all or part of the work covered by the permit to be
backfilled and temporarily resurfaced by the City's own forces or by
contract or otherwise, in which case the City shall be reimbursed
for any expenses incurred thereby in accordance with the
provisions of § 167-7D and E of this article, and the permittee shall
have no claim against the City for loss of anticipated profits or for
any other losses by reason thereof.
(2) The City Engineer may permit the closing of streets to all traffic for
a period of time prescribed by him if, in his opinion, it is necessary.
The permittee shall route and control traffic, including its own
vehicles, as directed by the Department of Police. The following
steps shall be taken before any highway may be closed or restricted
to traffic:
(a) The permittee must receive the approval of the City Engineer
and the Department of Police therefor.
(b) The permittee must notify the Driver - Clerk of the Fire
Department of any street so closed.
(c) Upon completion of construction work, the permittee shall
notify the City Engineer and the Department of Police before
traffic is moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary
adjustments may be made.
(d) Where flagmen are deemed necessary by the City Engineer,
they shall be furnished by the permittee at its own expense.
Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours,
if possible. In instances in which this would not be feasible, the
City Engineer will designate detours. The permittee will be
responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to any
highways by the operation of its equipment.
§ 167-9 RYE CODE § 167-9
165:532
§ 167-10. Excavating and backfilling street openings.
(3) Warning flags or signs and suitable lighted yellow lights shall be
provided if so ordered by the City Engineer, in accordance with his
direction.
(4) Where the free flow of traffic is interfered with, the permittee shall
designate competent persons to direct and expedite traffic by
means of lights or flags.
(5) Unless otherwise authorized by the City Engineer, vehicular traffic
shall be maintained at all times during the progress of the work
being performed under the permit.
J. Poles and wires. No person, firm or corporation shall erect or cause to
be erected any telephone, electric light or electric transmission pole or
poles, or install any conduits or change the location thereof, or string
any wires in, over or upon any street, highway, or public place without
first obtaining a permit therefor from the City Clerk.
K. Maximum size of openings. Where trenches fall within the roadway
pavement or the sidewalk, they shall be covered daily with adequate
size steel plates, as ordered by the City Engineer, to permit the flow of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic. At no time shall the length of the street
opening exceed 1/3 of the roadway pavement or the maximum length
established by the City Engineer after due consideration is given to the
amount of vehicular traffic and to the width of the pavement.
A. Excavated material. Excavated material shall be stored in neat piles, so
placed as to cause the least interference with the use of the roadway or
sidewalks. If so ordered by the City Engineer, such excavated material
shall be promptly removed from the site of the work.
B. Sheathing and shoring.
(1) The permittee shall comply with all regulations of the New York
State Department of Labor pertaining to sheathing and shoring.
(2) Whenever conditions make it necessary, the City Engineer may
require that the sheathing be driven ahead of the excavation as the
excavation proceeds.
(3) Unless otherwise authorized in writing by the City Engineer,
sheathing and shoring shall be left in place with a cutoff line 18
inches below ground surface.
C. Rock excavation.
(1) In rock excavation, drilling and blasting shall be conducted with all
possible care. All blasting operations shall be conducted in strict
accordance with the existing code and regulations relative to rock
blasting and the storage and use of explosives. A blasting permit
must be obtained from the City Clerk in all instances.
§ 167-9 SIGNS § 167-10
165:533
(2) The permittee shall use the utmost caution in properly protecting
all surface and subsurface structures from the effect of blasting,
and any damage done to such structures shall be promptly repaired
by the permittee, or by such other parties as the City Engineer may
direct, at said permittee's own expense.
(3) Sufficient warning shall be given to all persons in the vicinity of the
work before blasting. The site of the blast shall be covered with
blasting mats or other devices to prevent damages from flying rock
fragments.
(4) The permittee shall give adequate notice to the City and to the
appropriate public service corporations before proceeding with
blasting in the vicinity of water mains, sanitary sewers, stormwater
drains and other drains or other public utility lines.
D. Backfilling.
(1) Streets requiring controlled density fill are as follows:
Boston Post Road
Central Avenue
Elm Place
Forest Avenue
Highland Road
Grace Church Street
Locust Avenue
Milton Road
Oakland Beach Avenue
Osborn Road
Purchase Street
Purdy Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue
Theall Road
(2) Whenever an excavation is made in any of the streets listed above,
or, if in the opinion of the City Engineer the excavation, size or
material warrants it, a controlled density fill must be used for
backfilling. The controlled density fill used shall attain a minimum
compressive strength of 40 pounds per square inch (psi), a
maximum strength of 150 psi (twenty-eight day), and an allowable
minimum bearing strength of 5,000 pounds per square foot (psf).
The controlled density fill shall be brought up to the bottom grade
of the concrete or binder, depending on the type of roadway.
(3) If any excavation in any of the streets listed above is backfilled
without a controlled density fill, the permittee shall forfeit the
§ 167-10 RYE CODE § 167-10
165:534
deposit and the City Engineer shall have the authority to deny said
permittee any future permit.
(4) Backfilling for all areas not requiring controlled density fill. No
backfilling shall be done by the permittee until the work being done
under the permit shall have first been inspected and backfilling
authorized by the City Engineer. In case of nonconformity with this
requirement, the permittee shall forfeit the deposit and the City
Engineer shall have the authority to deny said permittee any future
permit.
(5) The material used to backfill the bottom of the trench up to a level
of two feet above the completed pipe or other structure shall be
clean earth, sand or rock dust and shall contain no broken rock,
stone or frozen earth.
(6) Above a level two feet higher than the top of the completed pipe or
other structure, the material used for backfill shall be approved
material containing no frozen earth and not more than 1/3 broken
rock and no stone or piece thereof shall exceed 1/2 cubic foot in
size.
(7) The space between the pipe or other structure and the bottom and
sides of the trench shall be packed full by hand and thoroughly
tamped as fast as placed and up to the level of the top of the pipe or
other structure, which shall then be covered by hand to a level of at
least two feet higher than the top thereof, material being carefully
deposited and tamped in layers not more than six inches thick.
(8) Backfilling above the level of two feet above the top of the pipe or
other structure shall be done in successive horizontal layers not
exceeding one foot in depth and each layer shall be thoroughly
compacted by means of approved mechanical tamping equipment
or by such other means as may be approved by the City Engineer.
(9) Compacting the backfill by means of flooding or puddling with
water will not be allowed.
E. Driving small pipes. Tunneling under pavement or sidewalks will not be
allowed, but small pipes or conduits having a dimension of six inches or
less may be driven beneath pavements or sidewalks in such a manner
that the surface shall not be disturbed or injured, and provided that:
(1) Prior written approval of the City Engineer is obtained.
(2) No excavation in connection therewith shall be closer than one foot
to the edge of a sidewalk or 18 inches to the edge of a pavement.
(3) Such pipes or conduits shall be enclosed in sleeves or larger pipes
so that required replacements or repairs may be made in the future
without disturbance or injury to the pavement or sidewalk.
§ 167-10 SIGNS § 167-10
165:535
§ 167-11. Sewer and drainage lines.
(4) In the event of damage to a pavement, sidewalk or subsurface pipe
or structure caused by driving such pipe or conduit, the permittee
shall repair and make good the damage at the permittee's own
expense.
A. Service lines.
(1) The installation and repair of sewer and drainage service lines,
within the limits of any public street, highway, easement or other
public property, and the connection of such service lines to the
sanitary sewers and stormwater drains of the City shall be done in
accordance with the provisions of the rules and regulations of the
Engineering Department and shall also conform to such
specifications as may be promulgated by the City Engineer.
(2) A sewer service line, between its connection point at the sanitary
sewer and the building, shall be a heavy cast-iron pipe with lead
joints or such other approved types of joints as may be allowed by
the New York State Plumbing Code and shall be laid by a plumber
licensed in the City of Rye.
(3) A drainage service line between its connection point at the
stormwater drain and the property line shall be of heavy cast-iron
pipe with lead or other approved joints, reinforced concrete pipe or
other pipe approved by the City Engineer.
(4) Such service lines shall be laid on a straight alignment and uniform
gradient of not less than 1/4 inch per foot unless otherwise
specifically authorized by the City Engineer and having all changes
in direction made with approved fittings.
B. Restriction as to type or amount of discharge.
(1) No domestic sewage nor industrial wastes and no injurious waste
substances shall be discharged into a stormwater drain,
watercourse or body of water through any connection thereto.
(2) No stormwater connection from any building or yard, nor any drain
from any catch basin, lake, swamp, pond or swimming pool, nor any
inlet for surface water, stormwater or groundwater of any kind
shall be connected to the City sewer system or to any private sewer
connected to any such public sewer.
(3) No industrial wastes nor any injurious waste substance shall be
discharged into a sanitary sewer unless the method and degree of
treatment, prior to discharge, has been approved by the
Commissioner of Public Works of Westchester County and the
Commissioner of Public Health of Westchester County.
§ 167-10 RYE CODE § 167-11
165:536
(4) Subject to the prior approval of the City Engineer, waste lines from
a swimming pool shall be connected into a sanitary sewer.
C. Connections.
(1) Except as otherwise provided hereinbelow, connections to sanitary
sewers and stormwater drains shall be made by means of forty-fivedegree
and ninety-degree sewer pipe saddles of approved size as
manufactured by the JM Manufacturing Co., Inc. or an approved
equal.
(2) The use of an existing Y-branch or other existing fitting for the
purpose of connecting a service line thereto shall be allowed only
when such branch or fitting is already available and in place as a
part of the sanitary sewer or stormwater drain, is in satisfactory
condition and at an acceptable location, and is of adequate size to
receive said service line.
(3) Whenever the proposed service line is greater than four inches
when the sanitary sewer or stormwater drain is six inches or less;
or greater than five inches when the sanitary sewer or stormwater
drain is eight inches or less; or greater than six inches when the
sanitary sewer or stormwater drain is 10 inches or less, a manhole
shall be built over said sanitary sewer or stormwater drain at the
point of connection. The above sizes refer to the internal diameter
of the pipe or conduit.
(4) Sewer pipe saddle connections and other approved types of
connections shall be installed in such a manner that the invert of
said connection shall be higher than the invert of the sanitary
sewer or stormwater drain by an amount not less than 1/2 the
vertical diameter of said stormwater drain unless otherwise
authorized by the City Engineer.
(5) Connections to an existing cast-iron pipe sanitary sewer or
stormwater drain shall be made by burning an opening in said pipe
in an approved manner or by such other means as may be
authorized by the City Engineer.
(6) When the difference in invert elevation in the manhole at the point
of connection exceeds three feet, a drop connection shall be
installed in said manhole.
(7) Adequate provision shall be made so that the discharge from a
service line within a manhole shall be conducted smoothly into and
in the direction of the flow of the main channel of the sanitary
sewer or stormwater drain by means of a built-up channel or by
extending said service line partly into the manhole, as may be
necessary and in such manner as may be approved by the City
Engineer.
§ 167-11 SIGNS § 167-11
165:537
§ 167-12. Resurfacing.
(8) Construction of new manholes, drop connections and any other
necessary structures and connections to existing structures shall
conform to such specifications as may be promulgated by the City
Engineer. In general, the current standards, specifications and
construction details of the Department of Engineering shall be
followed subject to the prior approval of the City Engineer.
(9) In the event that the sewer or drain connection is not installed
under the supervision and the approval of the City Engineer or his
authorized personnel, the permittee shall forfeit the deposit and
the City Engineer shall have the authority to deny said permittee
any future permit.
D. Drainage from business, commercial, industrial and other buildings.
Roof and other drainage from properties on which buildings are
hereinafter constructed to be used in whole or in part for business,
commercial, industrial or other public purposes shall be discharged
through drainage service lines directly into a stormwater drain through
an approved connection thereto when such a stormwater drain is
available and unless such connection, in the opinion of the City
Engineer, is deemed impracticable.
E. Sidewalk and curb drains.
(1) Unless otherwise authorized in writing by the City Engineer,
drainage outlets laid under or across the sidewalk area between
the property line and the curbline and discharging into the gutter
or into a catch basin or curb inlet, shall be approved cast-iron or
steel construction.
(2) When holes are cut through curbs for the purpose of providing
drainage outlets, care shall be taken not to damage the curb, and
any damage or injury to said curb shall be repaired by the
permittee at the latter's own expense and to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer.
A. Temporary resurfacing.
(1) Immediately after backfilling the excavation, the permittee shall
place thereon an acceptable temporary resurfacing as provided
hereinbelow. Such temporary resurfacing shall be maintained even
with the roadway or other surface, as directed, until permanent
restoration of the surface is ordered by the City Engineer.
(2) The temporary resurfacing shall consist of not less than two inches
of approved premixed asphalt paving material, except that where
topsoil, seeded areas or sod have been disturbed by the excavation
or by any work related thereto, the permittee shall restore the
entire ground area to the same condition as existed before the work
began.
§ 167-11 RYE CODE § 167-12
165:538
(3) The permittee is responsible for maintaining the temporary
resurfacing in such a manner as to avoid creating a hazard to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(4) Permanent restoration of the surface over a street opening
excavation shall not be made until satisfactory settlement of the
backfill has taken place or, if the excavation is in a street which
requires controlled density fill, the restoration can be made as soon
as the controlled density fill attains a minimum strength of 50 psi.
B. Concrete pavements.
(1) Before proceeding with pavement resurfacing the existing concrete
pavement shall be neatly cut back a distance of not less than 12
inches beyond the edges of the excavation, care being taken not to
remove any existing steel reinforcement. Such distance shall not be
reduced without prior approval of the City Engineer and may be
increased as provided hereunder.
(2) Where the existing pavement has been undermined by the
excavation or by any work connected therewith or where spalled or
scaled surface areas of existing pavement adjoin the area to be
resurfaced, the permittee shall remove additional pavement
beyond the distance stated hereinabove, as ordered by the City
Engineer.
(3) In the event that any portion of the proposed concrete resurfacing,
as finally determined by the City Engineer as provided
hereinabove, is nearer than four feet from a joint, then such
removal shall be extended to said joint. The smallest horizontal
dimension of the concrete resurfacing shall be not less than four
feet.
(4) None of the subgrade so exposed shall be disturbed in any way
except when, in the opinion of the City Engineer, such subgrade is
unstable, in which case the unstable material shall be removed as
ordered and replaced with approved stable material in layers not to
exceed four inches, each layer being thoroughly compacted.
(5) The upper edges of the existing concrete pavement shall be
uniformly plumbed and tooled for a depth not to exceed one inch,
the remaining depth being left with straight butrough edges.
(6) Reinforcement, consisting of six-inch-by-six-inch 6/6 welded-wire
fabric shall be placed two inches above the subgrade and shall be
adequately tied in with the existing reinforcements, if any.
(7) The concrete shall be proportioned, mixed, placed, finished and
cured as ordered. The City Engineer may, at his discretion, require
the use of an approved high-early-strength cement placed under
approved methods. The use of admixtures and work in freezing
§ 167-12 SIGNS § 167-12
165:539
§ 167-13. Street obstructions.
weather will be allowed only with the City Engineer's prior
approval and as directed.
(8) Approved joints shall be installed where directed.
(9) The resurfaced area shall not be opened to traffic for 48 hours or
until so ordered by the City Engineer.
C. Asphalt/composite pavement. [Amended 7-26-2018 by L.L. No.
5-2018]
(1) Asphalt concrete surface on existing concrete base.
(a) Prior to the replacement of the asphalt concrete surface, the
subgrade shall be properly prepared and a reinforced concrete
foundation of required thickness and proportions shall be
placed thereon, all in accordance with the requirements of
concrete pavements outlined before.
(b) The existing asphalt concrete pavement shall then be restored
in accordance with Subsection C(2), Asphalt concrete
pavement, below.
(2) Asphalt concrete pavement. All final pavement restoration limits
shall follow the guidelines depicted in the minimum pavement
restoration limits diagram as adopted by the City Council and
amended from time to time. The minimum pavement restoration
limits diagram shall be maintained by the City Engineer. The edges
of all trenches shall receive a liberal application of asphaltic
emulsion to seal edges.
D. All asphalt patches shall be sealed using hot-joint sealer on all joints
formed between old pavement and new work.
E. Other surfaces. Any other surfaces disturbed by reason of the work
performed under the permit shall be restored by the permittee as
directed by the City Engineer.
F. It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site
of the excavation work in the same condition as it was prior to the
excavation for two years after restoring it to its original condition.
G. Work may be done by City. The City Engineer may, at his discretion,
cause any or all of the work contemplated in this article to be done by
the City's own forces, or by contract or otherwise, in which case the
City shall be reimbursed for any expense incurred thereby in
accordance with the provisions of § 167-7D of this article, and the
permittee shall have no claim against the City for loss of anticipated
profits or for any other losses by reason thereof.
A. Permit required.
§ 167-12 RYE CODE § 167-13
165:540
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall obstruct, encumber or occupy
in any manner or for any purpose whatsoever any public street,
highway or sidewalk area without first obtaining therefor, from the
City Clerk, a written permit for street obstruction.
(2) The use and operation of construction machinery or equipment
which obstructs, encumbers or occupies any portion of a public
street, highway or sidewalk area will not be allowed unless a
written permit for street obstruction has first been obtained from
the City Clerk.
(3) Such permits shall be valid for an effective period of 30 consecutive
calendar days. Said effective period shall be determined and
specified therein by the City Engineer. Such effective period may be
extended if so requested in writing by the permittee prior to
expiration thereof for such additional period as the City Engineer
may, at his discretion, authorize.
B. Application for permit. Any person, firm or corporation desiring a
permit for street obstruction shall make application therefor to the City
Engineer upon forms provided for that purpose. Said application shall
contain the names and addresses of the applicant and of the owner of
the property in front of which the street obstruction if proposed, the
location of such property, sheet, block and lot designation thereof, the
extent and nature of the proposed obstruction, the date or dates
thereof, together with such necessary sketches and additional
information as may be required by the City Engineer, and a signed
statement by the applicant that said applicant agrees to abide by all the
conditions of the permit, the provisions of the Code of the City of Rye
and the applicable rules and regulations of the Engineering
Department.
C. Insurance required.
(1) No permit for a street opening shall be issued by the City Engineer
until the applicant shall have first complied with the requirements
of § 167-8C.
(2) Such insurance must remain in force throughout the effective
period of the permit as well as any authorized extensions thereof
and shall carry an endorsement to the effect that the insurance
company will give at least 10 days' written notice to the City of Rye
of any modification or cancellation of any such insurance.
D. Fees. No permit for street obstruction shall be issued by the City Clerk
until the applicant shall have first paid to the City Clerk in cash or by
check payable to the City of Rye: [Amended 12-16-1992 by L.L. No.
19-1992]
(1) A deposit in an amount to be determined as provided hereunder.
§ 167-13 SIGNS § 167-13
165:541
(2) A minimum fee of $100 or 10% of the amount of the deposit,
whichever is greater.
E. Deposits.
(1) The amount of deposit for street obstructions shall be computed in
accordance with the following unit prices for areas to be
obstructed, encumbered or occupied as determined by the City
Engineer:
(a) For the storage of materials or any operation in connection
with the erection, demolition, repair, alteration or
reconstruction of a building; for the loading, unloading and/or
operation of construction equipment or machinery in
connection with the erection, demolition, repair, alteration or
reconstruction of a building, for each square foot: $1.
(b) Minimum amount of deposit for each street obstruction: $100.
(2) When the permittee exceeds maximum authorized obstruction
specified in the permit, said permittee shall, when so ordered, pay
to the City Clerk such additional amounts of deposit as the City
Engineer may require. Failure on the part of the permittee to
comply promptly with said order shall be considered sufficient
cause for revocation of the permit.
(3) The deposit shall be retained by the City until expiration of the
permit as security for the faithful performance by the applicant of
all the terms, agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit
on its part to be done and performed, said deposit may be used by
the City for any expense incurred by the City by reason of such
failure or default on the part of the permittee, and without prior
notice thereof to the permittee, and said permittee shall have no
claim against the City for loss of anticipated profits or for any
losses by reason thereof.
(4) Any balance left after the expense of such failure or default, as
determined and certified by the City Engineer, shall be refunded to
the permittee.
F. Permissible area of obstruction.
(1) In the case of a permit issued by the City Clerk for a street
obstruction related to the erection, demolition, repair, alteration or
reconstruction of a building, the permissible area of the street,
highway or sidewalk to be obstructed, encumbered or occupied
shall be determined and specified by the City Engineer.
(2) Unless otherwise authorized in writing by the City Engineer, the
permittee shall conduct his operation under the permit for street
obstruction in such a manner that no more than 1/4 of the total
width of a street or highway pavement or surface shall at any time
§ 167-13 RYE CODE § 167-13
165:542
be obstructed or a maximum width of obstruction of seven feet,
whichever is least.
(3) The permittee shall, at all times, keep clear and unobstructed and
in no way interfere with prompt access to or adequate operation of
all manholes, catch basins, hydrants, valves or fire alarm boxes that
may be situated in or near the area obstructed or occupied in
accordance with the permit.
(4) Except as otherwise provided herein, the permittee shall at all
times also keep clear and unobstructed the sidewalk area and
gutter in or near the area occupied under the permit and shall
remove promptly therefrom any dirt, rubbish, snow or ice.
G. Safeguarding pedestrian and other traffic.
(1) Except as otherwise provided herein, the permittee shall erect and
maintain suitable protective barricades and fences around the
obstruction or area occupied and shall at all times provide a safe,
adequate and unobstructed passageway not less than four feet in
clear width for the use of pedestrians.
(2) When materials are to be moved over the sidewalks by means of a
derrick, crane, hoist or chute, the permittee shall provide a safe
and adequate sidewalk shed conforming to the requirements of the
City Engineer or, when so ordered by the City Engineer, shall
provide a safe, adequate and unobstructed temporary sidewalk
around the obstruction or area occupied.
(3) Temporary sidewalks, when so ordered, shall wherever practicable
be built to the same level as the existing sidewalk and in such a
manner as not to interfere with the free flow of water in the street
or gutter.
(4) The permittee shall also make adequate provision for the safe
passage of vehicular traffic by day and by night. Where the free
flow of traffic is interfered with, the permittee shall designate
competent persons to direct and expedite traffic by means of lights
or flags.
H. Loading and unloading across sidewalk. No permit for street
obstruction shall be required for the loading or unloading, across a
sidewalk area of goods, wares or merchandise which are in the process
of being transferred to or from trucks or other vehicles standing at the
curbline; provided, however, that such loading or unloading shall be
conducted in the most prompt manner possible and shall be subject to
such laws and ordinances as may be adopted by the City.
I. Damage resulting from street obstructions. Any damage resulting from
the obstruction, encumbrance or occupation of a public street, highway
or sidewalk area or from the storage of materials or operation of
§ 167-13 SIGNS § 167-13
165:543
§ 167-14. Containers for construction debris.
construction equipment or machinery shall be repaired by the
permittee to the satisfaction of the City Engineer when so ordered.
J. Lights required for obstructions. Any person who places or causes to be
placed in any of the streets or public places of the City any building
materials, earth, stone, sand, containers, trailers or any other
obstruction shall cause sufficient light or lights to be maintained at such
locations to protect travelers and pedestrians against damage or injury
by reason thereof.
A. Permit required.
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall place or cause to be placed any
container used for collection and storage of construction debris in
any street, sidewalk area or public place, without first obtaining a
written permit for said container from the City Clerk.
(2) Such permits shall be valid for an effective period stated on the
application not to exceed 30 consecutive calendar days. Such
effective period may be extended, if so requested in writing by the
permittee prior to expiration thereof, for such additional period as
the City Engineer, at his discretion, may authorize.
B. Application for permit. Any person, firm or corporation desiring a
permit for placing a container for collection and storage of construction
debris in a public street, shall make application therefor to the City
Engineer upon forms provided for that purpose. Said application shall
contain the names and addresses of the applicant and of the owner of
the property in front of which the container is to be placed, the location
of such property, sheet, block and lot designation thereof, and a signed
statement by the applicant that the said applicant agrees to abide by all
the conditions of the permit, the provisions of the Code of the City and
the applicable rules and regulations of the Engineering Department.
C. Insurance required.
(1) No permit for a container, as described in § 167-14A, shall be
issued by the City Engineer until the applicant shall have complied
with § 167-8C of this article.
(2) Such insurance must remain in force through the effective period
of the permit as well as any authorized extensions thereof and shall
carry an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company will
give at least 10 days' written notice to the City of Rye of any
modification or cancellation of any such insurance.
D. Deposits and fees. No permit for a container for the collection and
storage of construction debris stored in a public street shall be issued
by the City Clerk unless and until the applicant heretofore has paid, in
cash or by check payable to the City of Rye, the following amounts:
§ 167-13 RYE CODE § 167-14
165:544
§ 167-15. (Reserved)
§ 167-16. (Reserved)
§ 167-17. (Reserved)
§ 167-18. (Reserved)
§ 167-19. (Reserved)
§ 167-20. (Reserved)
§ 167-21. (Reserved)
§ 167-22. (Reserved)
§ 167-23. (Reserved)
§ 167-24. (Reserved)
§ 167-25. (Reserved)
§ 167-26. (Reserved)
§ 167-27. (Reserved)
§ 167-28. (Reserved)
§ 167-29. (Reserved)
[Amended 12-16-1992 by L.L. No. 19-1992; 12-18-1996 by L.L.
No. 15-1996]
(1) A deposit of $150 per location, per container.
(2) A fee of $50 per day, per location, per container.
E. Additional regulations. The provisions of § 167-13G through J of this
article referable to safeguarding pedestrian and other traffic, loading
and unloading across sidewalk, damage resulting from street
obstructions and lights required for obstructions shall be applicable to
this section.
F. Reflectors. Each container shall have not less than two reflectors
permanently mounted on each side of the container, not less than two
feet above the bottom of the container.
G. Identification. The name, address and telephone number of the owner
of the container shall be imprinted upon one side of the container in
letters not less than three inches in height.
§ 167-14 SIGNS § 167-30
165:545
§ 167-30. (Reserved)
§ 167-31. (Reserved)
§ 167-32. (Reserved)
§ 167-33. (Reserved)
§ 167-34. (Reserved)
§ 167-35. (Reserved)
§ 167-36. (Reserved)
§ 167-37. (Reserved)
§ 167-38. (Reserved)
§ 167-39. (Reserved)
§ 167-40. (Reserved)
§ 167-41. (Reserved)
§ 167-42. (Reserved)
§ 167-43. (Reserved)
§ 167-44. (Reserved)
§ 167-45. (Reserved)
§ 167-46. (Reserved)
§ 167-30 RYE CODE § 167-46
165:546
ARTICLE III
Sidewalks
[Adopted 2-4-1942 as Art. 3 of Ch. 5 of the General Ordinances]
§ 167-47. Removal of snow and ice. [Amended 11-17-1948;
8-16-1961 by Ord. No. 11-1961]
Every owner, lessee, occupant and other person having charge of any
building or lot of ground fronting or abutting upon a sidewalk, including any
unpaved area used as a sidewalk or walkway, on any public street or public
place in the City of Rye shall, within 24 hours after the cessation of every fall
of snow or the formation of any ice on the sidewalk in front of or adjacent
to said building or lot of ground, remove or cause the said snow or ice to be
removed or cleared entirely from the said sidewalk; provided that in case
the snow or ice on any sidewalk in front of or adjacent to said building or lot
of ground shall be frozen so hard that it cannot practically be removed, the
owner, lessee, occupant or other person having charge thereof shall, within
the time hereinabove specified, cover and strew the said sidewalk or cause
it to be covered and strewn with sifted ashes, sand or some other similar
material and shall, as soon thereafter as weather will permit, thoroughly
clean said sidewalk and remove the said ice and snow therefrom.
§ 167-48. Removal of snow and ice by City; costs; penalties.
[Amended 11-17-1948; 8-16-1961 by Ord. No. 11-1961; 12-15-2010
by L.L. No. 11-201039]
A. In addition to any penalty that may be imposed for any violation of
§ 167-47 hereof, if the sidewalk in front of or adjacent to any building or
lot of ground as aforesaid shall not be cleaned of snow or ice or covered
with ashes, sand or some other similar material before the expiration of
the time hereinabove specified for cleaning or covering the same, then
and in that event the City may proceed to so clean or cover the said
sidewalk as provided in § 167-47 hereof, and the cost or expense of
doing said work shall be ascertained and a report thereof shall be
forthwith filed in the office of the Clerk of said City.
B. Cost of work a lien on premises. The cost of said work, as the same shall
appear from the report on file in said City Clerk's office, may be sued for
and recovered from said owner, lessee, occupant or other person having
charge of said building or lot of ground by the City and shall be a lien
upon premises abutting said sidewalk so reported to have been cleaned
or covered as aforesaid. If the said cost is not paid on or before the first
day of April next following, the amount thereof shall be levied as part of
the tax to be collected upon the premises against which said cost shall
be a lien as aforesaid. The same shall be included within the completed
tax roll and collected as part of the taxes against the said premises.
39.Editor's Note: This local law also provided that it would take effect 3-1-2011.
§ 167-47 SIGNS § 167-48
165:547
§ 167-49. Keeping sidewalks clean.
The owner of any building or lot shall keep or cause to be kept the sidewalk
abutting upon said building or lot free from obstructions and nuisances of
every kind and shall sweep and remove or cause to be swept or removed
therefrom all garbage, refuse, filth, dirt and other offensive material and
shall keep such sidewalk free from garbage, refuse, filth, dirt or other
offensive material.
§ 167-50. Repair of sidewalks. [Added 10-21-1964 by Ord. No.
14-1964; amended 6-18-1980 by Ord. No. 3-1980; 12-18-1991 by
L.L. No. 22-1991; 1-22-1997 by L.L. No. 2-1997]
C. Penalties. Any person violating any provision of § 167-47 hereof shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a fine for each offense of not less
than $50 nor more than $100. Each day such violation is permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense. The provisions of this
section shall be inapplicable to snow deposited on the sidewalk by the
City in the course of plowing streets.
A. It shall be the duty of the Department of Public Works to require the
owner of property abutting upon a street to repair or replace any
sidewalk in front thereof that is required to be repaired or replaced.
Where the owner of such property shall fail to neglect to repair or
replace such sidewalk for five days after notice to do so has been served
upon the owner, either personally or by mailing the same to the name of
the last known owner thereof as the same appears on the assessment
roll of the City of Rye for the last calendar year, the Department of
Public Works shall repair or replace such sidewalk, and a statement for
100% of the cost incurred thereby shall be served upon the owner,
either personally or by mailing the same to the name of the last known
owner thereof as the same appears on said assessment roll. If the owner
of the property shall fail to pay the same within 15 days after demand,
the City Assessor shall, in the preparation of the next assessment roll,
assess such amount upon such property, and the same shall be levied,
collected and enforced in the same manner as taxes upon said property
for City purposes are levied, collected and enforced.
B. In the event that personal injury or property damage shall result from
the failure of any owner or other responsible person to comply with the
provisions of this section and § 167-47 above, the owner and such other
person shall be liable to all persons injured, or whose property is
damaged directly or indirectly thereby, and shall be liable to the City to
the extent that said City is required by law or by any court to respond in
damages to any injured party.
§ 167-48 RYE CODE § 167-50
165:548
ARTICLE IV
Street Improvements
[Adopted 9-17-1975 as L.L. No. 2-1975]
§ 167-51. Street improvements upon petition; assessment of costs.
Upon the petition of property owners who own more than 75% of the
lineal front footage of land abutting on any private street or section of a
private street, the City Council shall have the power to cause such street or
section of a private street to be improved, and the expense of such street
improvement, including sewer, storm drain, curbs and sidewalks, shall be
assessed, levied and collected from the owners of the several lots and
parcels of land benefited thereby as herein provided.
§ 167-52. Hearing upon petition; determination; expenses.
Upon receiving the petition, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing
on the petition for the proposed street improvement. If the City Council
shall determine to make such improvement, it shall direct the improvement
to be made. The City Engineer shall keep an itemized account of the
expenses and other necessary costs for the street improvement, including
sewer, storm drain, curbs and sidewalks, and file a certified statement of
such costs and expenses with the City Comptroller.
§ 167-53. Apportionment and assessment of expenses.
The expense of the street improvement, including any preliminary expenses
and borrowing costs, shall be apportioned and assessed upon the lots and
parcels of land abutting the street in proportion to the benefit which each
lot and parcel of land will derive therefrom, which shall be on the basis of
the lineal front footage of the property. The City Council may determine that
a portion of the cost of the improvement shall be borne by the City.
§ 167-54. Preparation of special assessment roll.
After the completion of the street improvement, the City Comptroller shall
determine all of the costs and expenses of the street improvement and fix
the amount chargeable to the City and the amount chargeable to the owners
of the lots and parcels of land abutting the improved street and furnish such
information to the City Assessor. Within 30 days after the completion of the
street improvement, the City Assessor shall prepare a special assessment
roll, which shall describe each lot and parcel of land abutting the said
street and show the name or names of the reputed owners thereof and the
aggregate amount of the assessment to be levied upon such lot or parcel of
land.
§ 167-55. Notice of completion of assessment roll.
Upon completion of such assessment roll, the City Assessor shall cause to be
published in the official newspaper of the City a notice subscribed by him,
§ 167-51 SIGNS § 167-55
165:549
stating that the said assessment roll has been completed and will remain
in the office of the City Assessor for inspection by all persons interested
therein for five business days next following the day of publication. Upon
a day no later than the day of publication of said notice, the City Assessor
shall cause a copy of said notice to be mailed to each of the persons whose
names shall be entered upon such roll. At the expiration of said five days,
the City Assessor shall submit such assessment roll to the City Council.
§ 167-56. Hearing on assessment roll; changes; confirmation.
After the receipt of the special assessment roll, the City Council shall
hold a public hearing thereon upon at least 10 days' notice prior to the
hearing, published in the official newspaper of the City, at which any person
interested may present objections to the confirmation of the assessment
roll. The City Council may make changes in such roll, and it shall confirm
the assessment roll. It shall levy the sum apportioned and assessed upon
each lot and parcel of land and cause the assessment levy to be collected
in the same manner as provided for the collection of City taxes, except as
herein otherwise provided.
§ 167-57. Payment of assessment in installments.
The City Council, upon confirming the assessment roll, may provide that the
assessments may be paid in not more than 10 equal annual installments, to
be collected in the same manner as provided for the collection of City taxes.
When such assessments are paid in installments, the first installment and
interest at 6% per annum, or at such other rate as may be fixed by the City
Council by resolution, on the full assessment from the date of confirmation
of the assessment roll to the date of payment on the first installment, shall
be paid on the first day of February following the confirmation of the roll,
and the first day of February thereafter shall be the anniversary date of
payment of the remaining installments, with accrued interest, in succeeding
years. Interest at the rate of 6% per annum, or at such other rate as may
be fixed by the City Council by resolution, on all unpaid principal balances
shall be paid annually on such anniversary dates. The owner of any premises
assessed may pay any or all installments remaining unpaid, with accrued
interest thereon, at any time prior to the due date of any installment. In
the event that the owner of the assessed premises shall become delinquent
in the payment of his assessment or any installment thereof, the amount in
default shall be collected and enforced in the same manner, by the same
proceedings, at the same time and under the same penalties, in addition
to the aforesaid accrued interest, and have the same lien effect upon the
property, as the general City tax and as part thereof. After the confirmation
of the special assessment roll by the City Council, the City Clerk shall
attach to the roll a warrant signed by the Mayor for the collection of the
assessment or the first installment, if payment is permitted in installments,
and deliver the same to the City Comptroller, who shall proceed in the
same manner as relates to the collection of City taxes. The remaining
installments, as due, shall be extended in a separate column on the tax roll
and shall be payable and collected in each successive year thereafter under
§ 167-55 RYE CODE § 167-57
165:550
the same tax roll and included in the same warrant for the collection of City
taxes.
§ 167-58. Establishment of special fund.
There is hereby established a special fund, which shall be under the
supervision and control of the City Comptroller, into which the proceeds
of any financing and the assessments collected shall be paid for any
improvement financed through such fund as hereinafter provided. The City
Council may determine, by resolution, that the financing of the construction
of any improvement heretofore or hereafter authorized, including the
acquisition of any land or any right in the land therefor, which shall be
paid completely by assessments upon the property benefited or partially by
assessments upon the City, shall be through the aforesaid special fund. The
City Council, upon the completion of any such improvement or at any time
prior thereto, may determine to issue, pursuant to the Local Finance Law,
the obligations of the City in such an amount as said Council may estimate
to be sufficient to pay the entire cost of any such improvement.
§ 167-59. (Reserved)
§ 167-57 SIGNS § 167-59
165:551

ARTICLE V
Newsracks
[Adopted 11-19-1980 by L.L. No. 9-1980]
§ 167-60. Legislative declaration.
The unregulated installation, use or maintenance of newsracks in public
streets will result in the obstruction of sidewalks that will interfere with the
public's right to unhampered passage thereon, will create traffic congestion
or illegal parking or stopping by motorists in order to purchase newspapers,
will damage municipal property because of the chaining of newsracks to
poles, traffic standards or other fixtures, will interfere with the performance
of required municipal services, will create unsightly conditions and will
endanger the safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Rye.
§ 167-61. Word usage; definitions.
§ 167-62. Prohibitions; standards.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future; words in the plural include the singular; and words
in the singular include the plural.
B. For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings given herein:
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person responsible for the installation, use or
maintenance of a newsrack in a public street.
NEWSRACK — Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage
unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and
sale of newspapers, periodicals or other printed matter.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curblines or lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by
pedestrians.
STREET — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public or purposes of vehicular travel, and it includes any alley or public
grounds in the City of Rye.
A. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which projects
onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street.
B. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which in whole or
in part rests upon, in or over any sidewalk or other public place when
such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons
or property or when such site or location is used for public utility
purposes, public transportation purposes or government use or when
§ 167-60 SIGNS § 167-62
165:553
such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the ingress into or egress from any
residence, place of business or any legally parked or stopped vehicle or
the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or
other objects permitted at or near said location.
C. Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any
sidewalk or other public place shall comply with the following
standards:
(1) No newsrack shall exceed four feet in height, 30 inches in width or
two feet in depth.
(2) No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any
property owned or maintained by the City of Rye.
(3) No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
(a) Within three feet of any crosswalk.
(b) Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant.
(c) Within five feet of any fire or police call box or other
emergency facility.
(d) Within five feet of any driveway, public or private.
(e) Within three feet ahead or 15 feet to the rear of any designated
bus stop, taxi stand or place marked for handicapped parking.
(f) Within three feet of any bus bench or shelter.
(g) At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than four feet.
(h) Within three feet of any display window of any building
abutting the sidewalk or other public place in such a manner as
to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window
for display purposes.
(i) No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity
purposes other than that which is essential to identify on no
more than two sides of the newsrack, the newspaper,
periodical or other printed matter offered for sale therein. No
letter thereon shall exceed two square inches in
size. Advertising signs, promotional decorations, banners and
moving signs shall not be permitted on the newsrack, except as
otherwise provided in this subsection.
(j) Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean and neat
condition and in good repair at all times, and it shall be of one
color that does not unnecessarily contrast with the immediate
surroundings, except that the lettering permitted in
Subsection C(3)(i) and (k) of this section may contrast with
§ 167-62 RYE CODE § 167-62
165:554
§ 167-63. Applicability; time limit for compliance.
The provisions of this article shall apply to existing newsracks within the
City of Rye, except that the distributors thereof shall have 30 days within
which to comply with the said provisions or within such additional time as
may be allowed in the discretion of the City Manager.
§ 167-64. Penalties for offenses.
such one color. Neither such one color nor any of the permitted
lettering shall employ reflectorized paint, day-glo, fluorescent
or scotchlite reflective materials or materials of like nature.
(k) Every person who places or maintains a newsrack on the
streets of the City of Rye shall have his name, address and
telephone number affixed thereto in a place where such
information may easily be seen.
A. If any distributor violates any provision of this article, it shall be the
duty of the Commissioner of Police to determine whether or not such a
violation has occurred and thereafter to notify the distributor to correct
the violation within three days thereafter. Such notification and
direction shall be in writing; it shall specify the nature of the violation
and whether or not it warrants removal of the newsrack if not corrected
within three days, and it shall direct correction; it shall be served upon
the distributor in the same manner as a summons; or it shall be
telephoned to the distributor at the telephone number designated by
the distributor as provided in § 167-62C(3)(k) above and confirmed in a
written notice, mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested to
the address designated by the distributor as provided in
§ 167-62C(3)(k) above. During such three-day period, the distributor
shall have a right to a hearing before the Commissioner of Police or his
duly designated representative to determine whether or not such
violation has occurred and whether or not the nature of such claimed
violation warrants removal prior to final determination. At such hearing
the distributor shall have the right to examine the evidence upon which
the Commissioner of Police acted, to cross-examine any witnesses who
may have appeared before him and to offer any evidence which may
tend to show that the subject newsrack does not violate any provision of
this article and that the claimed violation is not of a nature which
warrants removal prior to final determination. The hearing officer shall
promptly review such evidence, notify the distributor of his decision
with respect thereto and, if necessary, afford the distributor a
reasonable opportunity to comply with such determination.
B. If said violation is not corrected within such three-day period or such
further reasonable period as may be contained in the superseding
notice by the Commissioner of Police, the Department of Public Works
shall be directed by the Commissioner of Police to remove such
newsrack and place it in storage in a secure place. The cost of removal
§ 167-62 SIGNS § 167-64
165:555
§ 167-65. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
and storage shall be billed to the distributor, and, in the event of
nonpayment, a civil suit for money damages may be brought by the
Corporation Counsel.
C. If such newsrack is not claimed as provided in the Personal Property
Law, it shall be treated as abandoned property and disposed of as
provided therein.
D. Any distributor who, having been notified and directed as provided
herein to correct a violation of the provisions of this article, fails to
correct such violation as provided in such notice shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be subject to punishment as provided in § 1-15 of the
Code of the City of Rye.
E. Any distributor or other person aggrieved by a finding, determination,
notice or action taken under the provisions of this article may appeal to
the City Manager. An appeal shall be made in writing, and it must be
filed within three days after the receipt of written notice of any
protested decision or action with the Office of the City Manager by a
letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal. A
hearing thereon shall be scheduled to be held on a date no more than
10 days after receipt of such letter. The appellant shall be given at least
five days' notice of the time and place of the hearing. The City Manager
shall give the appellant or any other interested person a reasonable
opportunity to be heard in order to show cause why the determination
or action appealed from should not be upheld. The City Manager shall
make a final determination at the conclusion of the hearing or as soon
thereafter as is practicable. In the event that a distributor is successful
in reversing a determination that the claimed violation was of a nature
which warranted removal pending a final determination, no fee shall be
imposed for the removal and storage of the newsrack which was the
subject of the appeal, and failure to comply with such determination
shall not serve as a basis for prosecution under Subsection D of this
section. The distributor may bring an Article 78 proceeding to review
the decision of the City Manager.
F. Nothing contained in this article shall be interpreted to limit or impair
the exercise by the City of Rye of its police power in the event of an
emergency to remove any newsrack which presents a clear and present
danger of imminent personal injury or property damage to users of the
public streets of this City.
§ 167-64 RYE CODE § 167-65
165:556
ARTICLE VI
Vestibules
[Adopted 10-16-2019 by L.L. No. 7-2019]
§ 167-66. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish regulations for the design,
construction, installation and maintenance of seasonal vestibules in the City
of Rye, in order to maintain safe conditions that protect the well-being of
the community and to allow for additional insulation and protections to be
provided during the winter season.
§ 167-67. Permit required.
§ 167-68. Permit applications.
§ 167-69. Permit conditions; effect on existing vestibules.
A. No person, firm or corporation conducting or maintaining any place of
business in the entire City shall keep, use, erect, construct or maintain
any vestibule in or upon the sidewalks or rights-of-way in the City
unless the person, firm or corporation obtains a vestibule permit from
the City of Rye Building Inspector.
A. All applications for vestibule permits shall be submitted to the City of
Rye Building Department and contain the following information:
(1) The name and business address of the applicant.
(2) The name of the street, alley or sidewalk onto which it is desired to
place the vestibule.
(3) A site plan with appropriate dimensions showing the size and
configuration of the vestibule and the extent of encroachment on
adjacent City property, the location of adjacent buildings and
storefront entrances and the dimensions to City curb and other
existing obstructions (e.g., trees, signs, planters or other street
amenities).
(4) A drawing showing the materials, color and other physical
elements and appearance of the vestibule in sufficient detail to
facilitate review by the Board of Architectural Review.
(5) Other information and plans as may be required by the City of Rye
Building Department.
(6) Application form and fee as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by
the City Council.
B. No vestibule permit shall be issued until the Building Inspector has
approved the proposed vestibule location and the sufficiency of the
pedestrian pathway.
§ 167-66 SIGNS § 167-69
165:557
§ 167-70. Permit denial or revocation; appeal.
A. Any vestibule permit shall be conditioned on the following:
(1) Vestibule permits are effective from November 1 to April 15 each
year. Vestibule permits are only effective for one winter season.
(2) Any vestibule must allow for at least five feet of unobstructed
sidewalk to allow for sufficient pedestrian passage.
(3) Before any permit is issued, the applicant shall furnish the City
with proof of insurance naming the City of Rye as an additional
insured in the amount of at least $2,000,000 in addition to a signed
and notarized hold harmless and indemnification agreement
holding the City of Rye harmless from any liability and
indemnifying the City of Rye. All documents shall be submitted to
the Building Department and subject City Attorney for review and
approval.
(4) All vestibules shall be approved by the City of Rye Board of
Architectural Review prior to receiving a permit, which approval
shall be valid for a period not to exceed three seasons. Upon Board
of Architectural Review approval and prior to the start of each
vestibule season, the applicant shall file with the City Building
Department an application form and fee as set forth in the fee
schedule of the City budget adopted by the City Council. Filing with
the Building Department shall only be permitted if there have been
no enforcement actions against the applicant in the preceding
season for failure to comply with the original permit approved by
the Board of Architectural Review.
B. Any person, firm or corporation which has a vestibule located on the
sidewalk along any streets or City rights-of-way in the City shall
immediately remove same or comply with the terms of this article.
A. The Building Inspector may deny a vestibule permit or modify the above
requirements if such vestibule would interfere with safe pedestrian
passage on a particular area of sidewalk. If the Building Inspector
denies a permit, he/she must state his/her reason(s) for denying the
vestibule permit, in writing, and mail a copy of the written decision to
the applicant.
B. The Building Inspector may issue a notice of violation for persons or
entities violating any provision of this article or conditions of the
approved vestibule permit. Such notice shall be in writing and specify
the provision(s) violated, the remedial action to be taken and the time
limit for compliance, which shall be no less than three days from the
date of the mailing of the notice of violation.
C. If a person, firm or corporation willfully and consistently fails to comply
with the provisions of this article, the City may take any necessary steps
§ 167-69 RYE CODE § 167-70
165:558
§ 167-71. Fees.
Prior to the issuance of a vestibule permit, application and seasonal
licensing fees as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the City Council.
to ensure a clear pedestrian pathway of at least five feet and assess
against such party the costs of maintaining such pedestrian pathway.
D. Right of appeal. Any holder of a vestibule permit who has had his/her
permit revoked or who has been ordered by the Building Inspector to
incur expense in connection with the clearing or maintenance of a
vestibule, or any applicant whose application has been denied, may
appeal to the Board of Appeals within 15 days of such revocation, order
or decision.
§ 167-70 SIGNS § 167-71
165:559
Chapter 170
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Charter, Art. 18.
Architectural review — See Ch. 53.
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 87.
Filling and dredging — See Ch. 92.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 167.
Surtace water control — See Ch. 173.
Trees — See Ch. 187.
Zoning — See Ch. 197.
§ 167-71 RYE CODE § 167-71
165:560
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 170-1. Authority. [Amended 11-15-1967]
By authority of the City Charter, pursuant to the provisions of Article 3 of
the General City Law, the Planning Commission has the power and authority
to approve plats for subdivisions within the City of Rye.
§ 170-2. Declaration of policy.
It is declared to be the policy of the Rye City Planning Cormmission to
consider land subdivisions as part of a plan for the orderly, efficient and
economical development of the city. Land to be subdivided shall be of such
character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger
to health or peril from fire, flood or other menace. Proper provision shall
be made for drainage, water, sewerage and other needed improvements.
The proposed streets shall compose a convenient system conforming to
the Official Map and shall be properiy related to the proposals shown on
the City Development Plan as it is adopted by the Planning Commission.
Streets shall be of such width, grade and location as to accommodate the
prospective traffic, to afford adequate light and air and to facilitate fire
protection. In proper cases, there shall be reservation of park areas of
suitable location, size and character for playground or other recreational
purposes.
§ 170-3. Purpose.
In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with this policy, these
regulations are hereby adopted.
§ 170-1 SIGNS § 170-3
165:561

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 170-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, certain words and terms used herein
are defined as follows:
APPORTIONMENT — The rearrangement of lot lines for the convenience of
two abutting lot owners, where no new building lot is created and no feature
listed in the Table of Regulations in Chapter 197 is made nonconforming or
more nonconforming.[Added 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984]
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within the
City of Rye subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year, as shown on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map as being
within the one-hundred-year-flood boundary.[Added 3-5-1980 by L.L. No.
3-1980]
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, as shown on the Flood Boundary and Floodway
Map.[Added 3-5-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980]
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Procedures and methods pertaining
to construction activities which are intended to minimize water pollution,
retain valuable topsoil and prevent erosion and sedimentation, such as
those practices contained in the Westchester County Best Management
Practices Manual Series.[Added 5-21-1986 by L.L. No. 7-1986]
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES MANUALS — The manuals published
by the County of Westchester and amended from time to time, containing
best management practices and entitled, "Construction Related Activities,
Standards and Specifications, Westchester County New York Best
Management Practices Manual Series" and "Storm Water Management
Westchester County New York Best Practices Manual Series."[Added
5-21-1986 by L.L. No. 7-1986]
CITY DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan for development of
the city prepared and adopted by the Planning Commission pursuant to
Article 3, § 28a, of the General City Law, and includes any part of such plan
separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
CITY STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS — Standards and specifications
approved by the City Engineer for the construction of streets and
improvements customarily provided in street rights-of-way.
CONSTRUCTION PLAN — The maps or drawings accompanying a
subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of
improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the
requirements of the Planning Commission as a condition to the approval of
said plat.
EASEMENT — Authorization by a property owner for the use by another,
and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of this property.
§ 170-4 SIGNS § 170-4
165:563
ENGINEER — A civil engineer licensed as a professional engineer by the
State of New York.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A drawing prepared by a
New York State licensed professional engineer showing the proposed use
of the site and showing the methods, techniques and improvements, both
during and after construction, that will be employed to control erosion
and sedimentation, which shall employ best management practices.[Added
5-21-1986 by Ord. No. 7-1986]
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated the area of special flood
hazard and the regulatory floodway in the City of Rye, effective April 1,
1980, and as amended.[Added 3-5-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980]
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A landscape architect licensed as a
professional architect by the State of New York.[Added 4-7-1976]
OFFICIAL MAP — The map established by the Common Council under
Article 3, § 26, of the General City Law, showing the streets, highways
and parks theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law, and any
amendments or additions thereto adopted by the Common Council, or
additions thereto resulting from the approval of subdivision plats by the
Planning Commission and the subsequent filing of such approved plats.
OFFICIAL SUBMITTAL DATE — The date on which a subdivision plat is
officially submitted to the Planning Commission pursuant to Article 3 of
the General City Law, and hereby defined as the date of the next regular
meeting of the Planning Commission following completion of the application
procedure outlined in § 170-7 of these regulations. If a meeting is not called
within 30 days of completion of such procedure, the "official submittal date"
shall be considered to be the expiration date of such thirty-day period.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of Rye.
PLAT — See "subdivision plat."
PRELIMINARY LAYOUT — The preliminary drawing or drawings described
in § 170-20 of these regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout
of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission for its
consideration.
STREET — Includes streets, roads, avenues, lanes or other ways shown on
the Official Map between right-of-way lines.
STREET, BUSINESS — A street which serves or is designed to serve as an
access to abutting business properties.
STREET, DEAD-END — A street or a portion of a street with only one
vehicular traffic outlet.
STREET, LOCAL RESIDENTIAL — A street intended to serve primarily as
an access to abutting residential properties.
STREET, MAJOR — A street which is used primarily as a route for traffic
between communities or large areas.
§ 170-4 RYE CODE § 170-4
165:564
STREET PAVEMENT — The wearing or exposed surface of the roadway
used by vehicular traffic.
STREET, SECONDARY — A street which serves or is designed to carry
traffic from local residential streets to the system of major streets.
STREET WIDTH — The distance between property lines measured at right
angles to the center line of the street.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association
who shall lay out, for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development,
any subdivision or part thereof as defined herein.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into two or more lots,
plots, sites or other divisions of land, for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of transfer of ownership or building development, and includes
resubdivision. A division of a parcel of land for the purpose of transfer
of ownership, however, shall not be considered a "subdivision" if such
division and transfer does not create one or more new lots or sites for
building or development and does not reduce the size or dimensions of
any parcel remaining after such transfer in such a way as to create or
to increase any nonconfomnity to the requirements of the Building Zone
Ordinance.40[Amended 8-21-1963]
SUBDIVISION PLAT — The final map or drawing, described in § 170-21 of
these regulations, on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented
to the Planning Commission for approval, and which, if approved, may be
submitted to the County Clerk for recording; may also be referred to as
"plat" in the text of these regulations.
SURFACE WATER CONTROL PLAN — A drawing prepared by a New York
State licensed professional engineer showing the methods, techniques and
improvements, both during and after construction, that will be employed
to control surface water runoff, and shall contain all surface water control
calculations, unless set forth in an accompanying document.[Added
5-21-1986 by L.L. No. 7-1986]
SURVEYOR — A person licensed as a land surveyor by the State of New
York.
TREE PRESERVATION PLAN — The map accompanying a subdivision plat
and showing the species, size and location of all trees 10 inches or more
in caliper, identifying those trees which must be preserved and those trees
which may be removed and the location, size and species of trees which
will be installed in accordance with the requirements of the Planning
Commission as a condition of approval of said plat.[Added 4-7-1976]
ZONING ORDINANCE — The officially adopted Building Zone Ordinance of
the city, together with any and all amendments thereto. 41
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Zoning.
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Zoning.
§ 170-4 SIGNS § 170-4
165:565

ARTICLE III
Procedure for Filing Subdivision Applications
§ 170-5. Applicability and general procedure. [Amended 8-21-1963;
11-15-1967]
A. Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract is
made for the transfer of ownership of any part thereof and before any
permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall
be granted, the subdivider or his authorized agent shall apply for and
secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the
following procedure, which includes basically two steps:
(1) Preliminary layout.
(2) Subdivision plat.
B. Resubdivision. For a resubdivision, the same procedure, rules and
regulations shall apply as for a subdivision.
C. Small subdivision. For a subdivision or resubdivision which does not
create one or more new streets or highways, nor, in the opinion of the
City Engineer, involves any drainage improvements such as are
provided for in § 170-15B, nor any reservation of land or easement as is
provided for in § 170-17, and which complies in every respect with such
other requirements of Article IV as are relevant, the Planning
Commission, upon application by the subdivider, may waive all or part
of the preliminary layout material required to be submitted under
§ 170-20 and of the procedure for tentative approval specified in
§ 170-6.
D. Informal review. Prior to making an application for tentative approval of
a preliminary layout, as provided for in § 170-6 of this chapter, the
subdivider may request an informal review of his subdivision concept by
the Planning Commission. The request shall be made by submitting a
letter explaining the concept, with a sketch layout attached, along with
17 copies, and be accompanied by an informal review application fee.
The City Council shall set the fee annually by resolution before adoption
of the budget. The letter shall be presented to the City Planner for filing
with the Planning Commission. Prior to the meeting at which the
informal review will be heard, the subdivider shall post a sign on the
property in accordance with the same requirements as set forth in
§ 170-7C(6) of this chapter for a public hearing. [Added 4-4-1990 by
L.L. No. 9-1990; amended 12-18-1991 by L.L. No. 30-1991;
12-16-1992 by L.L. No. 20-1992; 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 13-1998]
E. Exemptions for historic properties. This chapter shall not apply to lots
created by the donation of portions of historic sites to a nonprofit
educational corporation for the purposes of historic preservation and
adaptive reuse, subject to the following limitations: [Added 6-16-1993
by L.L. No. 7-1993]
§ 170-5 SIGNS § 170-5
165:567
§ 170-6. Procedure for tentative approval of preliminary layout.
(1) The land and buildings located thereon are designated as protected
sites and structures pursuant to Chapter 117, Landmarks
Preservation, of the Code of the City of Rye and listed on the
National Register of Historic Places.
(2) A certificate of appropriateness is obtained from the Board of
Architectural Review pursuant to Chapter 117, Landmarks
Preservation, of the Code of the City of Rye.
(3) Site plan approval pursuant to § 197-7, Site development plan, of
the Code of the City of Rye and approval of an adaptive reuse
pursuant to § 197-10, Uses permitted subject to additional
standards and requirements, of the Code of the City of Rye are
obtained from the Planning Commission.
(4) If such lot or lots do not have frontage on an approved and
improved street, a variance must be obtained from the Board of
Appeals, as permitted by General City Law, to be provided by an
easement to a street or an easement to another lot which has actual
street frontage.
A. Discussion of requirements. Before preparing the preliminary layout, it
is recommended that the subdivider discuss with the Planning
Commission, or its representative, the requirements as to general
layout of streets and for reservations of land, tree preservation, street
improvements, drainage, sewerage, water, fire protection, other
community services and facilities and similar matters, as well as the
availability of existing services. The subdivider should also discuss the
preliminary layout with the County Health Department, which must
eventually approve any subdivision plat. [Amended 4-7-1976]
B. Application procedure. [Amended 2-19-1964; 12-5-1984 by L.L. No.
17-1984; 10-19-1988 by L.L. No. 16-1988; 11-2-1988 by L.L. No.
18-1988]
(1) Prior to filing application for the approval of a subdivision plat, the
subdivider shall file application for tentative approval of a
preliminary layout. The application shall:
(a) Be made on forms available at the office of the City Planner.
(b) Be accompanied by a minimum of 13 copies of the preliminary
layout as described in § 170-20 of these regulations and
complying in all respects with Article IV of these regulations
and with the provisions of Article 3 of the General City Law.
(c) Be presented to the City Planner for filing at the next regular
meeting of the Planning Commission.
§ 170-5 RYE CODE § 170-6
165:568
(d) Be accompanied by an application fee to be set by the City
Council annually by resolution before adoption of the budget.
In addition, the Planning Commission, in the review of the
application, may refer such application to the Westchester
County Soil and Water Conservation District for a written
review. Fees charged by the Westchester County Soil and
Water Conservation District for its written review shall be paid
by the applicant before action is taken on the application.
Payment of the fee shall be a check made payable to the
Westchester County Soil and Water Conservation District and
shall be submitted to the City Planner for transmittal to the
Westchester County Soil and Water Conservation District.
[Amended 4-4-1990 by L.L. No. 9-1990; 4-17-1991 by L.L.
No. 5-1991; 12-18-1991 by L.L. No. 30-1991; 12-16-1992
by L.L. No. 20-1992; 12-18-1996 by L.L. No. 16-1996;
12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 13-1998]
(e) Be accompanied by a public notification list prepared as
described in § 170-6F of these regulations on forms available at
the office of the City Planner.
(2) Due to the large additional administrative and inspection expenses
incurred by the city, an additional application fee, to be set by the
City Council annually by resolution before adoption of the budget,
shall be payable when construction or occupancy has commenced
prior to the issuance of a resolution of approval from the Rye City
Planning Commission or when construction and/or use which
requires modification of a previous approval has commenced prior
to the issuance of a resolution of approval from the Rye City
Planning Commission, except in the following specific cases:
[Added 11-18-1992 by L.L No. 14-1992; amended 12-16-1998
by L.L. No. 13-1998]
(a) The additional fee shall not apply to trees removed without
prior approval; such removal shall remain subject to the fees
set forth in § 170-11B of this chapter.
(b) If a building permit and/or a certificate of occupancy has been
issued by the Building Department or a street opening permit
and/or surface water control permit has been issued by the
Engineering Department prior to construction, the additional
fee shall be reduced by 75%.
(c) The additional fee shall not apply to minor variations in the
siting of buildings and other site improvements; such site
variations shall remain subject to the fees set forth in
§ 170-11B of this chapter.
(3) The Planning Commission in the review of any application may
refer such application to such engineering, planning, legal,
technical or environmental consultant or other professionals,
§ 170-6 SIGNS § 170-6
165:569
hereinafter referred to as "consultant or consultants," as it deems
reasonably necessary to enable it to review such application as
required by law, provided that the required expertise is not
available from city staff, and subject to the following: [Added
10-8-1997 by L.L. No. 13-1997]
(a) The detailed statement of the consulting services to be
provided by the consultant shall include the consultant's fees
for said services and a statement by the consultant that the
applicant, not the city, shall be ultimately responsible to the
consultant for the services provided. The detailed statement
shall be sent to the applicant by the City Planner via certified
mail, return receipt requested.
(b) If the applicant wishes to review the services and the costs
with the Planning Commission, the request for a review shall
be in writing and mailed to the City Planner via certified mail,
return receipt requested, within seven days of the applicant's
receipt of the service and cost statement provided by the City
Planner. The Planning Commission shall review the services
and costs with the applicant at its next regular meeting
following receipt of the request.
(c) The City Planner shall authorize the consultant to proceed if
he/she has not received a written request for a review of the
consultant's services and costs from the applicant within seven
days of the applicant's receipt of the City Planner's transmittal.
The receipt date is the date shown as received on the return
receipt card returned by the post office.
(d) The applicant shall pay the consultant's fee upon receipt of the
consultant's detailed statement for the services provided. The
statement will be forwarded to the applicant by the City
Planner.
(e) Payment of the consultant's fees shall be required in addition
to any and all other fees required by this or any other section of
this chapter or any other city law or regulation.
(f) The Planning Commission document taking final action on the
application shall not be issued until all consultant's fees
charged in connection with the review of the applicant's
project have been paid. Payment of the consultant's fees shall
be by check made payable to the consultant and shall be
submitted to the City Planner for transmittal to the consultant.
(g) This Subsection B(3) shall expire two years after the date of its
adoption, unless specifically reenacted by the City Council.
C. Proposed roads to be staked. To permit the Planning Commission to
check the proposed subdivision street layout, the Commission may
require that certain roads shall be staked along their center line every
§ 170-6 RYE CODE § 170-6
165:570
50 feet. Each stake shall be marked so that it can be located on the
preliminary layout and shall show approximate height of proposed cut
or fill at that point.
D. Attendance of subdivider at Planning Commission meeting. It is
recommended that the subdivider or his authorized representative
attend a meeting of the Planning Commission to discuss the preliminary
layout.
E. Study of layout. The Planning Commission will carefully study the
preliminary layout, taking into consideration the requirements of these
regulations and the best use of the land being subdivided. Particular
attention will be given to the arrangement, location and width of
streets, their relation to the topography of the land, tree preservation,
sewage disposal, drainage, lot sizes and arrangement, the future
development of adjoining lands as yet unsubdivided, the requirements
of the Official Map and the requirements of the City Development Plan
as adopted by the Planning Commission. [Amended 4-7-1976]
F. Informal public hearing and public notification by subdivider. The
Planning Commission, at its discretion, may hold an informal public
hearing on the preliminary layout, particularly where the layout of the
subdivision will affect adjacent properties. In the event that more than
one informal public hearing is held, a fee, to be set by the City Council
annually by resolution before adoption of the budget, shall be paid for
each additional informal public hearing. To facilitate notification of the
public, a public notification list shall be prepared by the subdivider,
using the most current City of Rye Tax Maps and Tax Assessment Roll,
showing the Tax Map sheet, block and lot number, the owner's name
and owner's mailing address for each property located wholly or
partially within 300 feet of the perimeter of the property that is the
subject of the application. If a property on the public notification list is
also listed as a cooperative or an apartment on a list entitled
"Apartment List City of Rye," maintained by the City Assessor's office,
the notice shall only be mailed to the property owner of record. When
an informal public hearing is required by the Planning Commission, the
subdivider shall deliver a copy of the public notice provided by the City
Planner to all of the property owners contained on the public
notification list and shall post a sign on the property in accordance with
the following requirements: [Amended 11-2-1988 by L.L. No.
18-1988; 11-20-1991 by L.L. No. 20-1991; 12-18-1991 by L.L. No.
30-1991; 12-18-1996 by L.L. No. 16-1996; 12-16-1998 by L.L. No.
13-1998; 3-10-2010 by L.L. No. 4-201042]
(1) The mailing shall be limited solely to the public notice provided to
the applicant by the City Planner.
(2) The public notice shall be mailed to all property owners by certified
mail with certificate of mailing (no return receipt necessary) at a
42.Editor's Note: This local law provided that it shall take effect 5-1-2010.
§ 170-6 SIGNS § 170-6
165:571
§ 170-7. Procedure for approval of subdivision plat.
post office or official depository of the Postal Service, at least 10
days prior to the date of the public hearing.
(3) At least five business days prior to the public hearing, the
subdivider shall provide to the City Planner all certificates of
mailing.
(4) At least one week preceding the date of the public hearing at least
one sign, a minimum of two feet by three feet in size and carrying a
legend prescribed by the Planning Commission announcing the
public hearing, shall be posted on the property. The height of the
lettering on the sign shall be no less than two inches, except that
the words "PUBLIC NOTICE" appearing at the top of the sign shall
have no less than five-inch-high lettering. The sign shall be in full
public view from the street and not more than 30 feet therefrom.
The sign shall be removed from the property within two days after
the public hearing.
(5) In accordance with General City Law, at least five days prior to the
public hearing, the City will publish a notice regarding the public
hearing in the official newspaper of the City. The applicant shall be
responsible for payment of all fees associated with such publication
and any subsequent publication necessary.
G. Required changes for tentative approval. After discussion of the
preliminary layout, the Planning Commission shall advise the
subdivider, in writing, of the specific changes, if any, it will require in
the layout and of the character and extent of required improvements
and land reservations which it will require as a prerequisite to the
approval of the subdivision plat. This shall constitute tentative approval
of the preliminary layout, but prior to approval of the subdivision plat,
the Planning Commission may require additional changes as a result of
further study of the subdivision in final form.
A. Application procedure. [Amended 8-21-1963; 2-19-1964; 4-7-1976;
10-12-1976; 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984; 5-21-1986 by L.L.
No. 7-1986; 10-19-1988 by L.L. No. 16-1988; 11-2-1988 by L.L.
No. 18-1988]
(1) Within one year of the tentative approval of the preliminary layout
or of the waivers granted under § 170-5C, the subdivider, if he
wishes to proceed with the subdivision, shall file with the Planning
Commission an application for approval of a subdivision plat.
Failure to do so voids the tentative approval of the preliminary
layout, unless the subdivider is granted an extension of this period
by the Planning Commission. Such application shall:
(a) Be made on forms available at the office of the City Planner.
§ 170-6 RYE CODE § 170-7
165:572
(b) Include the entire subdivision or a section thereof. (See
§ 170-13C.)
(c) Be accompanied by a minimum of 14 copies of the subdivision
plat, tree preservation plan, construction plans, erosion and
sediment control plan and surface water control plan, as
described in § 170-21 of these regulations.
(d) Not be accepted or considered officially filed unless it complies
in all respects with § 170-21 and with the preliminary layout as
approved.
(e) Be presented to the City Planner for filing at the next regular
meeting of the Planning Commission.
(f) Be accompanied by an application fee, except that the fee for a
subdivision or resubdivision subject to the waiver provisions of
§ 170-5C shall be as set forth therein. In the event that more
than one public hearing is held, a fee shall be paid for each
additional public hearing. The City Council shall set the fees
annually by resolution before adoption of the budget. In
addition, the Planning Commission in the review of the
application may refer such application to the Westchester
County Soil and Water Conservation District for a written
review. Fees charged by the Westchester County Soil and
Water Conservation District for its written review shall be paid
by the applicant before action is taken on the application.
Payment of the fee shall be by a check made payable to the
Westchester County Soil and Water Conservation District and
shall be submitted to the City Planner for transmittal to the
Westchester County Soil and Water Conservation District.
[Amended 4-4-1990 by L.L. No. 9-1990; 4-17-1991 by L.L.
No. 5-1991; 12-18-1991 by L.L. No. 30-1991; 12-16-1992
by L.L. No. 20-1992; 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 13-1998]
(g) Be accompanied by a public notification list prepared as
described in § 170-7C of these regulations on forms available
at the office of the City Planner.
(2) Due to the large additional administrative and inspection expenses
incurred by the city, an additional application fee, to be set by the
City Council annually by resolution before adoption of the budget,
shall be payable when construction or occupancy has commenced
prior to the issuance of a resolution of approval from the Rye City
Planning Commission or when construction and/or use which
requires modification of a previous approval has commenced prior
to the issuance of a resolution of approval from the Rye City
Planning Commission, except in the following specific cases:
[Added 11-18-1992 by L.L. No. 14-1992; amended
12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 13-1998]
§ 170-7 SIGNS § 170-7
165:573
(a) The additional fee shall not apply to trees removed without
prior approval; such removal shall remain subject to the fees
set forth in § 170-11B of this chapter.
(b) If a building permit and/or a certificate of occupancy has been
issued by the Building Department or a street opening permit
and/or surface water control permit has been issued by the
Engineering Department prior to construction, the additional
fee shall be reduced by 75%.
(c) The additional fee shall not apply to minor variations in the
siting of buildings and other site improvements; such site
variations shall remain subject to the fees set forth in
§ 170-11B of this chapter.
(3) The Planning Commission in the review of any application may
refer such application to such engineering, planning, legal,
technical or environmental consultant or other professionals,
hereinafter referred to as "consultant or consultants," as it deems
reasonably necessary to enable it to review such application as
required by law, provided that the required expertise is not
available from city staff, and subject to the following: [Added
10-8-1997 by L.L. No. 13-1997]
(a) The detailed statement of the consulting services to be
provided by the consultant shall include the consultant's fees
for said services and a statement by the consultant that the
applicant, not the city, shall be ultimately responsible to the
consultant for the services provided. The detailed statement
shall be sent to the applicant by the City Planner via certified
mail, return receipt requested.
(b) If the applicant wishes to review the services and the costs
with the Planning Commission, the request for a review shall
be in writing and mailed to the City Planner via certified mail,
return receipt requested, within seven days of the applicant's
receipt of the service and cost statement provided by the City
Planner. The Planning Commission shall review the services
and costs with the applicant at its next regular meeting
following receipt of the request.
(c) The City Planner shall authorize the consultant to proceed if
he/she has not received a written request for a review of the
consultant's services and costs from the applicant within seven
days of the applicant's receipt of the City Planners transmittal.
The receipt date is the date shown as received on the return
receipt card returned by the post office.
(d) The applicant shall pay the consultant's fee upon receipt of the
consultant's detailed statement for the services provided. The
§ 170-7 RYE CODE § 170-7
165:574
statement will be forwarded to the applicant by the City
Planner.
(e) Payment of the consultant's fees shall be required in addition
to any and all other fees required by this or any other section of
this chapter or any other city law or regulation.
(f) The Planning Commission document taking final action on the
application shall not be issued until all consultant's fees
charged in connection with the review of the applicant's
project have been paid. Payment of the consultant's fees shall
be by check made payable to the consultant and shall be
submitted to the City Planner for transmittal to the consultant.
(g) This Subsection A(3) shall expire two years after the date of its
adoption, unless specifically reenacted by the City Council.
B. Endorsement of County and State Health Departments. The proposed
subdivision plat shall be properly endorsed by the County Health
Department, as required by the County Sanitary Code, before any
public hearing is scheduled. The plat should be in final form before
submission to the County Health Department for approval. Where the
proposed subdivision is to be served by sanitary sewers, proof of State
Health Department approval shall also be submitted.
C. Public hearing and public notification by subdivider. Before the
Planning Commission acts on any subdivision plat, it shall hold a public
hearing thereon in accordance with the General City Law. To facilitate
notification of the public, a public notification list shall be prepared by
the subdivider, using the most current City of Rye Tax Maps and Tax
Assessment Roll, showing the Tax Map sheet, block and lot number, the
owner's name and owner's mailing address for each property located
wholly or partially within 300 feet of the perimeter of the property that
is the subject of the application. If a property on the public notification
list is also listed as a cooperative or an apartment on a list entitled
"Apartment List City of Rye," maintained by the City Assessor's office,
the notice shall only be mailed to the property owner of record. When
an informal public hearing is required by the Planning Commission, the
subdivider shall deliver a copy of the public notice provided by the City
Planner to all of the property owners contained on the public
notification list and shall post a sign on the property in accordance with
the following requirements: [Amended 11-2-1988 by L.L. No.
18-1988; 11-20-1991 by L.L. No. 20-1991; 3-10-2010 by L.L. No.
4-201043]
(1) The mailing shall be limited solely to the public notice provided to
the applicant by the City Planner.
(2) The public notice shall be mailed to all property owners by certified
mail with certificate of mailing (no return receipt necessary) at a
43.Editor's Note: This local law provided that it shall take effect 5-1-2010.
§ 170-7 SIGNS § 170-7
165:575
post office or official depository of the Postal Service, at least 10
days prior to the date of the public hearing.
(3) At least five business days prior to the public hearing, the
subdivider shall provide to the City Planner all certificates of
mailing.
(4) At least one week preceding the date of the public hearing at least
one sign, a minimum of two feet by three feet in size and carrying a
legend prescribed by the Planning Commission announcing the
public hearing, shall be posted on the property. The height of the
lettering on the sign shall be no less than two inches, except that
the words "PUBLIC NOTICE" appearing at the top of the sign shall
have no less than five-inch-high lettering. The sign shall be in full
public view from the street and not more than 30 feet therefrom.
The sign shall be removed from the property within two days after
the public hearing.
(5) In accordance with General City Law, at least five days prior to the
public hearing, the City will publish a notice regarding the public
hearing in the official newspaper of the City. The applicant shall be
responsible for payment of all fees associated with such publication
and any subsequent publication necessary.
D. Action on subdivision plat. The Planning Commission shall, within 45
days from the official submittal date of the subdivision plat, approve,
modify and approve or disapprove the plat. If the plat is disapproved,
the reasons for such action shall be stated on the records of the
Planning Commission and a copy of such reasons will be sent to the
subdivider. If the plat is approved, it shall not be signed by the approved
officers of the Planning Commission until the subdivider has met all the
conditions of the action granting approval of such plat.
E. Plat void if revised after approval. No changes, erasures, modifications
or revisions shall be made in any subdivision plat after approval has
been indicated by signature on the plat. In the event that any
subdivision plat, when recorded, contains any such changes, the plat
shall be considered null and void, and the Commission shall institute
proceedings to have said plat stricken from the records of the County
Clerk.
F. Signing of subdivision plat.
(1) The appropriate officers to sign an approved subdivision plat shall
be the Chairman and the Secretary. In the absence of the
Chairman, the Vice Chairman shall be authorized to sign in his
place.
(2) Every subdivision plat submitted to the Commission for its approval
shall carry the following endorsement:
§ 170-7 RYE CODE § 170-7
165:576
§ 170-8. Required improvements and agreements.
"Approved by Resolution ______ of the Planning Commission of the
City of Rye, New York, on the _____ day of _________20___, subject
to all requirements and conditions of said Resolution. Any change,
erasure, modification or revision of this plat, as approved, shall
void this approval.
Signed this ______ day of ________ 20____."
Chairman
Secretary
G. Duplicate of approved plat. The subdivider, before filing the plat, shall
have a duplicate made on tracing cloth and deliver this duplicate to the
Planning Commission for its files.
A. Improvements and performance bond.
(1) Following an action by the Planning Commission approving a
subdivision plat and before the plat is signed by the appropriate
officers of the Planning Commission, the subdivider shall be
required to complete, in accordance with the Planning
Commission's decision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer
or any other official authorized by law to act, all the street, sanitary
and all other improvements specified or not officially waived in the
action approving said plat, or, as an alternative, to file with the
Planning Commission a bond estimated by the Commission as
sufficient to secure to the city the satisfactory construction and
installation of the uncompleted portion of the required
improvements. Such performance bond shall comply with the
requirements of Article 3, Section 33, of the General City Law, and
shall be satisfactory to the Corporation Counsel as to form,
sufficiency and manner of execution.
(2) A period of one year or such other period as the Planning
Commission may determine appropriate, not to exceed three years,
within which required improvements must be completed, shall be
specified by the Planning Commission and expressed in the bond.
The bond shall provide that an amount determined adequate by the
Planning Commission shall be retained for a period of one year
after the date of completion of the required improvements to
assure their satisfactory condition. The bond shall also provide for
the satisfactory maintenance of streets in case the subdivider takes
advantage of the provisions of § 170-10. All required improvements
shall be made by the subdivider at his expense, without
reimbursement by the city.
§ 170-7 SIGNS § 170-8
165:577
(3) Waiver of required improvements. The Planning Commission may
waive, for such period as it may determine, the provision of any or
all such improvements as in its judgment are not necessary in the
interests of the public health, safety and general welfare. In the
case of each waiver granted, the Planning Commission shall enter
upon its records the reason or reasons why the particular
improvement is not necessary, and it shall attach appropriate
conditions or require such guaranties as may be necessary to
protect the public interest.
(4) Modification of design of improvements. If at any time before or
during the construction of the required improvements it is
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that
unforeseen conditions make it necessary or preferable to modify
the location or design of such required improvements, the City
Engineer may authorize such modifications upon written request of
the subdivider, provided that such modifications are within the
spirit and intent of the Planning Commission's approval and do not
extend to the waiver or substantial alteration of the function of any
improvement required by the Commission. The City Engineer shall
issue any authorization under this subsection in writing and shall
transmit a copy of such authorization to the Planning Commission
for approval at its next regular meeting.
(5) Modification of tree preservation plan. At such time as a building
permit or surface water control permit is requested for the initial
development of a main building on a lot in an approved subdivision,
the applicant for the permit shall submit a site layout for the
proposed improvements on the lot to the City Planner. The City
Planner shall review the proposed site improvements and the
approved subdivision tree preservation plan and determine if the
proposed improvements will result in the removal of or damage to
any tree identified for preservation on the tree preservation plan.
When the City Planner determines that the proposed improvements
will require the removal of a tree designated for preservation or
will result in damage to the tree by way of grading, removal of root
systems or alteration of the surface water runoff, he shall advise
the applicant of his findings and request that the applicant revise
his layout so as to avoid these conditions or to seek a modification
of the subdivision approval from the Planning Commission. All
plans submitted for review by the City Planner shall include an
accurate topographic site plan, indicating existing and proposed
contours, supplemented with critical spot elevations; plans for all
proposed buildings, which shall include finished floor elevations; all
trees located on the lot, which are designated for preservation or
required to be installed under the subdivision tree preservation
plan; driveways, entrance walks, exterior stairs and walls; and
other proposed site improvements. No building permit or surface
water control permit shall be issued until the City Planner has
advised the issuing officers, in writing, that the proposed
§ 170-8 RYE CODE § 170-8
165:578
improvements are consistent with the subdivision tree preservation
plan. [Added 4-7-1976]
B. Inspection of improvements.
(1) Prior to the start of construction of any required improvements, the
subdivider shall furnish to the City Engineer a copy of the
specifications included in any contract entered into by the
subdivider for such construction.
(2) The construction of all required improvements shall be supervised
by a registered professional engineer employed by the subdivider,
who, after completion of construction, shall certify to the
Commission that all required improvements have been constructed
as required and approved by the Commission or as such
requirements have been modified by the City Engineer under
Subsection A(4) above, and shall furnish to the City Engineer a
certified plan showing all improvements as constructed in the same
detail as required for the approved construction plan by § 170-21C.
(3) The City Engineer or other designated official shall inspect
required improvements during the construction to assure their
satisfactory completion, and the Planning Commission shall require
a certificate from such official stating that all required
improvements have been satisfactorily completed. The City Planner
shall inspect the subdivision for compliance with the conditions of
approval. The subdivider shall pay to the city an inspection fee, to
be set by the City Council annually by resolution before adoption of
the budget, and the subdivision plat shall not be signed by the
Chairman and the Secretary of the Planning Commission until such
fee has been paid. In order to facilitate inspection, the subdivider's
engineer shall set stakes not more than 50 feet apart outside of the
area to be disturbed by construction along all street utility and
drainage lines to be built, marked with proper center-line stations,
offset from the center line and cut or fill at center line. Where
several lines run parallel to each other, only one set of stakes shall
be required. [Amended 10-12-1976; 10-19-1988 by L.L. No.
16-1988; 4-4-1990 by L.L. No. 9-1990; 12-18-1991 by L.L. No.
30-1991; 12-16-1992 by L.L. No. 20-1992; 12-16-1998 by L.L.
No. 13-1998]
(4) If the City Engineer finds, upon inspection, that any of the required
improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the
approved plans, the subdivider shall be responsible for completing
said improvements according to specifications. If the City Engineer
or other duly designated official does not carry out inspection of
required improvements during construction, the subdivider or the
bonding company shall not in any way be relieved of their
responsibilities.
§ 170-8 SIGNS § 170-8
165:579
C. Utilities. Where utilities required by the Planning Commission are to be
installed by a public utility company, the Planning Commission, in its
discretion, may accept assurance from the public utility company, in
writing, that such installations will be furnished by the company within
a specified period of time and in accordance with the approved
construction plans.
D. Future status of streets, parks and easements.
(1) The subdivider may add as part of the plat a notation, if he so
desires, to the effect that no offer of dedication of certain or all of
the streets and parks shown on the plat is made to the public.
Formal offer of cession to the public of all streets and parks not
marked with such notation on the plat shall be filed with the
Planning Commission prior to approval of the plat by the Planning
Commission. Acceptance of any such offer shall rest with the
Common Council. In the event that the subdivider shall elect not to
file the plat in the office of the County Clerk within the ninety-day
period required by law, then such formal offer of cession shall be
deemed to be void.
(2) There shall be submitted to the Planning Commission prior to the
approval of the plat:
(a) Copies of agreements or other documents providing for the
suitable maintenance of all streets and parks not offered to the
public and setting forth the standards and conditions of
maintenance.
(b) Statements of all rights which exist with respect to the use of
such property.
(c) Agreements permitting entrance by the City of Rye and/or
responsible public utility on streets, parks or easements for the
purpose of installing or repairing required improvements in
the event of nonperformance under the terms of the bond.
(d) Agreements permitting entrance by the City of Rye and/or the
responsible public utility on streets, parks or easements for the
purpose of repairing or replacing utility and drainage lines.
These agreements or reference to them shall be noted on the
plat.
(3) The approval by the Planning Commission of a subdivision plat
shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the
Common Council of any street, park, playground or other open
space shown on said plat. The Planning Commission may require
said plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. The
Planning Commission may also require the filing of a written
agreement by the subdivider, satisfactory to the Common Council,
covering future title, dedication and provision for the cost of
§ 170-8 RYE CODE § 170-8
165:580
§ 170-9. Filing of approved subdivision plat. [Amended 2-19-1964]
Upon the completion of all requirements set forth in these regulations or
in the action approving the subdivision plat, the plat shall be signed by the
appropriate officers of the Planning Commission and shall be filed by the
subdivider in the office of the County Clerk. Any subdivision plat not so filed
within 90 days after approval by the Planning Commission shall become null
and void, as provided in Article 3, § 32, of the General City Law.
§ 170-10. Improvements required before occupancy of buildings.
Where a permit is desired for occupancy of a building in a subdivision
prior to the completion of the improvements as required in the Planning
Commission's approval of the subdivision plat, the provisions of Section
9-8.2(c) (iv) of the Zoning Ordinance44 shall be complied with to assure that
the traveled way serving the proposed building is adequate for vehicular
access by the occupant and by police and fire equipment prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy and that, where such certificate
has been issued, the street will be maintained in suitable condition. The
subdivider shall maintain the traveled ways or streets within the subdivision
under the above-described circumstances and, in addition, those public
or private streets abutting or adjacent to the subdivision wherein the
subdivider has or will have done any construction work in connection
with the subdivision. The subdivider's responsibility to maintain streets in
condition suitable for all-weather traffic shall also extend to those streets on
which no new construction was done but which were damaged by unusually
heavy traffic due to the development of the subdivision. Should he fail to do
so, the City of Rye may undertake necessary maintenance and, in such case,
shall be reimbursed out of part of the performance bond required under
§ 170-8A(1) and (2).
§ 170-11. Modifications in approved subdivisions. [Added
2-19-1964; amended 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984; 10-19-1988 by
L.L. No. 16-1988; 4-4-1990 by L.L. No. 9-1990; 4-17-1991 by L.L. No.
5-1991; 12-18-1991 by L.L. No. 30-1991; 11-18-1992 by L.L. No.
14-1992; 12-16-1992 by L.L. No. 20-1992; 3-6-1996 by L.L. No.
2-1996]
The Planning Commission may grant modifications in approved preliminary
subdivision layouts and subdivision plats or requirements if the Commission
finds that such modifications are consistent with the spirit and intent of
this chapter. Applications for such modifications shall be submitted in
accordance with § 170-6 of these regulations for preliminary subdivision
layouts and § 170-7 of these regulations for subdivision plats, except as
follows:
grading, development, equipping and maintaining of any park or
playground area.
44.Editor's Note: Currently, see Ch. 197, Zoning, § 197-84C(4).
§ 170-8 SIGNS § 170-11
165:581
A. The Planning Commission may waive such items described in § 170-21
of these regulations as it deems necessary.
B. Modification fees.
(1) For modifications of tentative approvals of preliminary subdivision
layouts or requirements, the applicant shall pay to the city an
application fee. If the approval has expired, then the fee shall be
the above fee plus that fee times the number of years or fraction
thereof that have elapsed since the expiration of the approval. The
City Council shall set the fees annually by resolution before
adoption of the budget. [Amended 12-18-1996 by L.L. No.
16-1996; 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 13-1998]
(2) For modifications of subdivision plats or requirements, the
applicant shall pay to the city an application fee. If the approval has
expired, then the fee shall be the above fee plus that fee times the
number of years or fraction thereof that have elapsed since the
expiration of the approval. The City Council shall set the fees
annually by resolution before adoption of the budget. [Amended
12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 13-1998]
(3) In the event that more than one public hearing is held for a
modification of an approved subdivision plat or requirements, a fee
shall be paid for each additional public hearing. The City Council
shall set the fee annually by resolution before adoption of the
budget. [Amended 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 13-1998]
(4) The Planning Commission, in the review of the application, may
refer such application to the Westchester County Soil and Water
Conservation District for a written review. Fees charged by the
Westchester County Soil and Water Conservation District for its
written review shall be paid by the applicant before action is taken
on the application. Payment of the fee shall be a check made
payable to the Westchester County Soil and Water Conservation
District and shall be submitted to the City Planner for transmittal to
the Westchester County Soil and Water Conservation District.
[Amended 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 13-1998]
(5) Due to the large additional administrative and inspection expenses
incurred by the city, an additional application fee, to be set by the
City Council annually by resolution before adoption of the budget,
shall be payable when construction or occupancy has commenced
prior to the issuance of a resolution of approval from the Rye City
Planning Commission, or when construction and/or use which
requires modification of a previous approval has commenced prior
to the issuance of a resolution of approval from the Rye City
Planning Commission, except in the following specific cases:
[Amended 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 13-1998]
§ 170-11 RYE CODE § 170-11
165:582
(a) The additional fee shall not apply to trees removed without
prior approval, such removal shall remain subject to the fees
set forth in § 170-11B(1) and (2) of this section.
(b) If a building permit and/or a certificate of occupancy has been
issued by the Building Department or a street opening permit
and/or Surface Water Control Permit has been issued by the
Engineering Department prior to construction, the additional
fee shall be reduced by 75%.
(c) The additional fee shall not apply to minor variations in the
siting of buildings and other site improvements, such site
variations shall remain subject to the fees set forth in
§ 170-11B(1) and (2) of this section.
(6) The Planning Commission in the review of any application may
refer such application to such engineering, planning, legal,
technical or environmental consultant or other professionals,
hereinafter referred to as "consultant or consultants," as it deems
reasonably necessary to enable it to review such application as
required by law, provided that the required expertise is not
available from city staff, and subject to the following: [Added
10-8-1997 by L.L. No. 13-1997]
(a) The detailed statement of the consulting services to be
provided by the consultant shall include the consultant's fees
for said services and a statement by the consultant that the
applicant, not the city, shall be ultimately responsible to the
consultant for the services provided. The detailed statement
shall be sent to the applicant by the City Planner via certified
mail, return receipt requested.
(b) If the applicant wishes to review the services and the costs
with the Planning Commission, the request for a review shall
be in writing and mailed to the City Planner via certified mail,
return receipt requested, within seven days of the applicant's
receipt of the service and cost statement provided by the City
Planner. The Planning Commission shall review the services
and costs with the applicant at its next regular meeting
following receipt of the request.
(c) The City Planner shall authorize the consultant to proceed if he
has not received a written request for a review of the
consultant's services and costs from the applicant within seven
days of the applicant's receipt of the City Planner's transmittal.
The receipt date is the date shown as received on the return
receipt card returned by the post office.
(d) The applicant shall pay the consultant's fee upon receipt of the
consultant's detailed statement for the services provided. The
§ 170-11 SIGNS § 170-11
165:583
statement will be forwarded to the applicant by the City
Planner.
(e) Payment of the consultant's fees shall be required in addition
to any and all other fees required by this or any other section of
this chapter or any other city law or regulation.
(f) The Planning Commission document taking final action on the
application shall not be issued until all consultant's fees
charged in connection with the review of the applicant's
project have been paid. Payment of the consultant's fees shall
be by check made payable to the consultant and shall be
submitted to the City Planner for transmittal to the consultant.
(g) This Subsection B(6) shall expire two years after the date of its
adoption, unless specifically reenacted by the City Council.
C. Apportionments prepared by a licensed surveyor may be approved by
the City Planner and Building Inspector when the apportionment has
been prepared by a surveyor without submission to the Planning
Commission. The applicant shall pay to the city an application fee to be
set by the City Council annually by resolution before adoption of the
budget. [Amended 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 13-1998]
§ 170-11 RYE CODE § 170-11
165:584
ARTICLE IV
General Requirements for Subdivision of Land
§ 170-12. Requirements used as standards and guides.
The Planning Commission, in considering an application for the subdivision
of land, shall be guided by the following considerations and standards.
§ 170-13. General.
§ 170-14. Streets.
A. Character of land. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that
it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or
peril from fire, flood or other menace.
B. Conformity to Official Map and City Development Plan. Subdivisions
shall conform to the streets shown on the Official Map of the city and
shall be properly related to the City Development Plan as it is developed
and adopted by the Planning Commission.
C. Access from suitably improved street. The area to be subdivided shall
have frontage on and access from a street on the Official Map, which
street is suitably improved to the satisfaction of the Commission so as to
accommodate the traffic generated by the subdivision without
impairing its present function or for which street a bond covering such
improvement is held by the city.
D. Minimizing flood damage. Subdivisions located in areas of special flood
hazard shall be designed to minimize flood damage, shall have all
utilities and facilities located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage and shall have surface water control improvements and
other drainage improvements adequate to reduce exposure to flood
hazards. [Added 3-5-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980]
A. Location, width and improvement of streets. Streets shall be suitably
located, of sufficient width and adequately improved to accommodate
the prospective traffic and to afford satisfactory access to police, firefighting,
snow removal or other road maintenance equipment, and shall
be coordinated so as to compose a convenient system. Where a street
connection is necessary for the appropriate development of adjoining
land, the arrangement of streets shall include such provision.
B. Widths of right-of-way. Streets shall have the right-of-way prescribed in
the schedule in Subsection C(1) below unless otherwise indicated on
the City Development Plan.
C. Standards for street design.
(1) Streets shall meet the following design standards. Street
classification may be indicated on the City Development Plan or
Official Map. Otherwise, it shall be determined by the Planning
§ 170-12 SIGNS § 170-14
165:585
Commission. Standards are not shown for major streets, which
would be built by the state or county.
Street Classification
Widths
and Grades
Local
Residential Secondary Business
Minimum width
of right-of-way
(feet)
50 60 60
Minimum width
of pavement
(excluding
curbs or
gutters)
(feet)
30, except 36
where located in
a multifamily
residence district
and 24 in R-1;
also see
§ 170-14C(3)
38 40
Ordinary
minimum
radius of
horizontal
curves of street
line (feet)
200 400 400
Ordinary
minimum
length of
vertical curves
at surface of
pavement (feet)
Not less than 20
for each 1%
algebraic
difference of
grade
Not less than
30 for each
1% algebraic
difference of
grade
200
Ordinary
minimum
length of
tangents
between
reverse curves
(feet)
100 200 200
Ordinary
maximum
grade
8% 6% 6%
Ordinary
minimum grade
1% 1% 1%
Minimum sight
distance (feet)
150 250 250
(2) Easements shall be 10 feet wide or more where specified.
§ 170-14 RYE CODE § 170-14
165:586
(3) For local residential streets in R Districts, the Planning Commission
may authorize a reduction of the minimum width of pavement to 24
feet for permanent dead-end streets not longer than six times the
minimum lot width for the zoning district, and for all or part of the
length of other streets in R-2 and R-3 Districts where
considerations of grade, sight distance and probable traffic volume
and speed indicate that such lesser width would be consistent with
requirements of safety and convenience.
D. Relations to topography. Streets shall be related appropriately to the
topography, and all streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as
possible of the building sites at or above the grades of the streets.
Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original
topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided.
E. Block size. Block dimensions shall be generally twice the normal lot
depth and not more than 12 times the minimum lot width required in
the zoning district. In long blocks, the Planning Commission may
require the reservation of a twenty-foot-wide easement through the
block to accommodate utilities or pedestrian traffic. (See § 170-17B and
C)
F. Intersections. Intersections of major streets by other streets shall be at
least 800 feet apart, if possible. Cross street (four-cornered)
intersections shall be avoided in general, except as shown on the City
Development Plan or at other important traffic intersections. A distance
of at least 150 feet shall be maintained between center lines of offset
intersecting streets. Within 100 feet of an intersection, streets shall be
at approximately right angles. Grades shall be limited to no more than
3% within 50 feet of an intersection. All street intersection corners shall
be rounded by curves of at least 25 feet in radius at the property line. In
order to provide visibility for traffic safety, that portion of any corner lot
(whether at an intersection entirely within the subdivision or of a new
street with an existing street) which is shown shaded on Sketch A shall
be cleared of all growth (except isolated trees) and obstructions above
the level three feet higher than the center line of the street. If directed,
ground shall be excavated to achieve visibility.
§ 170-14 SIGNS § 170-14
165:587
G. Continuation of streets into adjacent property. The arrangement of
streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between
adjacent properties where such continuation is necessary, among other
things, for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection or
efficient provision of utilities and drainage, and in places where such
continuation is shown on the City Development Plan. If the adjacent
property is underdeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street
temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A
temporary circular turnaround with a traveled way having a minimum
of 40 feet in radius at the outside pavement edge and a fifty-foot
easement radius shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets,
with the notation on the plat that land outside the normal street rightof-
way shall revert to abutters whenever the street is continued. A
temporary turnaround shall not be required within 200 feet of an
intersection where an alternate arrangement has been approved by the
Planning Commission.
H. Permanent dead-end streets. Where a street does not extend to the
boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not needed for
access to or from adjoining property, its terminus shall not be nearer to
such boundary than the normal average lot depth for the zoning district
in which the land is located, However, the Planning Commission may
require the reservation of an easement to accommodate traffic or
utilities. A circular turnaround of a minimum right-of-way radius of 50
feet and a minimum radius of 40 feet to the outside edge of the
pavement shall be provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street.
For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire
protection, permanent dead-end streets shall, in general, be limited in
length to not more than six times the minimum lot width for the zoning
district.
I. Widening or realignment of existing streets. Where the subdivision
borders an existing street and additional land is required for
§ 170-14 RYE CODE § 170-14
165:588
§ 170-15. Improvements. [Amended 6-15-1965]
realignment or widening of such street, as indicated by the Official
Map or City Development Plan or otherwise determined by the Planning
Commission to be necessary, such additional land shall either be
included as a part of such street as indicated on such plat or be marked
on the plat "Reserved for Street Realignment (or Widening) Purposes."
J. Street names.
(1) All streets shall be named, and such names shall be subject to the
approval of the Planning Commission. Names shall be sufficiently
different in sound and in spelling from other street names in the
city so as not to cause confusion. A street which is a continuation of
an existing street shall bear the same name. Street names shall
conform to the following classifications:
Street Name Type of Street
Avenue or Road Major or secondary street
Street or Lane Local residential street (except as follows)
Court or Place Dead-end street
Circle Street, both ends of which intersect the
same street at different locations
(2) Numbers as street names are not acceptable. House numbers will
be assigned by the City Engineer.
A. Street improvements.
(1) General. Streets shall be graded and improved with pavement,
street signs, sidewalks, streetlighting standards, curbs, gutters,
street trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains and fire
hydrants, except where waivers may be requested and the Planning
Commission may waive, subject to appropriate conditions, such
improvements as it considers are not requisite in the interest of the
public health, safety and general welfare. If placed on the street
right-of-way, underground utilities may be required by the Planning
Commission to be placed between the paved roadway and street
line, where possible, to simplify location and repair of the lines. The
subdivider shall install underground service connections to the
property line of each lot before the street is paved. Walks in
pedestrian easements shall be improved according to specifications
and as shown on the construction plans. Other easements shall be
cleared and graded where required by the City Engineer.
(2) Underground utility wires.
(a) Electric and telephone wires shall be installed underground,
except that the Planning Commission may waive this
requirement at the request of the applicant in cases where the
§ 170-14 SIGNS § 170-15
165:589
Commission shall determine that the installation of
underground service will result in practical difficulty or
hardship. In making such determination, the Commission shall
take into account the following:
[1] The size and nature of the subdivision.
[2] Unusual topographic or other natural conditions.
[3] Type of service existing in the area adjacent to the
subdivision at the time of application for waiver.
(b) The Planning Commission may grant a full or partial waiver of
this requirement, and in approving such waiver, may require
the installation of electric and telephone wires on poles or may
require a combination of underground and overhead service.
B. Surface water control improvements.
(1) The subdivider is required to preserve the natural drainage
features of the land, except for those reasonable alterations
permitted by the Planning Commission, and to provide surface
water control facilities as required by the Planning Commission to
protect adjoining property from surface water runoff.
(2) The subdivider may be required by the Planning Commission to
control any spring or surface water that may exist prior to or occur
as a result of the development of the property by installing or
constructing surface water control facilities, which hereinafter
shall be deemed to include pipes, ditches, culverts, water retention
areas and structures, swales, slopes and other conduits or
reservoirs of water. The developer may also be required by the
Planning Commission to provide temporary on-site surface water
and soil erosion control facilities during construction.
(3) Surface water control facilities, as may be required, shall be
located either in perpetually unobstructed easements or in a street
right-of-way when appropriate. The subdivider shall not construct
culverts, ditches, pipes or other conduits of water which will
discharge waters onto adjoining land in such a manner as to impair
the appropriate use and development of that land.
(4) The subdivider may be required by the Planning Commission to
offset the increase in the rate of surface water runoff resulting from
the proposed development in accordance with the following
requirements: [Amended 5-21-1986 by L.L. No. 7-1986]
(a) The surface water control plan and related subdivision plans
shall be referred to the Westchester County Soil and Water
Conservation District for their review and comments.
(b) Sites of four acres or more shall provide for a one-hundredyear
stormwater detention facility or facilities, designed using
§ 170-15 RYE CODE § 170-15
165:590
those methods contained in "Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds Technical Release No. 55," prepared by the United
States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service,
and as from time to time amended, supplemented or replaced.
In the Beaver Swamp Brook Watershed, the Planning
Commission may waive or modify this one-hundred-year
detention requirement after consultation with the Westchester
County Soil and Water Conservation District.
(c) Sites with a proposed 75% or more net increase in impervious
surfaces shall provide for a one-hundred-year stormwater
detention storage facility or facilities designed using those
methods contained in "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds
Technical Release No. 55," prepared by the United States
Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, and as
from time to time amended, supplemented or replaced. In the
Beaver Swamp Brook Watershed, the Planning Commission
may waive or modify this one-hundred-year detention
requirement after consultation with the Westchester County
Soil and Water Conservation District.
(d) Sites of less than four acres with a proposed increase of less
than a seventy-five-percent net increase in impervious surfaces
shall provide for a twenty-five-year stormwater detention
storage facility or facilities, except in the Beaver Swamp Brook
Watershed in which locations one-hundred-year stormwater
retention shall be required, designed using those methods
contained in "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds Technical
Release No. 55," prepared by the United States Department of
Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, and as from time to time
amended, supplemented or replaced, or another method
specified by the City Engineer after consultation with the
Westchester County Soil and Water Conservation District. The
Planning Commission may waive or modify this one-hundredyear
detention requirement after consultation with the
Westchester County Soil and Water Conservation District.
(e) Rainfall depth used in calculating required stormwater
detention facilities shall be, 7.2 inches in 24 hours for a onehundred-
year storm and 5.7 inches in 24 hours for a twentyfive-
year storm. In each case, a Type III distribution shall be
used.
(f) Detention facility maximum discharge rates for
preconstruction conditions for the one-hundred-year storm and
the twenty-five-year storm shall be as follows:
[1] One-hundred-year storm: one-hundred-, fifty-, twenty-five,
ten-, five- and two-year storms.
§ 170-15 SIGNS § 170-15
165:591
[2] Twenty-five-year storm: twenty-five-, ten- , five- and twoyear
storms.
(5) The Commission may reduce the permitted number of lots and
reduce the permitted coverage of the land if it is determined that
the surface water retention facilities considered appropriate by the
Commission will not have sufficient capacity to offset the increase
in the rate and quantity of surface water runoff resulting from the
proposed development and/or if it is determined that the increment
of the increase which cannot be retained on the site cannot be
carried away by natural drainage or by public surface water control
facilities.
(6) The Planning Commission and the City Engineer may waive or
reduce the requirements of § 170-15B(4) of this chapter if it is
determined by them that existing storm drains or storm drains
proposed to be constructed are of adequate size, and will discharge
surface water runoff directly to Long Island Sound, Milton Harbor
or Port Chester Harbor. [Amended 5-21-1986 by L.L. No.
7-1986]
(7) (Reserved)45
C. Monuments and lot corner markers. Permanent monuments of a size
and type approved by the City Engineer shall be set at such block
corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and other points as the
City Engineer may require, and their location shall be shown on the
subdivision plat. All lot corners shall be marked by iron rods or pipes
driven below the frost line.
D. Tree preservation. [Added 4-7-1976; amended 11-7-1990 by L.L.
No. 18-1990; 11-6-1996 by L.L. No. 9-1996]
(1) The subdivider is required to permanently tag or affix identification
on each tree on the site having a caliper of eight inches or more
prior to the submission of an application for preliminary
subdivision approval.
(2) The subdivider shall lay out the subdivision in such a manner as to
minimize the number of trees eight inches or more in caliper to be
removed to accommodate development.
(3) The subdivider is required to preserve all trees eight inches or
more in caliper unless the Planning Commission has specifically
authorized their removal.
(4) On sites devoid of trees eight inches or more in caliper or sparsely
populated with such trees, the Commission shall require the
installation of supplemental trees having a minimum caliper of six
45.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(7), regarding waiver of report for minor subdivisions,
as amended, was repealed 5-21-1986 by L.L. No. 7-1986.
§ 170-15 RYE CODE § 170-15
165:592
inches, such that there will be an overall density of one tree per
3,000 square feet of land, or fraction thereof. Supplemental trees
shall also be tagged for future identification.
(5) The subdivider may be required to preserve trees having a caliper
of less than eight inches if the Planning Commission finds that such
trees have significant aesthetic value due to species or location or
that their removal would excessively alter drainage or affect the
stability of slopes.
(6) The subdivider shall install protective barriers around each tree
not specifically authorized for removal prior to the start of any
construction or may, with the approval of the Commission, erect
protective barriers around sections in which several trees are
located. The barriers shall remain in place and be kept in good
repair until all construction has been completed and removal of the
barriers has been authorized by the City Engineer.
(7) Trees which have been designated for preservation, including
supplemental trees, shall be deemed to be required site
improvements, and their preservation and replacement, as
necessary, including the replacement of trees damaged during
construction, shall remain the responsibility of the subdivider for a
period of one year after the completion of the subdivision. That
portion of the performance bond calculated to be the cost of
replacing trees to be preserved or supplemental trees which may
be damaged during construction shall be retained by the city for at
least one year after all improvements in the subdivision have been
completed. Prior to release of the bond, the trees shall be inspected
to ensure that they have not been damaged and that future growth
will be characteristic of the species.
(8) The requirements for tree preservation shall not apply to lots for
existing houses in a new subdivision, provided that such lots and
houses will not be altered to accommodate development of the
subdivision. However, this provision shall not relieve the subdivider
of the responsibility of including in the tree preservation plan for
the subdivision any tree eight inches or more in caliper located
within 50 feet of a new lot or required subdivision improvement.
When lots for existing houses have been excluded from the tree
preservation plan, the landscape architect shall set forth on the
plan which lots have been excluded and shall certify that the plan
does include all trees eight inches or more in caliper located within
50 feet of a new lot or other subdivision improvement and that
surrounding development will not substantially alter the
environment of the trees on such lot.
(9) In cases where the number of trees required to satisfy the penalty
can not be accommodated on the site of the violation, the penalty
shall include planting of trees on available public spaces and/or
payment of $1,700 to the City Tree Fund. [Amended 12-16-1998
§ 170-15 SIGNS § 170-15
165:593
by L.L. No. 13-1998; 12-15-1999 by L.L. No. 13-1999;
12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 16-2000]
(10) Modification of tree preservation plan requirements. If at any time
before or during the construction of required improvements or a
residence on a lot it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City
Planner that unforeseen conditions or the design of the actual
residence proposed to be constructed make it necessary or
preferable to modify the subdivision tree preservation plan, the
City Planner may authorize such modifications upon written
request of the subdivider with a supporting letter from the
landscape architect who prepared the original tree preservation
plan and receipt of a fee payable to the city. The City Council shall
set the fee annually by resolution before adoption of the budget.
This supporting letter shall include a revised tree preservation plan
for the lot or other area affected by the proposed modification
prepared by the subdivider's landscape architect, provided that
such modifications are within the spirit and intent of the Planning
Commission's approval. The City Planner may, at his discretion,
decide not to exercise his authority to modify a tree preservation
plan and may, instead, require the person requesting the
modification to apply to the Planning Commission for a
modification of the subdivision approval. The City Planner shall
issue any authorization under this subsection in writing and shall
transmit a copy of such authorization to the Planning Commission
at its next regular meeting, subject to the following limitations:
[Amended 12-17-1997 by L.L. No. 18-1997; 12-16-1998 by
L.L. No. 13-1998]
(a) The City Planner shall not authorize the removal of a tree
required to be preserved if the proposed improvements can be
relocated so as to avoid the need for the removal of the tree.
(b) The City Planner shall not authorize the removal of a tree
required to be preserved on the basis of the current condition
of the tree, even if recommended by the subdivider's landscape
architect, without first consulting with the City Tree Foreman.
(c) In the case of the modification of the location of required
replacement trees or other required landscaping, the City
Planner may not waive the requirement for the installation of
the plant materials, but may modify the location if field
conditions, such as underground rock, prevent the planting of
the material in the location shown on the approved tree
preservation plan, provided that the modified location and the
original location accomplish the same goals originally
envisioned by the Planning Commission.
(d) The City Planner shall not authorize a relocation of the house
and driveway shown on the approved tree preservation plan, if
it will result in the removal of a tree required to be preserved
§ 170-15 RYE CODE § 170-15
165:594
on the approved tree preservation plan, unless a tree of
greater or equal value originally shown on the approved tree
preservation plan for removal will be preserved as a result of
such relocation, and then only in consultation with the City
Tree Foreman as to the value of the respective trees.
E. Erosion and sediment control. [Added 5-21-1986 by L.L. No. 7-1986]
(1) The surface water control plan shall be referred to the Westchester
County Soil and Water Conservation District for their review and
comments for all new construction, exclusive of building additions
and accessory buildings, surfaces and structures for existing
buildings.
(2) Development shall preserve salient natural features, keep cut and
fill operations to a minimum and ensure conformity with
topography so as to create the least erosion potential, based upon
the Best Management Practices Manual.
(3) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as soon as practicable and in any
event within the time period specified on the approved soil
conservation plan.
(4) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed areas during construction.
(5) The permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control
measures shall both be installed within the time period specified on
the approved soil conservation plan.
(6) Until a disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in the runoff water
shall be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt
traps or similar measures, as more specifically may be determined
in any particular instance by the City Engineer.
(7) Provision shall be made to prevent surface water runoff from
damaging the cut face of excavations or the sloping surfaces of fill.
(8) All fill shall be compacted to provide stability of materials and to
prevent undesirable settlement.
(9) Fill shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed
channels.
(10) Fill placed adjacent to or having an impact upon natural
watercourses, constructed channels or floodplains shall have
suitable protection against erosion during periods of flooding, as
determined necessary by the City Engineer.
(11) During grading operations, appropriate measures for dust control
shall be exercised.
§ 170-15 SIGNS § 170-15
165:595
§ 170-16. Lots.
(12) Grading equipment shall not be allowed to enter into or cross any
watercourse, except when specifically set forth on the approved
erosion and sediment control plan.
F. Preservation of vegetation. [Added 5-21-1986 by L.L. No. 7-1986]
(1) The applicant shall be guided by the requirements of the Best
Management Practices Manuals and shall follow such specific
requirements as the City Engineer shall determine.
(2) The applicant shall restore vegetative cover in disturbed areas as
directed by the City Engineer.
(3) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be
done in such a way as to minimize erosion.
(4) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation, and in particular trees, shall
be retained, protected and supplemented.
(5) The permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control
measures shall be installed as soon as practicable, but in no event
after the time specified on the approved control plan.
A. Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be
no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other
conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in
compliance with the Zoning Ordinance,46 and in providing access to
buildings on such lots from an approved street.
B. Access across a watercourse. Where a watercourse separates the
buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provision
shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure of a size
and design approved by the City Engineer.
C. Grading for driveways. Grading for driveways shall be in accordance
with Section 9-4.86 (b) of the Zoning Ordinance.47
D. Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum
standards of the Zoning Ordinance. Where lots are more than double
the minimum required area for the zoning district, the Planning
Commission may require that such lots be arranged so as to allow
further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would
be necessary to serve such potential lots, all in compliance with the
Zoning Ordinance and these regulations.
E. Corner lots. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for
erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback from
both streets.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Zoning.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Zoning, § 197-30B.
§ 170-15 RYE CODE § 170-16
165:596
§ 170-17. Reservations and easements.
F. Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be generally at right angles or radial to
street lines unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or
lot plan.
G. Access from major streets. Lots shall not, in general, derive access
exclusively from a major street. Where driveway access from a major
street may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the Planning
Commission may require that such lots be served by a minor stain order
to limit possible traffic hazard on such street.
H. Water bodies. If a tract being subdivided contains a private water body
or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire
ownership of the water body among the fees of adjacent lots. The
Planning Commission may approve an alternative plan whereby the
ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water body
is so placed that it will not become a city responsibility.
I. Setback building lines and house locations. Lots and streets shall be so
laid out as to make possible an attractive arrangement of buildings. In
cases where the Planning Commission considers it necessary in order
to avoid unattractive monotony, the Commission may require the
showing on the plat of specific setback building lines, which may vary
from lot to lot and may provide a setback from the street greater than is
required under the Zoning Ordinance. The Commission may also
designate approximate house locations for each lot. Such setback line
or house location shall constitute a deed restriction upon the placement
of the buildings upon each lot affected. In order to provide a suitable lot
for any existing house to be retained in a subdivision, each proposed lot
line shall be located away from the building a distance equal to the
normal minimum yard dimension or a distance equal to half the sum of
the length and height of the building facade parallel or substantially
parallel with that proposed lot line, whichever is greater. [Amended
11-15-1967]
A. Parks and playgrounds. [Amended 2-19-1964; 6-15-1965]
(1) Land shall be reserved for park and playground purposes in
locations designated on the City Development Plan or Official Map
or otherwise where the Planning Commission shall deem such
reservation to be appropriate. Each reservation shall be of suitable
size, dimension, topography and general character for park and
playground purposes and shall have adequate street access for the
purpose. The area shall be shown and marked on the plat as
"reserved for park or playground purposes." The Planning
Commission shall determine the amount of land to be reserved but
in no case more than 10% of the land in the subdivision, excluding
land in any lot with an existing house. Where the Planning
Commission deems, with respect to a particular subdivision, that a
reservation of land would be inadequate in size for park or
§ 170-16 SIGNS § 170-17
165:597
playground use, either alone or in conjunction with abutting
reservations on adjoining subdivisions, or otherwise inappropriate
for such use, the Planning Commission may waive the requirement
for such reservation, subject to the condition that the subdivider
deposit with the City Comptroller a cash payment in lieu of land
reservation. In such event, the Commission may accept either a
payment to the city of an amount calculated based on the fee
schedule, excluding land in any lot with an existing house and
land within any proposed street right-of-way, or any equivalent
combination of land in the subdivision and money. [Amended
2-7-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990; 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 13-1998]
(a) The City Council shall set the cash payment annually by
resolution before adoption of the budget.
(b) In the event that a lot in a subdivision for which cash payment
was made in lieu of parkland reservation is subsequently
further subdivided, the amount of the cash payment for the
new subdivision shall be limited to the difference between that
portion of the prior cash payment attributable to that lot and
the cash payment for the new subdivision calculated using the
current fee schedule. All such cash payments in lieu of
parkland reservation shall be placed in a special park fund.
Money from such fund heretofore or hereafLer deposited
therein shall be used only for the purchase and development of
sites for parks and playgrounds beneficial to residents of the
subdivisions from which the cash payments were collected. No
disbursement from such fund shall be made by the Council of
the City of Rye unless it finds that the proposed use of the
funds satisfies the aforesaid condition.
(2) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to land zoned for
and proposed to be subdivided for business purposes.
(3) Courts and pools. [Added 2-17-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
(a) Outdoor tennis courts, paddle courts, racquet courts and other
similar courts, swimming pools and other active recreational
facilities, to be located in areas reserved for park and
playground purpose, shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
[1] They shall be set back from all property lines of abutting
properties not included in the subdivision a distance at
least equal to the number of proposed residences times 20
feet in R-1 Districts and 15 feet in all other districts, but
not to exceed 300 feet and not less than 20 feet from any
proposed lot in the subdivision.
[2] They shall be screened, including accessory equipment,
from the view of the street and abutting residentially
§ 170-17 RYE CODE § 170-17
165:598
zoned properties. Such screening shall, at a minimum,
consist of a ten-foot-wide landscape strip planted and
maintained with at least a double row of alternately spaced
evergreens, with an actual height of at least six feet above
the natural grade when installed.
[3] Fence heights shall not be in excess of six feet above the
average natural grade, except that fences not exceeding a
height of 10 feet above the average natural grade, which
are open mesh and are set back and screened, as required
for tennis and other similar courts, are permitted and may
be equipped with the customary attached windbreaks.
[4] Tennis and other similar courts shall have no lighting.
[5] Swimming pools shall have no floodlighting, directly or
indirectly, and all other lighting shall be arranged and
shaded so as to reflect light away from adjoining premises
or a public street.
[6] Swimming pools shall be completely surrounded by
fences, freestanding walls and/or the walls of a building
containing no doors, at least four feet high above grade at
all points, and each gate or door opening through the
fence or freestanding wall shall be equipped with a selfclosing
and self-latching device for keeping the gate or
door securely closed at all times and shall be locked when
the pool is not in actual use.
[7] Swimming pools shall be located at least 25 feet away from
any septic tank and its fields.
(b) The Planning Commission may modify these requirements
where, in its judgment, it deems such modifications desirable
and appropriate because of characteristics of the specific site,
such as topography, size, shape and location and proximity to
facilities such as streets, schools, public buildings and
facilities, other recreational facilities and similar active use
areas.
B. Utility and drainage easements. Where topography or other conditions
are such as to make impractical the inclusion of utilities or drainage
facilities within street rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements
of appropriate width for such utilities shall be provided across property
outside the street lines and with satisfactory access to the street.
C. Easements for pedestrian access. The Planning Commission may
require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from streets to schools,
parks, playgrounds or other nearby streets, perpetual unobstructed
easements at least 20 feet in width. Easements shall be indicated on the
plat.
§ 170-17 SIGNS § 170-17
165:599
§ 170-18. Miscellaneous.
D. Responsibility for ownership of land reservations. Title, if vested or to
be vested in interests other than the sub-divider, shall be clearly
indicated on all reservations for park and playground purposes, in
accordance with § 170-8D(2).
E. Reserve strips prohibited. Reserve strips of land, which might be used
to control access from the proposed subdivision to any neighboring
property or to any land within the subdivision itself, shall be prohibited.
The entire area of the subdivision shall be distributed among lots,
streets and parks and playgrounds as shown on the plat.
A. Preservation of existing features. Existing features which would add
value to residential development, such as trees, watercourses and falls,
historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved,
insofar as possible, through harmonious design of the subdivision. In
connection with the preservation of landmarked properties, the
Commission shall use the authority granted it by § 117-9 of this Code.
[Amended 11-11-1989 by L.L. No. 14-1989]
B. Self-imposed restrictions. The owner may place restrictions on any of
the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the
Zoning Ordinance. Such restrictions shall be indicated on the
subdivision plat.
C. Subdivisions including land zoned for business. If a proposed
subdivision includes land that is zoned for business purposes and if
such land is not restricted against business use by the imposition of
deed restrictions by the owner, the layout of the subdivision with
respect to such land shall make such provision as the Planning
Commission may require for safe and convenient access to such
automobile parking and loading and unloading spaces as may be
required by the Zoning Ordinance or otherwise for safe and convenient
service access to such land.
D. The Planning Commission, as a condition of approval, may require the
filing of restrictive covenants, easements, deed restrictions,
declarations, agreements, deeds and other legal instruments it deems
necessary to ensure compliance with chapter, other chapters of this
Code and the State Environmental Quality Review Act48 in the Land
Records Division of the Westchester County Clerk's office. [Added
4-3-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
E. Conditions of approval authorized by this chapter shall be enforced in
the same manner as provided for building permits, surface water,
erosion and sedimentation control permits and zoning in this Code, and
no building permit, certificate of occupancy or other permit shall be
issued for development or use of such property except in conformity
48.Editor's Note: See Art. 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 170-17 RYE CODE § 170-18
165:600
§ 170-19. Adjustment of regulations.
Where the Planning Commission finds that extraordinary hardships may
result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may adjust the
regulations so that substantial justice maybe done and the public interest
secured; provided that any such adjustment will not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations, the City Development
Plan or the Official Map of the city. In granting any adjustment, the Planning
Commission shall attach such conditions as are, in its judgment, necessary
to secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so
adjusted.
with the approved subdivision plans and the conditions of the approval.
[Added 4-3-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
§ 170-18 SIGNS § 170-19
165:601

ARTICLE V
Specifications for Preliminary Layouts and Subdivision Plats
§ 170-20. Preliminary layouts.
Preliminary layouts submitted to the Planning Commission shall be drawn
to a convenient scale, not more than 100 feet to an inch, and shall show the
following information:
A. The location of the property with respect to surrounding property and
streets; the names of all adjoining property owners of record or the
names of adjoining developments; the names of adjoining streets. There
shall be included an area map at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet,
showing all streets and property within 1,000 feet of the proposed
subdivision, and identifying all property held by the subdivider and all
boundaries of zoning districts within this area.
B. The location and dimensions of all boundaries of the property (include
entire area proposed to be subdivided and remainder of the tract owned
by the subdividing owner), certified by a surveyor.
C. The location of existing streets, sewers, drains, water mains,
easements, water bodies, streams and other pertinent features, such as
swamps, buildings, outstanding trees and outlines of densely wooded
areas, that may influence the design of the subdivision. Topography
shall be shown at a contour interval of not more than five feet, or as
required by the Planning Commission, referenced to City of Rye datum.
D. The location, width, grade and profilies showing existing surfaces and
proposed grades of all streets; typical cross sections of the proposed
grading of the entire right-of-way and 30 feet on both sides.
E. Proposed connections with existing water supply and sanitary sewerage
system or alternative means of providing sanitary waste treatment and
disposal as provided in Section 89 of the Public Health Law; proposed
provisions for collecting and discharging surface or subsurface water,
including the proposed location and sizes of drains, culverts, catch
basins, curbs and gutters; the proposed locations of fire hydrants,
street trees, streetlighting standards, street signs, monuments or other
improvements to be provided in connection with the subdivision.
F. The approximate locations, dimensions and areas of all proposed or
existing lots.
G. The approximate location and dimensions of all property proposed to be
set aside for park or playground use.
H. The name and address of the owner or owners of land to be subdivided;
the name and address of the subdivider, if other than the owner; and the
name of the surveyor and engineer.
I. The date of the map, approximate true North point and scale.
§ 170-20 SIGNS § 170-20
165:603
§ 170-21. Subdivision plats. [Amended 4-7-1976; 5-21-1986 by L.L.
No. 7-1986]
Subdivision plats shall be accompanied by separate sheets of construction
plans, tree preservations plans, erosion and sediment and surface water
control plans and shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for
approval as follows:
J. The location, caliper and species of all trees 10 inches or more in
caliper. [Added 4-7-1976]
K. Base flood elevation data. [Added 3-5-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980]
L. A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the
requirements of Chapter 174 of this Code shall be required for
preliminary subdivision plat approval. The SWPPP shall meet the
performance and design criteria and standards in § 174-7 of this Code.
The approved preliminary subdivision plat shall be consistent with the
provisions of this Code. [Added 12-12-2007 by L.L. No. 7-2007]
A. Drawing, scale and size of plat, construction plans, tree preservations
plans, erosion and sediment control plans and surface water control
plans. The plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn on transparent linen
tracing cloth or on Mylar with black waterproof ink, at a scale of not
more than 100 feet to an inch, but preferably at a scale of 40 feet to an
inch. Maps shall be on uniform size sheets, not larger than 24 inches by
36 inches, but the map part proper shall not exceed 19 inches by 34
inches. Whenever any project is of such size that more than one sheet is
required, an index map on the same size sheet shall be filed showing the
entire subdivision at an appropriate scale. Construction plans, tree
preservation plans, erosion and sediment plans and surface water
control plans may be drawn in pencil or ink on good quality tracing
paper or Mylar.
B. Information to be shown on plat. Plats shall show the following
information:
(1) Proposed subdivision name or identifying title, which shall not
duplicate or too closely approximate that of any other development
in the city.
(2) Date of the plat, approximate true North point and graphic scale.
(3) Name, address and signature of owner-subdivider, engineer and
surveyor.
(4) Names of owners of record of abutting properties or developments.
(5) Boundary lines of the property being subdivided.
(6) Locations, names and widths of existing and proposed streets.
(7) Locations and names of existing and proposed public open spaces.
§ 170-20 RYE CODE § 170-21
165:604
(8) Locations and widths of existing and proposed easements.
(9) Lot lines with accurate dimensions and bearings or angles.
(10) Lot areas in square feet, or acres to hundredths, for all lots shown;
any city line or any school, sewer or other tax district line. Where a
lot is divided by such a city or district line, the area of the lot in
each municipality or district shall be shown.
(11) Setback lines or approximate house locations, where specified.
(12) Block and lot numbers as assigned by the Assessor of the City of
Rye.
(13) Sufficient data acceptable to the City Engineer to determine
readily the location, bearing and length of all lines and to
reproduce such lines upon the ground. Where practicable, these
should be referenced to monuments included in the state system of
plane coordinates, and in any event should be tied to reference
points previously established by a public authority.
(14) Base flood elevation data. [Added 3-5-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980]
C. Information to be shown on construction plans. Improvements shall be
designed and construction plans drawn by an engineer. Construction
plans shall show all necessary information for the construction of all
improvements, except that where requirements have been waived by
the Planning Commission, applicable specifications may be omitted.
Written specifications may also be required for any unusual
construction or use of materials. Construction plans shall show the
following, among other things, on plans, profiles cross sections and
detail drawings:
(1) Plans shall show the location of street pavement, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, pedestrian walks, manholes, catch basins, street trees,
streetlighting standards, fire hydrants and street signs; the widths
of pavements, sidewalks and pedestrian walks; the location and
size of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, stormwater drains,
water and gas mains and other underground utilities and
structures.
(2) Profiles shall show existing and proposed elevations along the
center lines for each 50 feet of all proposed streets as well as
center-line elevations of intersecting streets for a distance of 100
feet; elevations along pedestrian walks; size and invert elevations
of existing or proposed storm and sanitary sewers and locations of
manholes and catch basins; grades of proposed streets and sewers;
size and location of water and gas mains and other underground
utilities. All elevations must be referred to City of Rye datum.
(3) Cross sections shall show existing and proposed elevations at five
points on lines at right angles to the center lines of all streets and
§ 170-21 SIGNS § 170-21
165:605
spaced 50 feet apart along the center lines, said elevation points
to be at the center lines of the street, each property line and
points 30 feet inside each property line. A map showing present
and proposed contours at a satisfactory interval may be substituted
for the cross sections.
(4) Detail drawings shall show typical cross sections of pavement,
gutters and sidewalks and construction drawings for manholes,
catch basins or other structures needed for the completion of
improvements.
(5) Base flood elevation data. [Added 3-5-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980]
D. Information to be shown on tree preservation plans. The plan and the
procedures to be followed to preserve trees shall be prepared by a
landscape architect. The tree preservation plans shall show the location
and identify the species and caliper of each tree 10 inches or more in
caliper and shall indicate which trees the Planning Commission has
authorized to be removed. The plan shall also show the location and
indicate the caliper and species of any supplemental tree required to be
installed. Written specifications shall be submitted setting forth the
procedures to be used for construction within the drip line of each tree
and specifications for the erection of protective barriers around trees or
areas in order to prevent damage to the trees during construction. Tree
preservation plans and written specifications shall show the following,
among other things:
(1) Plans shall identify each tree, including existing, supplemental and
street trees, with a tree identification number and set forth in a
table the tree identification number, the caliper and species of the
tree and the nature of proposed construction or alteration of the
topography within the drip line of the tree.
(2) Plans shall be prepared on a topographic map indicating existing
and proposed contours, supplemented with critical spot elevations,
finished first-floor elevations, all trees 10 inches or more in caliper,
proposed lot lines, yard setback lines, all street and utility
improvements and lot improvements, to include house location,
driveways, entrance walks, exterior stairs, retaining walls, utility
lines, grading and other lot development. If lot improvements are
not specifically approved by the Planning Commission at the time of
subdivision approval, improvement of the lots shall be subject to
review by the City Planner as set forth in § 170-8A(5) of these
regulations.
(3) The written specifications shall set forth detailed specifications for
methods of construction within the drip line of any tree shown on
the plan, the protective barriers to be erected around trees during
construction and the installation of supplemental and street trees,
all to at least American Association of Nurserymen (A.A.N.)
minimum specifications.
§ 170-21 RYE CODE § 170-21
165:606
E. Information to be shown on erosion and sediment control plan:
(1) The proposed subdivision name or identifying title.
(2) The date, approximate true North point and graphic scale.
(3) The subdivision layout.
(4) A schematic layout of the proposed methods of providing for
erosion and sediment control, consistent with best management
practices.
(5) Existing and proposed contours and critical spot elevations.
(6) Base flood elevation data.
(7) Existing tree lines, grassy areas or unique vegetation.
(8) Boundaries of the different soil types existing on the site.
(9) The dividing lines and direction of flow for different drainage areas.
(10) Areas with potentially significant erosion problems.
(11) Areas which are to be cleared and graded.
(12) Any structural practices used that are not referenced to the Best
Management Practices Manuals shall be explained and illustrated
with detail drawings.
(13) Construction schedule showing the sequencing of the installation
of the required surface water control improvements, erosion and
sediment control devices, and other site construction activities,
which shall be supplemented as directed by the City Engineer to
show required inspections.
F. Information to be shown on surface water control plan:
(1) The proposed subdivision name or identifying title.
(2) The date, approximate true North point and graphic scale.
(3) The subdivision layout.
(4) A schematic layout of the proposed methods of controlling surface
water runoff.
(5) Existing and proposed grades.
(6) Surface water control calculations, unless set forth in a separate
document.
(7) Base flood elevation data.
(8) Construction schedule showing the sequencing of the installation
of the required surface water control improvements, erosion and
§ 170-21 SIGNS § 170-21
165:607
sediment control devices, and other site construction activities,
which shall be supplemented as directed by the City Engineer to
show required inspections.
G. A stormwater pollution prevention plan consistent with the
requirements of Chapter 174 of this Code and with the terms of
preliminary plan approval shall be required for final subdivision plat
approval. The SWPPP shall meet the performance and design criteria
and standards in § 174-7 of this Code. The approved final subdivision
plat shall be consistent with the provisions of this Code. [Added
12-12-2007 by L.L. No. 7-2007]
§ 170-21 RYE CODE § 170-21
165:608
Chapter 173
(RESERVED)
Chapter 174
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 100.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 170.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 195.
Zoning — See Ch. 197.
§ 170-21 SIGNS § 170-21
165:609

ARTICLE I
Erosion and Sediment Control
[Adopted 12-12-2007 by L.L. No. 8-2007; amended 9-11-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
§ 174-1. Findings of fact.
It has been determined by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYSDEC) that:
A. Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition;
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of waterborne
pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other
desirable species;
C. Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat;
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby
increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation;
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow;
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the state;
G. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities;
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety.
I. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
§ 174-1 SIGNS § 174-2
165:611
§ 174-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management
requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health,
safety, and welfare of the public residing within the City and to address the
State's findings of fact in § 174-1 hereof. This article seeks to meet those
purposes by achieving the following objectives:
§ 174-3. Statutory authority.
In accordance with § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of
New York, the City Council of the City of Rye has the authority to enact local
laws and amend local laws and for the purpose of promoting the health,
safety or general welfare of the City of Rye and for the protection and
enhancement of its physical environment. The City Council of the City of
Rye may include in any such local law provisions for the appointment of
any municipal officer, employees, or independent contractor to effectuate,
administer and enforce such local law.
§ 174-4. Applicability.
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of New York
State's SPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from
Municipal Separate Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No.
GP-02-02, or as amended or revised;
B. Require land development and redevelopment activities to conform to
the substantive requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental
Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
General Permit for Construction Activities GP02-01, or as amended or
revised;
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development and
redevelopment activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases
in stream temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the
integrity of stream channels, watercourses or waterways;
D. Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development and redevelopment activities which would otherwise
degrade local water quality;
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development and
redevelopment to the maximum extent practicable; and
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management
practices, devices and/or structures, and to ensure that these
management practices, devices and/or structures are properly
maintained and eliminate threats to public safety.
§ 174-2 RYE CODE § 174-4
165:612
§ 174-5. Exemptions.
The following activities are exempt from review under this article.
A. This article shall be applicable to all land development and
redevelopment activities as defined in § 174-6 of this article.
B. The City shall designate a Stormwater Management Officer who shall
accept and review all stormwater pollution prevention plans. The
Stormwater Management Officer may:
(1) Review the plans, and as necessary;
(2) Engage the services of a licensed/certified professional to review
the plans, specifications and related documents at a cost not to
exceed a fee schedule established by said governing board; or
(3) Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans
conform to the requirements of this article.
C. All land development or redevelopment activities identified in § 174-6
as being subject to review and approval by the Stormwater
Management Officer under subdivision, site plan and/or special permit
regulations shall be reviewed subject to the standards contained or
referenced in this article.
D. All land development activities not subject to review as stated in
§ 174-4C of this article shall be required to submit a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) to the Stormwater Management
Officer who shall approve the SWPPP if it complies with the
requirements of this article.
E. No person shall commence or carry out any development or land
disturbing activity on any lot in the City of Rye, except those activities
exempted in § 174-5 of this article below, without first obtaining a
stormwater management and erosion and sediment control permit from
the City Clerk upon approval of it by the City Engineer, and thereafter
complying with the requirements of this article.
A. Agricultural activity as defined in this article.
B. Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads are
subject to this article.
C. Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than 300 square feet
and are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity or original purpose of a facility.
D. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Stormwater Management Officer.
E. Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved
by the City on or before the effective date of this article.
§ 174-4 SIGNS § 174-5
165:613
§ 174-6. Definitions.
The terms used in this article or in documents prepared or reviewed under
this article shall have the meaning as set forth in this section.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land development or redevelopment activity.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls
and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CITY — The City of Rye, New York.
CITY CODE — The City Code of the City of Rye, New York.
CITY ENGINEER — The City Engineer of the City of Rye, New York.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual, most recent version, including applicable updates, that serves
as the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and
practices.
F. Land development or redevelopment activities for which a building
permit has been approved on or before the effective date of this article.
G. Cemetery graves.
H. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds
of posts or poles.
I. Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or
natural resources.
J. Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetable and other plants primarily for use by that person and
his or her family.
K. Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing
structure.
L. Land disturbing activities less than 100 square feet.
§ 174-5 RYE CODE § 174-6
165:614
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EPA — Environmental Protection Agency.
EROSION — The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice
or other geological agents.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snowmelt and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc).
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
LAND DEVELOPMENT/REDEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction
activity, including clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or
placement of fill, that results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than
300 square feet, or activities disturbing less than 300 square feet of total
land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale, even
though multiple separate and distinct land development or redevelopment
activities may take place at different times on different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
LICENSED/CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person currently licensed to
practice engineering in New York State or a Certified Professional in
Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC).
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
NYSDEC — New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Rye.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
§ 174-6 SIGNS § 174-6
165:615
PROJECT — Land development or redevelopment activity.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, and
habitats for threatened, endangered or special concern species.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal
separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA and/or NYSDEC established
water quality standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, subsurface drainage and
snowmelt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — The City Engineer of the City
of Rye (or the person serving in the capacity of the City Engineer) or his/
her authorized deputies, agents or representatives, including employees of
other City Departments, as appropriate. The City Engineer is designated
by the City to accept and review stormwater pollution prevention plans,
forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and inspect stormwater
management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPs) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site involving a
§ 174-6 RYE CODE § 174-6
165:616
disturbance equal to or greater than 300 square feet during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground resulting
from precipitation.
STREAM CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite
bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water (see
also "watercourse," "waterway").
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria
of this definition, are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water
(see also "stream channel," "waterway").
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain (see also "stream channel," "watercourse").
WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 174-7. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
A. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement. No application for
approval of a land development or redevelopment activity shall be
reviewed until the Planning Board or City Engineer has received a
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared in accordance
with the specifications in this chapter. Where possible, the SWPPP shall
include the sustainable development practices as identified in the
following sources:
(1) Low-Impact Development Design Strategies: An Integrated Design
Approach" (1999), by the Prince George's County (Maryland)
Department of Environmental Resources.
(2) Low Impact Development (LID) Urban Design Tools website, by the
Low Impact Development (LID) Center.
§ 174-6 SIGNS § 174-7
165:617
(3) Polluted Runoff: Nonpoint Source Pollution: Low Impact
Development (LID) website, by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
B. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
(1) All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information
and erosion and sediment controls:
(a) Background information about the scope of the project,
including location, type and size of project;
(b) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map. At a minimum, the site map should show
the total site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance;
areas that will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site
and adjacent off-site surface water(s); wetlands and drainage
patterns that could be affected by the construction activity;
existing and final slopes; locations of off-site material, waste,
borrow or equipment storage areas; and location(s) of the
stormwater discharges(s). The site map should be at a scale no
smaller than one inch equals 100 feet;
(c) Description of the soil(s) present at the site;
(d) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing,
excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation
and any other activity at the site that results in soil
disturbance. Consistent with the New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Erosion
Control Manual), not more than five acres shall be disturbed at
any one time unless pursuant to an approved SWPPP;
(e) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be
used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction
debris from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
(f) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials, including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill -prevention and response;
(g) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures
to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment
control for each stage of the project, from initial land clearing
and grubbing to project closeout;
(h) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control
practice;
§ 174-7 RYE CODE § 174-7
165:618
(i) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting
and sizing of any temporary sediment basins;
(j) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent
control measures;
(k) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in
place;
(l) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice;
(m) Name(s) of the receiving water(s);
(n) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site;
(o) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows
from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and
the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to
the degree attainable; and
(p) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the
site.
(2) Land development or redevelopment activities as defined in § 174-6
of this article and meeting Condition A, B or C below shall also
include water quantity and water quality controls (postconstruction
stormwater runoff controls) as set forth in § 174-7B(3) below as
applicable. Land development or redevelopment activities as
defined in § 174-6 of this article and falling below the thresholds
established in Condition A, B or C, but meeting Condition D, shall
also include water quantity and water quality controls
(postconstruction stormwater runoff controls) as set forth in
§ 174-7B(4) below as applicable.
(a) Condition A: stormwater runoff from land development or
redevelopment activities, including clearing, grading,
excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that results in
land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre
discharging a pollutant of concern to either an impaired water
identified on the Department's 303(d) list of impaired waters or
a total maximum daily load (TMDL) designated watershed for
which pollutants in stormwater have been identified as a
source of the impairment.
(b) Condition B: stormwater runoff from land development or
redevelopment activities disturbing five or more acres.
§ 174-7 SIGNS § 174-7
165:619
(c) Condition C: stormwater runoff from land development or
redevelopment activity disturbing between one and five acres
of land during the course of the project, exclusive of the
construction of single-family residences and construction
activities at agricultural properties.
(d) Condition D: all other land development or redevelopment
activities not meeting Condition A, B or C above.
(3) SWPPP requirements for Conditions A, B and C:
(a) All information in § 174-7B(1) of this article;
(b) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice;
(c) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific
location(s) and size(s) of each postconstruction stormwater
management practice;
(d) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural
components of the stormwater management system for the
applicable design storms;
(e) Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions;
(f) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
each postconstruction stormwater management practice;
(g) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice;
(h) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection
and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall
remain in effect with transfer of title to the property;
(i) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all
subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater
management measures in accordance with § 174-9 of this
article; and
(j) For Condition A, the SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape
architect, certified professional or professional engineer and
must be signed by the professional preparing the plan, who
shall certify that the design of all stormwater management
practices meets the requirements in this article.
(4) SWPPP requirements for Condition D:
(a) All information in § 174-7B(1) of this article;
§ 174-7 RYE CODE § 174-7
165:620
(b) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice;
(c) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific
location(s) and size(s) of each postconstruction stormwater
management practice;
(d) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural
components of the stormwater management system for the
applicable design storms;
(e) Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions;
(f) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
each postconstruction stormwater management practice;
(g) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice;
(h) Maintenance easements, if applicable, to ensure access to all
stormwater management practices at the site for the purpose
of inspection and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the
plan and shall remain in effect with transfer of title to the
property; and
(i) Inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, binding
on all subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater
management measures in accordance with § 174-9 of this
article.
C. Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other
applicable environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the
land development or redevelopment activity prior to approval of the
final stormwater design plan.
D. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who
will be involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management
practice installation shall sign and date a copy of the following
certification statement before undertaking any land development
or redevelopment activity: "I certify under penalty of law that I
understand and agree to comply with the terms and conditions of
the stormwater pollution prevention plan. I also understand that it
is unlawful for any person to cause or contribute to a violation of
water quality standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made.
§ 174-7 SIGNS § 174-7
165:621
§ 174-8. Performance and design criteria for stormwater
management plans.
All land development or redevelopment activities equal to or greater than
300 square feet shall be subject to the following performance and design
criteria:
§ 174-9. Maintenance, inspection and repair of stormwater
facilities.
(3) The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for
the land development activity.
E. Posting of stormwater pollution prevention plan. A copy of the SWPPP
shall be retained at the site of the land development or redevelopment
activity during construction from the date of initiation of construction
activities to the date of final stabilization.
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this article, the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
Stormwater Management Plans (SMPs) prepared under § 174-7B.
Stormwater management practices that are designed and constructed
in accordance with these technical documents shall be presumed to
meet the standards imposed by this article:
(1) The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most
current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the
"Design Manual").
(2) New York State Standards and Specifications for Erosion and
Sediment Control, (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water
Conservation Society, 2005, most current version or its successor,
hereafter referred to as the "Erosion Control Manual").
B. Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management
practices are not in accordance with technical standards, the applicant
or developer must demonstrate to the City equivalence to the technical
standards set forth in § 174-8A of this article and the SWPPP shall be
prepared by a licensed professional.
C. Water quality standards. Any land development or redevelopment or
land disturbance activity shall not cause an increase in turbidity that
will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in surface
waters of the State of New York.
A. Maintenance and inspection during construction.
(1) The applicant or developer of the land development or
redevelopment activity or their representative shall at all times
properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of
treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are
§ 174-7 RYE CODE § 174-9
165:622
installed or used by the applicant or developer to achieve
compliance with the conditions of this article. Sediment shall be
removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever their
design capacity has been reduced by 50%.
(2) For land development, redevelopment or land disturbance
activities as defined in § 174-6 of this article and meeting Condition
A, B or C in § 174-7B(2) of this article, the applicant shall have a
qualified professional conduct site inspections and document the
effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices every
seven days and within 24 hours of any storm event producing 0.5
inch of precipitation or more. Inspection reports shall be
maintained in a site logbook.
(3) The applicant or developer or their representative shall be on site
at all times when construction or grading activity takes place and
shall inspect and document the effectiveness of all stormwater
management and erosion and sediment control practices.
B. Maintenance easement(s). Prior to the issuance of any approval that
has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the
applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement
agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served
by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for
access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
City to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working
condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this article. The easement shall be recorded by the
grantor in the office of the City Clerk after approval by the counsel for
the City.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
article shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the
goals of this article. Proper operation and maintenance also includes, as
a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this article.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause
or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance
with § 174-8C of this article.
D. Maintenance agreements. The City shall approve a formal maintenance
agreement for stormwater management facilities binding on all
subsequent landowners and recorded in the office of the City Clerk as a
§ 174-9 SIGNS § 174-9
165:623
§ 174-10. Construction inspection.
deed restriction on the property prior to final plan approval. The
maintenance agreement shall be consistent with the terms and
conditions of Schedule B of this article, entitled "Sample Stormwater
Control Facility Maintenance Agreement."49 The City, in lieu of a
maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion, may accept dedication of
any existing or future stormwater management facility, provided such
facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate
and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for
inspection and regular maintenance.
A. Inspection.
(1) The City Engineer may require such inspections as necessary to
determine compliance with this article and may either approve that
portion of the work completed or notify the applicant wherein the
work fails to comply with the requirements of this article and the
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as approved. To
obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the City enforcement
official at least 48 hours before any of the following as required by
the City Engineer:
(a) Start of construction;
(b) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures;
(c) Completion of site clearing;
(d) Completion of rough grading;
(e) Completion of final grading;
(f) Close of the construction season;
(g) Completion of final landscaping;
(h) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(2) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted except for
site stabilization until any violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the City Engineer.
B. Stormwater management practice inspections. The City Engineer is
responsible for conducting inspections of stormwater management
practices (SMPs). Inspections may be performed by City staff or the
City Engineer may designate an inspector required to have a
professional engineer's (PE) license or Certified Professional in Erosion
and Sediment Control (CPESC) certificate, as long as the designated
49.Editor's Note: Said Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 174-9 RYE CODE § 174-10
165:624
§ 174-11. Performance guarantee; maintenance guarantee;
recordkeeping.
inspector is required to submit a report. All applicants are required to
submit as-built plans for any stormwater management practices located
on site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the
final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and
must be certified by a professional engineer.
C. Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection
programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including but
not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type associated with higher-than-usual discharges of
contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more
likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal
water or sediment quality standards or the NYSDEC SPDES General
Stormwater Permit; and joint inspections with other agencies
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may
include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair
records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and
material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater
management practices.
D. Submission of reports. The City Engineer may require monitoring and
reporting from entities subject to this article as are necessary to
determine compliance with this article.
E. Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new stormwater management
facility is installed on private property or when any new connection is
made between private property and the public stormwater system, the
landowner shall grant to the City the right to enter the property at
reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of
inspection as specified in § 174-10C.
A. Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the City in its approval of the
stormwater pollution prevention plan, the City may require the
applicant or developer to provide, prior to construction, a performance
bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit from an appropriate
financial or surety institution which guarantees satisfactory completion
of the project and names the City as the beneficiary. The security shall
be in an amount equal to 20% of the anticipated cost of the work
covered by the permit issued for the project, not to exceed $5,000 or in
an amount to be determined by the City based on submission of final
design plans, with reference to actual construction and landscaping
costs. The performance guarantee shall remain in force until the surety
§ 174-10 SIGNS § 174-11
165:625
§ 174-12. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
is released from liability by the City, provided that such period shall not
be less than one year from the date of final acceptance or such other
certification that the facility(ies) have been constructed in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications and that a one-year
inspection has been conducted and the facilities have been found to be
acceptable to the City. Per annum interest on cash escrow deposits shall
be reinvested in the account until the surety is released from liability.
B. Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the
developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or
industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required
to provide the City with an irrevocable letter of credit from an approved
financial institution or surety to ensure proper operation and
maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion control
facilities both during and after construction, and until the facilities are
removed from operation. If the developer or landowner fails to properly
operate and maintain stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control facilities, the City may draw upon the account to cover
the costs of proper operation and maintenance, including engineering
and inspection costs.
C. Recordkeeping. The City may require entities subject to this article to
maintain records demonstrating compliance with this article.
A. Notice of violation. When the City determines that a land development
or redevelopment activity is not being carried out in accordance with
the requirements of this article, it may issue a written notice of violation
to the landowner. The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the landowner, developer or applicant;
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land
development or redevelopment activity into compliance with this
article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial
action;
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the City by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of service
of notice of violation.
§ 174-11 RYE CODE § 174-12
165:626
§ 174-13. Fees for services.
B. Stop-work orders. The City may issue a stop-work order for violations of
this article. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be required to
halt all land development or redevelopment activities, except those
activities that address the violations leading to the stop-work order. The
stop-work order shall be in effect until the City confines that the land
development or redevelopment activity is in compliance and the
violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stopwork
order in a timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary
penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in
this article.
C. Violations. Any land development or redevelopment activity that is
commenced or is conducted contrary to this article may be restrained
by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
D. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
E. Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development or redevelopment activity is installed or conducted in
violation of this article, the City Engineer may prevent the occupancy of
said building or land.
F. Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its
undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken
within a reasonable time after notice, the City may take necessary
corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the
property until paid.
A. The City may require any person undertaking land development or
redevelopment activities regulated by this article to pay reasonable
costs at prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP
maintenance performed by the City or performed by a third party for
the City.
§ 174-12 SIGNS § 174-13
165:627
§ 174-14. Severability.
If the provisions of any chapter, section subsection, paragraph, subdivision
or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or
clause of this article.
B. Upon the filing of an application for a stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control permit, the all applicable application and
inspection fees shall be paid. The City Council shall set said fees
annually by resolution before adoption of the budget.
§ 174-13 RYE CODE § 174-14
165:628
Chapter 176
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 176, Energy Conservation, adopted 12-3-2014 by L.L.
No. 10-2014, as amended, was repealed 12-18-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2020.]
Chapter 177
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax administration — See Charter, Art. 22. Disposition of tax liens — See Ch. 183.
§ 174-14 SIGNS § 174-14
165:629

ARTICLE I
Tax on Income of Utilities
[Adopted 6-21-1944 by L.L. No. 1-1944]
§ 177-1. Legislative intent.
By § 20-b of the General City Laws, as added by Chapter 321 of the Laws
of 1937, and as amended by Chapter 245 of the Laws of 1942, cities are
authorized to enact local laws imposing a tax such as is imposed by § 186-a
of the Tax Law. Pursuant to such authority, this Article is modeled upon said
§ 186-a. It is intended thereby and likewise by this Article, enacted pursuant
to the above-mentioned authority, to impose a tax on utility services,
whether rendered by utilities in the strict sense or not, and whether such
services are in the main or incidental part of their business and regardless
of whether the public streets are used in any manner. Accordingly, such
a utility is defined for the purposes of the tax as including every person
subject to the supervision of the Department of Public Service and every
other person furnishing utility services. It is intended to include persons and
corporations which are directly in competition with ordinary utilities, such
as landlords and submeterers, who buy their services from other utilities
and in turn resell such services. For that reason the tax is imposed in
receipts from sales to ultimate consumers. Receipts from the sale of such
utility services to submeterers are not taxed, but receipts of submeterers
from their own customers are intended to be taxed. Any other construction
would result in a complete exemption from taxation of utility services sold
or furnished by this particular method. Furthermore, it is believed that
submeterers have common characteristics that distinguish them from other
businesses and justify the conclusion that the method, character and nature
of their business, in this aspect, is substantially similar to the business of
an ordinary utility and requires similar treatment for the purposes of the
tax. This conclusion is strongly fortified by the fact that such landlords
and submeterers are in direct competition with ordinary utilities and hence
should bear similar tax burdens in order to avoid inequality of treatment.
§ 177-2. Imposition of tax. [Amended 7-18-1945 by L.L. No. 1-1945;
6-19-1946 by L.L. No. 2-1946; 6-18-1947 by L.L. No. 2-1947;
5-19-1948 by L.L. No. 1-1948; 5-18-1949 by L.L. No. 1-1949;
6-21-1950 by L.L. No. 1-1950]
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 20-b of the General City Law of the
State of New York, a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after July
1, 1950, is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business in the City of
Rye which is subject to the supervision of the State Department of Public
Service, which has a gross income for the 12 months ending May 31 in
excess of $500, except motor carriers or brokers subject to such supervision
under Article 3-B of the Public Service Law,50 and a tax equal to 1% of its
gross operating income is hereby imposed from and after July 1, 1937, upon
50.Editor's Note: Article 3-B of the Public Service Law was repealed by L. 1970, c. 267, § 5.
See now § 240 et seq. of the Transportation Law.
§ 177-1 SIGNS § 177-2
165:631
every utility doing business in the City of Rye which has a gross operating
income for the 12 months ending May 31 in excess of $500, which taxes
shall have application only within the territorial limits of the City of Rye and
shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees imposed by any other
provision of law for the same period. Such taxes shall not be imposed on
any transaction originating or consummated outside of the territorial limits
of the City of Rye, notwithstanding that some act be necessarily performed
with respect to such transaction within such limits.
§ 177-3. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Means and includes receipts received in or by reason of
any sale, conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with
respect to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included
in gross income), made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser in the City of Rye, including cash, credits and property
of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or such service
is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on account of the
cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or services
or other costs, interest or discount paid or any other expense whatsoever;
also profits from the sale of securities; also profits from the sale of real
property growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property;
also profit from the sale of personal property (other than property of a kind
which would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on
hand at the close of the period for which a return is made); also receipts
from interest, dividends and royalties derived from sources within the City
of Rye, other than such as are received from a corporation a majority of
whose voting stock is owned by the taxpaying utility without any deduction
therefrom for any expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the
receipt thereof; and also profits from any transaction (except sales for
resale and rentals) within the City of Rye whatsoever.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Means and includes receipts received
in or by reason of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate
consumption or use by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water,
refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy, or in or by reason of the furnishing
for such consumption or use of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator,
telephone or telegraph service in the City of Rye, including cash, credits and
property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account
of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services
or other costs, interest or discount paid or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSONS — Means persons, corporations, companies, associations, jointstock
associations, co-partnerships, estates, assignees of rents, any person
acting in a fiduciary capacity, or any other entity, and persons, their
assignees, lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court
whatsoever, or by any other means, except the state, municipalities,
§ 177-2 RYE CODE § 177-3
165:632
political and civil subdivisions of the state or municipality, and public
districts.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of either
division of the State Department of Public Service, except persons engaged
in the business of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars
or of operating railroads other than street surface, rapid transit, subway
and elevated railroads, and also includes every person (whether or not
such person is subject to such supervision) who sells gas, electricity, steam,
water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy, delivered through mains,
pipes or wires, or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator,
telephone or telegraph service, by means of mains, pipes or wires;
regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such person
or are only incidental thereto, or of whether use is made of the public
streets.
§ 177-4. Keeping of business records.
Every utility subject to tax under this Article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the City Comptroller may require, and such
records shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the City
Comptroller may consent to their destruction within that period or may
require that they be kept longer.
§ 177-5. Filing of quarterly returns. [Amended 7-18-1945 by L.L.
No. 1-1945; 6-19-1946 by L.L. No. 2-1946; 6-18-1947 by L.L. No.
2-1947; 5-19-1948 by L.L. No. 1-1948; 5-18-1949 by L.L. No. 1-1949;
6-21-1950 by L.L. No. 1-1950]
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file, on or before September
25, December 25, March 25 an June 25, a return for the three calendar
months preceding each such return date, including any period for which
the tax imposed hereby or by any amendment hereof is effective, each of
which returns shall state the gross income or gross operating income for
the period covered by each such return. Returns shall be filed with the City
Comptroller on a form to be furnished by him for such purpose and shall
contain such other data, information or matter as the City Comptroller may
require to be included therein. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions
of this section, any utility whose average gross income or average gross
operating income, as the case may be, for the aforesaid three months'
periods is less than $1,500, may file a return annually on June 25 for the
12 preceding calendar months, and the City Comptroller may require any
utility doing business in the City of Rye to file an annual return, which shall
contain any data specified by the City Comptroller, regardless of whether
the utility is subject to tax under this Article. The City Comptroller, in order
to ensure payment of the tax imposed, may require at any time a further or
supplemental return, which shall contain any data that may be specified by
the City Comptroller. Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit
of the head of the utility making the same, or of a copartner thereof, or
§ 177-3 SIGNS § 177-5
165:633
of a principal officer of the corporation, if such business is conducted by a
corporation, to the effect that the statements contained therein are true.
§ 177-6. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return as required by this Article, each utility shall
pay to the City Comptroller the tax imposed by this Article for the period
covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of
filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which
the return is required to be filed.
§ 177-7. Determination of tax by City Comptroller; review.
In case any return filed pursuant to this Article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the City Comptroller, and if acorrect or sufficient return is
not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice from the City
Comptroller, or if no return is made for any period, the City Comptroller
shall determine the amount of tax due from such information as he is
able to obtain, and if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of
external indices or otherwise. The City Comptroller shall give notice of
such determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination
shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person against whom
it is assessed shall, within 30 days after the giving of notice of such
determination, apply to the City Comptroller for a hearing, or unless the
City Comptroller, of his own motion, shall reduce the same. After such
hearing, the City Comptroller shall give notice of his decision to the person
liable for the tax. The decision of the City Comptroller may be reviewed
by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Act of the State of
New York if application therefor is made within 30 days after the giving
of notice of such decision. An order to review such decision shall not
be granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with
interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the City
Comptroller and an undertaking filed with him in such amount and with
such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect
that if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the applicant
will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such
proceeding, or at the option of the applicant, such undertaking may be
in a sum sufficient to cover the tax, interest, penalties, costs and charges
aforesaid, in which event the applicant shall not be required to pay such
tax, interest and penalties as a condition precedent to the granting of such
order.
§ 177-8. Giving of notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this Article may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return filed by him under this Article, or, if no return has been
filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to
§ 177-5 RYE CODE § 177-8
165:634
whom addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the
provisions of this Article by the giving of notice shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 177-9. Penalty for late payment.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof within the time required by this Article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of the tax due, plus 1% of such tax for
each month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month, after
such return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the City
Comptroller, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any
portion of such penalty.
§ 177-10. Refunds.
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof
shall make application for a refund thereof and the City Comptroller or
the court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof
was erroneously or illegally collected, the City Comptroller shall refund
the amount so determined. For like cause and within the same period, a
refund may be so made on the initiative of the City Comptroller. However,
no refund shall be made of a tax penalty paid pursuant to a determination of
the City Comptroller as hereinbefore provided unless the City Comptroller,
after a hearing as hereinbefore provided or of his own motion, shall have
reduced the tax or penalty or it shall have been established in a proceeding
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Act of the State of New York that
such determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds shall be made out
of moneys collected under this Article. An application for a refund, made
as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for the revision
of any tax or penalty complained of, and the City Comptroller may receive
additional evidence with respect thereto. After making his determination,
the City Comptroller shall give notice thereof to the person interested, and
he shall be entitled to an order to review such determination under said
Article 78, subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained relating to the
granting of such an order.
§ 177-11. Source of tax payments.
The tax imposed by this Article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
§ 177-12. Action to enforce payment.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by
this Article, the Corporation Counsel shall, upon the request of the City
Comptroller, bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds
of any judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the City
§ 177-8 SIGNS § 177-12
165:635
Comptroller. Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property
of the person liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same
extent that the tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a
lien.
§ 177-13. Rules and regulations.
In the administration of this Article the City Comptroller shall have power
to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law,
as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the perfon-nance of
his duties, and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records
relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony
and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his
official duty under this Article, and to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 177-14. Confidentiality of information.
A. Except in accordance with the proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the City Comptroller or any
agent, clerk or employee of the City of Rye to divulge or make known in
any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating income or
any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this Article.
The officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not be
required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in
them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the
City of Rye in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this
Article, or on behalf of the State Tax Commission in an action or
proceeding under the provisions of the Tax Law of the State of New
York, or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under the
provisions of this Article when the returns or facts shown thereby are
directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events
the court may require the production of and may admit in evidence so
much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby as are pertinent to
the action or proceeding and no more. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the delivery to a person or his duly authorized
representative of a copy of any return filed by him, nor to prohibit the
publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of
particular returns and the items thereof, or the publication of
delinquent lists showing the names of persons who have failed to pay
their taxes at the time and in the manner provided for by this Article,
together with any relevent information which in the opinion of the City
Comptroller may assist in the collection of such delinquent taxes, or the
inspection by the Corporation Counsel or other legal representatives of
the City of Rye of the return of any person who shall bring action to set
aside or review the tax based thereon or against whom an action has
been instituted in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
B. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
§ 177-12 RYE CODE § 177-14
165:636
§ 177-15. Disposition of taxes.
All taxes and penalties received by the Comptroller under this Article shall
be credited to and deposited by him in the general fund of the city.
exceeding six months, or both, and if the offender be an officer, agent,
clerk or employee of the City of Rye, he shall be dismissed from office
and shall be incapable of holding any office or employment in the City
of Rye for a period of five years thereafter.
C. Notwithstanding any provisions of this section, the City Comptroller
may exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any other city in the State
of New York information contained in returns filed under this Article,
provided such other city grants similar privileges to the City of Rye, and
provided such information is to be used for tax purposes only, and the
City Comptroller shall, upon request, furnish the State Tax Commission
with any information contained in such returns.
§ 177-14 SIGNS § 177-15
165:637

ARTICLE II
Alternative Veterans Exemption51
[Adopted 4-2-1997 by L.L. No. 5-1997]
§ 177-16. Amount of exemption. [Amended 4-29-1998 by L.L. No.
6-1998]
§ 177-17. (Reserved)
§ 177-18. (Reserved)
§ 177-19. (Reserved)
§ 177-20. (Reserved)
§ 177-21. (Reserved)
§ 177-22. (Reserved)
§ 177-23. (Reserved)
§ 177-24. (Reserved)
A. Veterans qualifying for a tax exemption under the alternative veterans
exemption, provided in § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law, shall be
exempt from taxation by the City of Rye to the maximum extent
permitted by § 458-a, Subdivision 2(d)ii.
B. In addition, persons meeting the above-described requirements who
own shares in a residential cooperative corporation shall be exempt
from taxation by the City of Rye to the extent permitted and pursuant to
the terms of § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law.
51.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Tax on Admission Charges and Club Dues, adopted
7-29-1965 as L.L. No. 2-1965 and consisting of §§ 177-16 through 177-24, was repealed
7-24-1991 by L.L. No. 18-1991.
§ 177-16 SIGNS § 177-24
165:639

ARTICLE III
Senior Citizens' Exemption
[Adopted 5-19-1971 as L.L. No. 1-1971]
§ 177-25. Exemption stated. [Amended 11-2-1983 by L.L. No.
9-1983; 3-4-1987 by L.L. No. 1-1987; 5-1-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996]
Pursuant to § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law, real property owned by
one or more persons, each of whom is 65 years of age or over, or real
property owned by husband and wife, or by siblings, one of whom is 65
years of age or over, shall be exempt from taxation by the City of Rye to the
extent permitted by the schedule of exemptions contained in § 467 of the
Real Property Tax Law. In addition, persons meeting the above-described
age requirements who own shares in a residential cooperative corporation
shall be exempt from taxation by the City of Rye to the extent permitted and
pursuant to the terms of Subsection 3(a) of § 467 of the Real Property Tax
Law.
§ 177-26. Conditions of exemption. [Amended 5-2-1973 by L.L. No.
1-1973; 11-20-1974 by L.L. No. 1-1974; 11-16-1977 by L.L. No.
7-1977; 9-19-1979 by L.L. No. 3-1979; 12-3-1980 by L.L. No.
10-1980; 4-6-1983 by L.L. No. 2-1983; 11-2-1983 by L.L. No. 9-1983;
3-4-1987 by L.L. No. 1-1987; 4-4-1990 by L.L. No. 8-1990; 5-1-1996
by L.L. No. 3-1996]
No exemption shall be granted:
A. If the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of the
property for the income tax year immediately preceding the date of
making application for exemption exceeds the maximum sum permitted
by the schedule of exemptions contained in § 467 of the Real Property
Tax Law. Where title is vested in either the husband or wife, their
combined income may not exceed such sum. Such income shall include
social security and retirement benefits, interest, dividends, total gain
from the sale or exchange or a capital asset which may be offset by a
loss from the sale or exchange or a capital asset in the same income tax
year, net rental income, salary or earnings and net income from selfemployment
but shall not include supplemental security income, a
return of capital, gifts or inheritances.
B. Unless the owner shall have held an exemption under this section for
his previous residence and unless the title of the property shall have
been vested in the owner or one of the owners of the property for at
least 12 consecutive months prior to the date of making application for
exemption. Where a residence is sold and replaced with another within
one year and both residences are within the state, the period of
ownership of both properties shall be deemed consecutive for purposes
of the exemption.
C. Unless the property is used exclusively for residential purposes.
§ 177-25 SIGNS § 177-26
165:641
§ 177-27. Application for exemption.
Application for such exemption must be made by the owner or all of the
owners of the property on forms prescribed by the State Board and
furnished by the City Assessor's office, and shall furnish the information
and be executed in the manner required or prescribed in such forms, and
shall be filed each year in the City Assessor's office on or before the taxable
status date, namely, the first day of May.
§ 177-28. Notice to apply for exemption.
At least 60 days prior to the taxable status date, the City Assessor shall
mail to each person who was granted exemption pursuant to this Article
on the latest completed assessment roll an application form and a notice
that such application must be filed on or before taxable status date and be
approved in order for the exemption to be granted. Failure to mail any such
application form and notice or the failure of such person to receive the same
shall not prevent the levy, collection and enforcement of the payment of the
taxes on property owned by such person.
§ 177-29. Penalties for offenses.
Any conviction of having made any willful false statement in the application
for such exemption shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100
and shall disqualify the applicant or applicants from further exemption for
a period of five years.
D. Unless the real property is the legal residence of and is occupied in
whole or in part by the owner or by all of the owners of the property.
§ 177-26 RYE CODE § 177-29
165:642
ARTICLE IV
Nonprofit Organizations
[Adopted 4-23-1975 as L.L. No. 1-1975]
§ 177-30. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to subject to taxation real property owned by
nonprofit corporations or associations specified in § 177-31 of this Article,
as authorized by Paragraph (b) of Subdivision 1 of § 421 of the Real Property
Tax Law.
§ 177-31. Certain real property to be taxable.
Real property owned by a corporation or association which is not organized
or conducted exclusively for religious, charitable, hospital, educational,
moral or mental improvement of men, women or children or cemetery
purposes, or for two or more such purposes, but which is organized or
conducted exclusively for Bible, tract, missionary, infirmary, public
playground, literary, bar association, medical society, patriotic or historical
purposes, for the enforcement of laws relating to children or animals, or for
two or more such purposes, and used exclusively for carrying out thereupon
one or more of such purposes, shall be taxable.
§ 177-32. Property subject to special levies and assessments.
Real property which is taxable pursuant to this Article shall be subject to
special ad valorem levies and special assessments which are imposed to
defray the costs of improvements or services furnished by the City of Rye or
by a special district established therein.
§ 177-30 SIGNS § 177-32
165:643

ARTICLE V
Business Improvements
[Adopted 2-16-1977 as L.L. No. 2-1977]
§ 177-33. Special percentage exemption denied.
Pursuant to the authority of Subdivision 7 of § 485-b of the Real Property
Tax Law, the per centum of exemption from taxation allowed to
improvements for the purpose of commercial, business or industrial activity,
pursuant to said § 485-b, is hereby reduced to zero in each of the 10 years
provided for in said section, unless the City Council shall hereafter decide
to do otherwise.
§ 177-34. When effective; filing of copy.
This Article shall take effect immediately, and a copy of this Article shall be
filed with the State Board of Equalization and Assessment.
§ 177-33 SIGNS § 177-34
165:645

ARTICLE VI
Fiscal Information
[Adopted 12-4-1963 by L.L. No. 8-1963]
§ 177-35. Enclosure of fiscal information with tax bill.
The City Comptroller is hereby authorized to enclose with a city tax bill a
statement or report relating to the budget or any other fiscal matter of the
city.
§ 177-35 SIGNS § 177-35
165:647

ARTICLE VII
Exemption for Solar or Wind Energy Equipment
[Adopted 3-6-1991 by L.L. No. 3-1991]
§ 177-36. Nonapplicability.
The real estate tax exemption provided by § 487 of the Real Property Law
of New York for solar or wind energy equipment does not apply to the
construction of such equipment undertaken in the City of Rye after the
effective date of this Article.
§ 177-36 SIGNS § 177-36
165:649

ARTICLE VIII
Exemption for Persons With Disabilities and Limited Incomes
[Adopted 4-4-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
§ 177-37. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article VIII is to grant persons with disabilities who
meet the requirements set forth in New York State Real Property Tax Law
§ 459-c with the maximum possible real property tax exemption.
§ 177-38. Eligible persons and property; income level; conditions
for exemption.
Real property owned by one or more persons with disabilities, as defined
in New York State Real Property Tax Law § 459-c, or owned by a husband,
wife, or both, or by siblings, at least one of whom has a disability, shall
be exempt from taxes up to a maximum of 50% of the assessed valuation,
pursuant to the following schedule and subject to the following conditions:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Value Exempt
From Taxation
$0 to $20,500.00 50%
$20,500.01 to $21,499.99 45%
$21,500.00 to $22,499.99 40%
$22,500.00 to $23,499.99 35%
$23,500.00 to $24,399.99 30%
$24,400.00 to $25,299.99 25%
$25,300.00 to $26,199.99 20%
$26,200.00 to $27,099.99 15%
$27,100.00 to $27,999.99 10%
$28,000.00 to $28,899.99 5%
A. The income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of the
property, from all sources, as set forth in New York State Real Property
Tax Law § 459-c, for the income tax year immediately preceding the
date of making application for exemption must not exceed $28,899.99.
"Income tax year" shall mean the twelve-month period for which the
owner or owners file a federal personal income tax return or, if no such
return is filed, the calendar year.
B. Only that portion of property used exclusively for residential purposes
shall be eligible for exemption pursuant to this article.
C. Except as otherwise provided for in New York State Real Property Tax
Law § 459-c, to be eligible for exemption pursuant to this article,
property must be the legal residence, and be occupied, in whole or in
part, by the disabled person.
§ 177-37 SIGNS § 177-38
165:651
§ 177-39. Application for exemption.
Application for an exemption pursuant to this article must be filed by the
owner, or by all of the owners, of the property, annually in the Assessor's
office on forms prescribed by the New York State Board of Real Property
Services on or before the appropriate taxable status date.
§ 177-40. Cooperative apartments.
As set forth pursuant to Subdivision 6 of § 459-c of the New York State
Real Property Tax Law, title to that portion of real property owned by a
cooperative apartment corporation in which a tenant-stockholder resides,
and which is represented by his or her share or shares of stock in such
corporation as determined by its or their proportional relationship to the
total outstanding stock of the corporation, including that owned by the
corporation, shall be deemed to be vested in such tenant-stockholder. That
proportion of the assessment of such real property owned by a cooperative
apartment corporation determined by the relationship of such real property
vested in such tenant-stockholder to such real property owned by such
cooperative apartment corporation in which such tenant-stockholder
resides shall be subject to exemption from taxation pursuant to § 459-c of
the New York State Real Property Tax Law, and any exemption so granted
shall be credited by the appropriate taxing authority against the assessed
valuation of such real property; the reduction in real property taxes realized
thereby shall be credited by the cooperative apartment corporation against
the amount of such taxes otherwise payable by or chargeable to such
tenant-stockholder.
§ 177-41. Exception.
No exemption shall be granted pursuant to the terms and conditions of
exemption stated by Real Property Tax Law § 459-c, if the property receives
an exemption for the same municipal tax purpose pursuant to § 467 of the
Real Property Tax Law.
D. Any exemption provided by this article shall be computed after all other
partial exemptions allowed by law have been subtracted from the total
amount assessed; provided, however, that no parcel may receive both
an exemption pursuant to this article and a senior citizens tax
exemption pursuant to Article III of this chapter.
E. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the
provisions of this article shall apply to real property held in trust solely
for the benefit of a person or persons who would otherwise be eligible
for a real property tax exemption, pursuant to this article, were such
person or persons the owner or owners of such real property.
§ 177-38 RYE CODE § 177-41
165:652
ARTICLE IX
Room Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 10-4-2006 by L.L. No. 9-2006]
§ 177-42. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following terms shall mean:
CITY COMPTROLLER — The City Comptroller of the City of Rye or such
other person as may be designated by the City Manager to administer and
collect the tax provided for herein.
EFFECTIVE DATE — The date on which the Secretary of State files this
article.
EXEMPT OCCUPANT — Any occupant of any room or rooms in a hotel
whose rent is paid from public assistance from the County of Westchester
shall be deemed an "exempt occupant" with respect to the period of such
occupancy, regardless of the length thereof.
HOTEL — A building or portion thereof, which is regularly used and kept
open as such for the lodging of guests. For the purposes of this article, the
term "hotel" includes hotels, motels, tourist homes, motel courts, clubs or
similar facilities with at least four rentable rooms for lodging, whether or
not meals are served to guests or residents thereof.
OCCUPANCY — The use or possession or the right to the use or possession
of any room in a hotel.
OCCUPANT — A person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has
the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession,
permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement or otherwise.
OPERATOR — Any person operating a hotel in the City of Rye, including, but
not limited to, an owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee,
mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating
such hotel.
PERMANENT RESIDENT — Any occupant of any room or rooms in a hotel
at least 90 consecutive days shall be considered a "permanent resident"
with regard to the period of such occupancy.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, society, association, joint-stock
company, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee and any
other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity; whether
appointed by a court or otherwise, and any combination of the foregoing.
POLICE COMMISSIONER — The Police Commissioner of the City of Rye or
his/her successor in office.
RENT — The consideration received for occupancy valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, for the occupancy of a room in a
hotel for any period of time.
RETURN — Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided.
§ 177-42 SIGNS § 177-42
165:653
ROOM — Any room or rooms or suite of rooms with sleeping
accommodations, whether or not such accommodations are used, of any
kind in any part or portion of a hotel which is available for or let out for any
purpose.
§ 177-43. Imposition of tax.
On and after the fourth day of October 2006, there is hereby imposed and
there shall be paid a tax of 3% upon the rent for every occupancy of a room
or rooms in a hotel in this City, except that the tax shall not be imposed upon
a permanent resident or an exempt occupant.
§ 177-44. Transitional provisions.
The tax imposed by this article shall be paid upon any occupancy on and
after the fourth day of October 2006, although such occupancy is pursuant
to a prior contract, lease or other arrangement. Where rent is paid on a
weekly, monthly or other term basis, the rent shall be subject to the tax
imposed by this article to the extent that it covers any period on and after
the fourth day of October 2006.
§ 177-45. Exempt organizations.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, any use or occupancy by any
of the following shall not be subject to the tax imposed by this article:
A. The State of New York, or any of its agencies or instrumentalities,
public corporations (including a public corporation created pursuant to
agreement or compact with another state or Canada), improvement
districts or political subdivisions of the state;
B. The United States of America, or any of its agencies and
instrumentalities, insofar as it is immune from taxation;
C. Any corporation, association, trust or community chest, fund or
foundation, organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable
or education purposes or for the prevention of cruelty to children or
animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of
any private shareholder or individual and no substantial part of the
activities of which is carrying on propaganda or otherwise attempting
to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in this
subsection shall include an organization operated for the primary
purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit, whether or not all
of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in this
subsection. Where any organization described in this subsection carries
on its activities in furtherance of the purposes for which it was
organized in premises in which, as part of said activities, it operates a
hotel, occupancy of rooms in the premises and rents therefrom received
by such corporation or association shall not be subject to tax
hereunder;
§ 177-42 RYE CODE § 177-45
165:654
§ 177-46. Territorial limits.
The tax imposed by this article shall apply only within the territorial limits
of the City of Rye.
§ 177-47. Registration.
§ 177-48. Administration and collection.
D. A hotel, as defined in this article, having fewer than four rentable
rooms.
A. Within 10 days after the effective date of this article or, in the case of
operators commencing business after such effective date, within three
days after such commencement or opening, every operator shall file
with the City Comptroller a certificate of registration in a form
prescribed by the City Comptroller.
B. The City Comptroller shall, within five days after such registration,
issue without charge to each operator a certificate of authority
empowering such operator to collect the tax from the occupant and a
duplicate thereof for each additional hotel of such operator. Each
certificate or duplicate shall state the hotel to which it is applicable.
Such certificate of authority shall be prominently displayed by the
operator in such manner that it may be seen and come to the notice of
all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificate shall be
nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered
immediately to the City Comptroller upon the cessation of business at
the hotel named or upon its sale or transfer.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall be administered and collected by
the City Comptroller or such other City employee as he/she may
designate by such means and in such manner as are other taxes which
are now collected and administered or as otherwise are provided by this
article.
B. The tax to be collected shall be stated and charged separately from the
rent and shown separately on any record thereof, at the time when the
occupancy is arranged or contracted for and charged for, and upon
every evidence of occupancy or any bill or statement of charges made
for said occupancy issued or delivered by the operator, and the tax shall
be paid by the occupant to the operator as trustee for and on account of
the City, and the operator shall be liable for the collection thereof and
for the tax. The operator and any officer of any corporate operator shall
be personally liable for the tax collected or required to be collected
under this article, and the operator shall have the same right in respect
to collecting the tax from the occupant, or in respect to nonpayment of
the tax by the occupant, as if the tax were part of the rent for the
occupancy payable at the time such tax shall become due and owing,
including all rights of eviction, dispossession, repossession and
enforcement of any innkeeper's lien that he/she may have in the event
§ 177-45 SIGNS § 177-48
165:655
§ 177-49. Records to be kept.
Every operator shall keep records of every occupancy and of all rent paid,
charged or due thereon and of the tax payable thereon, in such form as
the City Comptroller may by regulation require. Such records shall be
available for inspection and examination at any time upon demand by the
City Comptroller or his/her duly authorized agent or employee and shall be
preserved for a period of three years, except that the City Comptroller may
consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be
kept longer.
§ 177-50. Returns.
of nonpayment of rent by the occupant; provided, however, that the City
Comptroller or employees or agents duly designated by him/her shall
be joined as a party in any action or proceeding brought by the operator
to collect or enforce collection of the tax.
C. The City Comptroller may, wherever he/she deems it necessary for the
proper enforcement of this article, provide by regulation that the
occupant shall file returns and pay directly to the City Comptroller the
tax imposed at such times as returns are required to be filed and
payment over made by the operator.
D. The tax imposed by this article shall be paid upon any occupancy on and
after October 4, 2006, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a
contract, lease or other arrangement made prior to such date. Where
rent is paid or charged or billed or falls due on either a weekly, monthly
or other term basis, the rent so paid, charged, billed or falling due shall
be subject to the tax herein imposed to the extent that it covers any
portion of the period on and after October 4, 2006. Where any tax has
been paid hereunder upon any rent which has been ascertained to be
worthless, the City Comptroller may, by regulation, provide for credit
and/or refund of the amount of such tax upon application therefor as
provided in § 177-54 of this article.
E. For the purpose of the proper administration of this article and to
prevent evasion of the tax hereby imposed, it shall be presumed that all
rents are subject to tax until the contrary is established, and the burden
of proving that a rent for occupancy is not taxable hereunder shall be
upon the operator or occupant. Where an occupant claims exemption
from the tax under the provisions of Subsection C of § 177-45 of this
article, the rent shall be deemed taxable hereunder unless the operator
shall receive from the occupant claiming such exemption a copy of a
New York State sales tax exemption certificate.
A. Every operator shall file with the City Comptroller a return of
occupancy and of rents and of the taxes payable thereon for the threemonth
periods ending the last day of March, June, September, and
December on and after October 4, 2006. Such returns shall be filed
within 20 days from the expiration of the period covered thereby. The
§ 177-48 RYE CODE § 177-50
165:656
§ 177-51. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of rents, each operator
shall pay to the City Comptroller the taxes imposed by this article upon the
rents required to be included in such return, as well as all other moneys
collected by the operator acting or purporting to act under the provisions
of this article; even though it be judicially determined that the tax collected
is invalidly required to be filed, it shall be due from the operator and
payable to the City Comptroller on the date prescribed herein for the filing
of the return for such period, without regard to whether a return is filed
or whether the return which is filed correctly shows the amount of rents
and taxes due thereon. Where the City Comptroller in his/her discretion
deems it necessary to protect revenues to be obtained under this article,
he/she may require any operator required to collect the tax imposed by this
article to file with him/her a bond, issued by a surety company authorized
to transact business in this state and approved by the Superintendent of
Insurance of this state as to solvency and responsibility, in such amount
as the City Comptroller may find to secure the payment of any tax and/or
penalties and interest due or which may become due from such operator.
In the event that the City Comptroller determines that an operator is to
file such bonds, he/she shall give notice to such operator to that effect,
specifying the amount of the bond required. The operator shall file such
bond within five days after the giving of such notice unless, within such
five days, the operator shall request in writing a hearing before the City
Comptroller at which the necessity, propriety and amount of the bond shall
be determined by the City Comptroller. Such determination shall be final
and shall be complied with within 15 days after the giving of notices thereof.
In lieu of such bond, securities approved by the City Comptroller or cash
in such amount as he/she may prescribe may be deposited with him/her,
which shall be kept in the custody of the City Comptroller, who may at any
time, without notice of the depositor, apply them to any tax and/or interest
City Comptroller may permit or require returns to be made by other
periods and upon such dates as he/she may specify. If the City
Comptroller deems it necessary in order to ensure the payment of the
tax imposed by this article, he/she may require returns to be made
for shorter periods than those prescribed pursuant to the foregoing
provisions of this section and upon such dates as he/she may specify.
B. The forms of return shall be prescribed by the City Comptroller and
shall contain such information as he/she may deem necessary for the
proper administration of this article. The City Comptroller may require
amended returns to be filed within 20 days after notice and to contain
the information specified in the notice.
C. If a return required by this article is not filed, or if a return is
incorrectly filed or is insufficient on its face, the City Comptroller shall
take such steps as he/she deems necessary to enforce the filing of such
return or of a corrected return.
§ 177-50 SIGNS § 177-51
165:657
or penalties due, and for that purpose the securities may be sold by him/her
at public or private sale without notice to the depositor thereof.
§ 177-52. Determination of tax.
If a return required by local law is not filed or if a return, when filed,
is incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be determined by
the City Comptroller from such information as may be obtainable, and, if
necessary, the tax may be estimated on the basis of external indices, such
as number of rooms, locations, scale of rents, comparable rents, type of
accommodations and service, number of employees and/or other factors.
Notice of such determination shall be given to the person liable for the
collection and/or payment of the tax. Such determination shall finally and
irrevocably fix the tax unless the person against whom it is assessed, within
30 days after giving notice of such determination, shall apply to the City
Comptroller for a hearing or unless the City Comptroller on his/her own
motion shall redetermine the same. After such hearing, the City Comptroller
shall give notice of his/her determination to the person against whom
the tax is assessed. The determination of the City Comptroller shall be
reviewable for error, illegality, unconstitutionality or any other recognizable
basis whatsoever by proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules if application therefor is made to the Supreme Court within 30
days after the giving of the notice of such determination. A proceeding
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules shall not be instituted
unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with penalties and
interest thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the City Comptroller
and there shall be filed with the City Comptroller an undertaking, issued
by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state and
approved by the Superintendent of Insurance of this state as to solvency
and responsibility, in such amount as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall
approve to the effect that, if such proceedings be dismissed or the tax
confirmed, the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which may accrue,
including reasonable counsel fees, in the prosecution of the proceeding,
or, at the option of the applicant, such undertaking filed with the City
Comptroller may be in a sum sufficient to cover the taxes, penalties and
interest thereon stated in such determination plus the costs and charges,
including reasonable counsel fees, which may accrue against it in the
prosecution of the proceedings, in which event the applicant shall not
be required to deposit such taxes, penalties and interest as a condition
precedent to the application.
§ 177-53. Disposition of revenues.
All revenue resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article shall
be paid into the treasury of the City and shall be credited to and deposited
in the general fund of the City.
§ 177-54. Refunds.
§ 177-51 RYE CODE § 177-54
165:658
A. In the manner provided in this section, the City Comptroller shall
refund or credit, without interest, any tax penalty or interest
erroneously, illegally or unconstitutionally collected or paid if
application to the City Comptroller for such refund shall be made within
one year from the payment thereof. Whenever a refund is made by the
City Comptroller, he/she shall state his/her reason therefor in writing.
Such application may be made by the occupant, operator or other
person who has actually paid the tax. Such application may also be
made by an operator who has collected and paid over such tax to the
City Comptroller, provided that the application is made within one year
of the payment by the occupant to the operator, but no actual refund of
moneys shall be made to such operator until he/she shall first establish
to the satisfaction of the City Comptroller, under such regulations as the
City Comptroller may prescribe, that he/she has repaid to the occupant
the amount for which the application for refund is made. The City
Comptroller may, in lieu of any refund required to be made, allow credit
therefor on payments due or to become due from the applicant.
B. An application for a refund or credit made as herein provided shall be
deemed an application for a revision of any tax, penalty or interest
complained of, and the City Comptroller may receive evidence with
respect thereto. After making his/her determination, the City
Comptroller shall give notice thereof to the applicant, who shall be
entitled to review such determination by a proceeding pursuant to
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, provided that such
proceeding is instituted within 30 days after the giving of the notice of
such determination, and provided that a final determination of tax due
was not previously made. Such a proceeding shall not be instituted
unless an undertaking is filed with the City Comptroller in such amount
and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve
to the effect that, if such proceedings be dismissed or the tax confirmed,
the petitioner will pay costs and charges which may accrue in the
prosecution of such proceeding.
C. A person shall not be entitled to a revision, refund or credit under this
section of a tax, interest or penalty which had been determined to be
due pursuant to the provisions of § 177-52 of this article where he/she
has had a hearing or an opportunity for a hearing, as provided in said
section, or has failed to avail himself of the remedies therein provided.
No refund or credit shall be made of a tax, interest or penalty paid after
a determination by the City Comptroller made pursuant to § 177-52 of
this article unless it be found that such determination was erroneous,
illegal or unconstitutional or otherwise improper by the City
Comptroller after a hearing or on his/her own motion or in a proceeding
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, pursuant to the
provisions of said section, in which event refund or credit without
interest shall be made of the tax, interest or penalty found to have been
overpaid.
§ 177-54 SIGNS § 177-55
165:659
§ 177-55. Reserves.
In cases where the occupant or operator has applied for a refund and has
instituted a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules
to review a determination adverse to him/her on his/her application for
refund, the City Comptroller shall have the option of crediting future tax
payments to meet the cost of any settlements or judgments or, at his/her
option, may, in the first instance, set up appropriate reserves to meet any
decision adverse to the City.
§ 177-56. Remedies exclusive.
The remedies provided by §§ 177-52 and 177-54 of this article shall be the
exclusive remedies available to any person for the review of tax liability
imposed by this article, and no determination or proposed determination
of tax or determination on any application for refund shall be enjoined or
reviewed by an action for declaratory judgment, an action for money had
and received or by any action or proceeding other than a proceeding in a
nature of a certiorari proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules; provided, however, that a taxpayer may proceed by declaratory
judgment if he/she institutes suit within 30 days after a deficiency
assessment is made and pays the amount of the deficiency assessment to
the City Comptroller prior to the institution of such suit and posts a bond
for costs as provided in § 177-52 of this article.
§ 177-57. Proceedings to recover tax.
A. Whenever any operator or any officer of a corporate operator or any
occupant or other person shall fail to collect and pay over any tax and/
or to pay any tax, penalty or interest imposed by this article as therein
provided, the City Corporation Counsel shall, upon the request of the
City Comptroller, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the
payment of the same on behalf of the City of Rye in any court of the
State of New York or of any other state or of the United States. If,
however, the City Comptroller in his/her discretion believes that any
such operator, officer, occupant or other person is about to cease
business, leave the state or remove or dissipate the assets out of which
the tax or penalties might be satisfied, and that any such tax or penalty
will not be paid when due, he/she may declare such tax or penalty to be
immediately due and payable and may issue a warrant immediately.
B. As an additional or alternate remedy, the City Comptroller may direct
the City Assessor to, in the preparation of the next assessment roll,
assess the amount of such tax or penalty upon the property occupied by
business giving rise to such tax or penalty, and this amount shall be
levied, collected and enforced in the same manner as taxes upon said
property for City purposes are levied collected, and enforced.
C. Whenever an operator shall make a sale, transfer or assignment in bulk
of any part of the whole of his/her hotel or its assets or his/her lease,
license or other agreement or right to possess or operate such facility
§ 177-55 RYE CODE § 177-57
165:660
§ 177-58. General powers of City Comptroller.
In addition to the powers granted to the City Comptroller by the General
City Law and this article, he/she is hereby authorized and empowered:
or of the equipment, furnishings, fixtures, supplies or stock of
merchandise or the said premises or lease, license or other agreement
or right to possess or operate such hotel and the equipment,
furnishings, fixtures, supplies and stock or merchandise pertaining to
the conduct or operation of said hotel otherwise than in the ordinary
and regular prosecution of business, the purchaser, transferee or
assignee shall, at least 10 days before taking possession of the subject
of said sale, transfer or assignment or paying therefor, notify the City
Comptroller by registered mail of the proposed sale and of the price,
terms and conditions thereof, whether or not the seller, transferor or
assignor has represented to or informed the purchaser, transferee or
assignee that it owes any tax pursuant to this article and whether or not
the purchaser, transferee or assignee has knowledge that such taxes
are owing and whether any such taxes are in fact owing.
D. Whenever the purchaser, transferee or assignee shall fail to give notice
to the City Comptroller as required by the preceding subsection or
whenever the City Comptroller shall inform the purchaser, transferee or
assignee that a possible claim for such tax or taxes exists, any sums of
money, property or choses in action, or other consideration, which the
purchaser, transferee or assignee is required to transfer over, the seller,
transferor or assignor shall be subject to a first priority right and lien
for any such taxes theretofore or thereafter determined to be due from
the seller, transferor or assignor to the City, and the purchaser,
transferee or assignee is forbidden to transfer to the seller, transferor
or assignor any such sums of money, property or choses in action to the
extent of the amount of the City's claim. For failure to comply with the
provisions of this subsection, the purchaser, transferee or assignee, in
addition to being subject to the liabilities and remedies imposed under
the provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code, shall be personally
liable for the payment to the City of any such taxes theretofore or
thereafter determined to be due to the City from the seller, transferor or
assignor, and such liability may be assessed and enforced in the same
manner as the liability for tax under this article.
A. To make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the
carrying out of this article and the purposes thereof;
B. To extend, for cause shown, the time of filing any return for a period not
exceeding 30 days; and, for cause shown, to remit penalties but not
interest computed at the rate of 1% per annum per month or fraction
thereof during which a tax is unpaid although due; and to compromise
disputed claims in connection with the taxes hereby imposed;
C. To request information from the Tax Commission of the State of New
York or the Treasury Department of the United States relative to any
§ 177-57 SIGNS § 177-58
165:661
§ 177-59. Administration of oaths and compelling testimony.
person; and to afford information to such Tax Commission or such
Treasury Department relative to any person, any other provision of this
article to the contrary notwithstanding;
D. To delegate his/her functions hereunder to any employee or employees
of the City of Rye as the City Manager may approve;
E. To prescribe methods for determining the rents for occupancy and to
determine the taxable and nontaxable rents;
F. To require any operator within the City to keep detailed records of the
nature and type of hotel maintained, nature and type of service
rendered, the rooms available and rooms occupied daily, leases or
occupancy contracts or arrangements, rents received, charged and
accrued, the names and addresses of the occupants, whether or not any
occupancy is claimed to be subject to the tax imposed by this article,
and to furnish such information upon request to the City Comptroller;
G. To assess, determine, revise and readjust the taxes imposed under this
article;
H. To require any operator to submit with the return required hereunder a
copy of any tax return for sales, occupancy or use taxes submitted to
the Tax Commission or other instrumentality of the State of New York.
A. The City Comptroller or his/her employees or agents duly designated
and authorized by him/her shall have power to administer oaths and
take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceeding in the exercise of
their powers and duties under this article. The City Comptroller shall
have power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and
the production of books, papers and documents, to secure information
pertinent to the performance of his/her duties hereunder and of the
enforcement of this article and to examine them in relation thereto and
to issue commissions for the examination of witnesses who are out of
the state or unable to attend before him/her or excused from
attendance.
B. A Justice of the Supreme Court, either in court or at chambers, shall
have power summarily to enforce by proper proceedings the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production and
examination of books, papers and documents called for by the subpoena
of the City Comptroller under this article.
C. Any person who shall refuse to testify or to produce books or records or
who shall testify falsely in any material matter pending before the City
Comptroller under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishment for which shall be a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 177-58 RYE CODE § 177-59
165:662
§ 177-60. Reference to tax.
Wherever reference is made in placards or advertisements or in any other
publications to this tax, such reference shall be substantially in the
following form: "Tax on occupancy of hotel rooms," except that in any bill,
receipt, statement or other evidence or memorandum of occupancy or rent
charge issued or employed by the operator, the term "City tax" will suffice.
§ 177-61. Penalties and interest.
D. The officers who serve the summons or subpoena of the City
Comptroller and witnesses attending in response thereto shall be
entitled to the same fees as are allowed to officers and witnesses in civil
cases in courts of record, except as herein otherwise provided. Such
officers shall be the Police Commissioner and his/her duly appointed
deputies or any officers, employees or other persons of the City
Comptroller designated by him/her to serve such process.
A. Any person failing to file a return or to pay or pay over any tax to the
City Comptroller within the time required by this article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due per month or any fraction of
a month to a maximum of 25% for each year; plus interest at the rate of
1% of such tax for each month of delay or fraction of a month after such
return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the City
Comptroller, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or
any part of such penalty; but not interest. Such net penalties and
interest shall be paid and disposed of in the same manner as other
revenues from this article. Unpaid penalties and interest may be
enforced in the same manner as the tax imposed by this article.
B. Any operator or occupant and any officer of an operator or occupant
failing to file a return required by this article, or filing or causing to be
filed or making or causing to be made or giving or causing to be given
any return, certificate, affidavit, representation, information, testimony
or statement required or authorized by this article which is willfully
false, and any operator and any officer of a corporate operator willfully
failing to file a bond required to be filed pursuant to § 177-52 of this
article or failing to file a registration certificate and such data in
connection therewith as the City Comptroller may by regulation or
otherwise require to display or surrender the certificate of authority as
required by this article or assigning or transferring such certificate of
authority; and any operator or any officer of a corporate operator
willfully failing to charge separately from the rent the tax herein
imposed or willfully failing to state such tax separately on any evidence
of occupancy and on any bill or statement or receipt of rent issue or
employed by the operator or willfully failing or refusing to collect such
tax from the occupant, any operator or any officer of a corporate
operator who shall refer or cause reference to be made to this tax in a
form or manner other than that required by this article, and any such
person or operator failing to keep records required by this article, shall,
§ 177-59 SIGNS § 177-61
165:663
§ 177-62. Returns to be secret.
§ 177-63. Notices and limitations of time.
in addition to the penalties herein or elsewhere prescribed, be guilty of
a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000, imprisonment for
not more than one year, or both such fine and imprisonment. Officers
of a corporate operator shall be personally liable for the tax collected
or required to be collected by such corporation under this article
and penalties and interest thereon and subject to the fines and
imprisonment herein authorized.
C. The certificate of the City Comptroller to the effect that a tax has not
been paid, that a return, bond or registration certificate has not been
filed or that information has not been supplied pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be presumptive evidence thereof.
A. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the City Comptroller or
employee or designee of the City Comptroller to divulge or make known
in any manner the rents or other information relating to the business of
a taxpayer contained in any return required under this article. The
officers charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required
to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in
any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the City
Comptroller in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this
article or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under the
provisions of this article when the returns or facts shown thereby are
directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events
the court may require the production of, and may admit in evidence, so
much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby as are pertinent to
the action or proceeding and no more. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the delivery to a taxpayer or his/her duly
authorized representative of a certified copy of any return filed in
connection with his/her tax nor to prohibit the publication of statistics
so classified to prevent the identification of particular returns and items
thereof or the inspection by the City Corporation Counsel or other legal
representatives of the City or by the District Attorney of any County of
the return of any taxpayer who shall bring action to set aside or review
the tax based thereon, or against whom an action or proceeding has
been instituted for the collection of a tax or penalty. Returns shall be
preserved for three years and thereafter until the City Comptroller
permits them to be destroyed.
B. Any violation of Subsection A of this section shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year,
or both, in the discretion of the court, and if the offender be an officer or
employee of the City, he/she may be, at the discretion of the City
Manager, dismissed from office and be incapable of holding any further
City office as may be determined according to law.
§ 177-61 RYE CODE § 177-63
165:664
§ 177-64. Severability.
If any provision of this article, or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of this article, and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be
affected thereby.
A. Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article
may be given to the person to whom it is intended in a postpaid
envelope addressed to such person at the address given in the last
return filed by him/her pursuant to the provisions of this article or in
any application made by him/her or, if no return has been filed or
application made, then to such address as may be obtainable. The
mailing of such notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of
the same by the person to who addressed. Any period of time which is
determined according to the provisions of this article by the giving of
notice shall commence five days after the date of mailing of such notice.
B. The provisions of the Civil Practice Law and Rules or any other law
relative to limitations of time for the enforcement of a civil remedy shall
not apply to any proceeding or action taken by the City to levy, appraise,
assess, determine or enforce the collection of any tax or penalty
provided by this article. However, except in the case of a willfully false,
fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax, no assessment of
additional tax shall be made after the expiration of more than three
years from the date of filing of a return; provided, however, that, in the
case of a return which should have been filed and has not been filed as
provided by law, the tax may be assessed at any time.
C. Where, before expiration of the period prescribed herein for the
assessment of an additional tax, a taxpayer has consented in writing
that such period be extended, the amount of such additional tax due
may be determined at any time within such extended period. The period
so extended may be further extended by subsequent consents in writing
made before the expiration of the extended period.
§ 177-63 SIGNS § 177-64
165:665

ARTICLE X
Cold War Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 5-5-2010 by L.L. No. 5-201052]
§ 177-65. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to grant Cold War veterans who meet the
requirements set forth in § 458-b of the New York State Real Property Tax
Law with a real property tax exemption.
§ 177-66. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE DUTY — Full-time duty in the United States Armed Forces, other
than active duty for training.
ARMED FORCES — The United States Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force,
and Coast Guard.
COLD WAR VETERAN — A person, male or female, who served on active
duty in the United States Armed Forces, during the time period from
September 2, 1945, to December 26, 1991, was discharged or released
therefrom under honorable conditions and satisfies any other requirements
set forth in § 458-b(1)(a) of the New York State Real Property Tax Law.
LATEST CLASS RATIO — The latest final class ratio established by the
New York State Board of Real Property Tax Services pursuant to Title 1 of
Article 12 of the New York State Real Property Tax Law for use in a special
assessing unit as defined in § 1801 of the New York State Real Property Tax
Law.
LATEST STATE EQUALIZATION RATE — State equalization rate or special
equalization rate established by the New York State Board of Real Property
Tax Services pursuant to Article 12 of the New York State Real Property
Tax Law. The New York State Board of Real Property Tax Services shall
establish a special equalization if it finds that here has been a material
change in the level of assessment since the establishment of the latest
state equalization rate, but in no event shall such special equalization
rate exceed 100. In the event that the state equalization rate exceeds
100, then the state equalization rate shall be 100 for the purposes of this
section. Where a special equalization rate is established for purposes of
this section, the Assessor is directed and authorized to recompute the
Cold War veterans exemption on the assessment roll by applying special
equalization rate instead of the latest state equalization rate applied in the
previous year and to make the appropriate corrections on the assessment
roll, notwithstanding the fact that such Assessor may receive the special
equalization rate after the completion, verification and filing of such final
assessment roll. In the event that the Assessor does not have custody of the
52.Editor's Note: This local law also superseded former Art. X, Cold War Veterans Exemption,
adopted 4-16-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008.
§ 177-65 SIGNS § 177-66
165:667
roll when such recomputation is accomplished, the Assessor shall certify
such recomputation to the local officers having custody and control of such
roll, and such local officers are hereby directed and authorized to enter the
recomputed Cold War veterans exemption certified by the Assessor on such
roll.
QUALIFIED OWNER — A Cold War veteran, the spouse of a Cold War
veteran, or the unremarried surviving spouse of a deceased Cold War
veteran. Where property is owned by more than one qualified owner, the
exemption to which each is entitled may be combined. Where a veteran is
also the unremarried surviving spouse of a veteran, such person may also
receive any exemption to which the deceased spouse was entitled.
QUALIFIED RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY — Property owned by a
qualified owner which is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided,
however, that in the event that any portion of such property is not used
exclusively for residential purposes, but is used for other purposes, such
portion shall be subject to taxation and only the remaining portion used
exclusively for residential purposes shall be subject to the exemption
provided by this section. Such property shall be the primary residence of
the Cold War veteran or the unremarried surviving spouse of a Cold War
veteran, unless the Cold War veteran or unremarried surviving spouse is
absent from the property due to medical reasons or institutionalized subject
to such time limitations, if any, as are set forth in § 458-b(l)(f) of the New
York State Real Property Tax Law.
SERVICE CONNECTED — With respect to disability or death, that such
disability was incurred or aggravated, or that the death resulted from a
disability incurred or aggravated, in the line of duty on active military, naval
or air service.
§ 177-67. Amount of exemption; limitations.
A. Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of 15% of the assessed value of such property; provided,
however, that such exemption shall not exceed $54,000 or the product
of $54,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the
assessing unit, or, in the case of a special assessing unit, the latest class
ratio, whichever is less.
B. In addition to the exemption provided by Subsection A of this section,
where the Cold War veteran received a compensation rating from the
United States Department of Veterans Affairs or from the United States
Department of Defense because of a service-related disability,
qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of the product of the assessed value of such property multiplied
by 50% of the Cold War veteran disability rating; provided, however,
that such exemption shall not exceed $180,000 or the product of
$180,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the
assessing unit, or, in the case of a special assessing unit, the latest class
ratio, whichever is less.
§ 177-66 RYE CODE § 177-67
165:668
§ 177-68. Property held in trust.
The provisions of this article shall apply to any real property held in trust
solely for the benefit of a person or persons who would otherwise be eligible
for a real property tax exemption, pursuant to this article, were such person
or persons the owner or owners of such real property.
§ 177-69. Cooperative apartments.
§ 177-69.1. Duration of exemption.
The exemption provided by § 177-67A shall be granted for a period of
10 years. The commencement of such ten-year period shall be governed
pursuant to this section. Where a qualified owner owns qualifying
residential real property on the effective date of this article, or such other
date as may be set forth in § 458-b(2)(c) of the New York State Real Property
Tax Law, such ten-year period shall be measured from the assessment roll
prepared pursuant to the first taxable status date occurring on or after
the effective date of this article, or such other date as may be set forth
C. If a Cold War Veteran receives either an eligible funds veterans
exemption authorized by § 458 of the Real Property Tax Law or an
alternative veterans exemption under Article II of this chapter, the Cold
War veteran shall not be eligible to receive an exemption under this
article.
A. For the purposes of this article, title to the portion of real property
owned by a cooperative apartment corporation in which a tenantstockholder
of such corporation resides and which is represented by his
or her share or shares of stock in such corporation as determined by its
or their proportional relationship to the total outstanding stock of the
corporation, including that owned by the corporation, shall be deemed
to be vested in such tenant-stockholder.
B. Provided that all other eligibility criteria of this article are met, that
proportion of the assessment of such real property owned by a
cooperative apartment corporation determined by the relationship of
such real property vested in such tenant-stockholder to such real
property owned by such cooperative apartment corporation in which
such tenant-stockholder resides shall be subject to exemption from
taxation pursuant to this article and any exemption so granted shall be
credited by the appropriate taxing authority against the assessed
valuation of such real property; the reduction in real property taxes
realized thereby shall be credited by the cooperative apartment
corporation against the amount of such taxes otherwise payable by or
chargeable to such tenant-stockholder.
C. Notwithstanding Subsection B of this section, a tenant-stockholder who
resides in a dwelling that is subject to the provisions of either Article 2,
4, 5 or 11 of the Private Housing Finance Law shall not be eligible for an
exemption pursuant to this section.
§ 177-67 SIGNS § 177-69.1
165:669
in § 458-b(2)(c) of the New York State Real Property Tax Law. Where a
qualified owner does not own qualifying residential real property on the
effective date of this article, or such other date as may be set forth in
§ 458-b(2)(c) of the New York State Real Property Tax Law, such ten-year
period shall be measured from the assessment roll prepared pursuant to the
first taxable status date occurring at least 60 days after the date of purchase
of qualifying residential real property; provided, however, that should the
veteran apply for and be granted an exemption on the assessment roll
prepared pursuant to a taxable status date occurring within 60 days after
the date of purchase of residential real property, such ten-year period shall
be measured from the first assessment roll in which the exemption occurs.
If, before the expiration of such ten-year period, such exempt property is
sold and replaced with other residential real property, such exemption may
be granted pursuant to this section for the unexpired portion of the ten-year
exemption period.
§ 177-69.2. Application for exemption.
Application for the exemption set forth in this article shall be made by the
qualified owner, or all of the qualified owners, of the property on the form
prescribed by the New York State Board of Real Property Tax Services. The
owner or owners shall file the completed form in the City of Rye Assessor's
office on or before the first appropriate taxable status date. The owner or
owners of the property shall be required to refile at such times and under
such circumstances as may be set forth in § 458-b(4) of the New York State
Real Property Tax Law. Any applicant convicted of willfully making any false
statement in the application for such exemption shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed in the New York State Penal Law.
§ 177-69.1 RYE CODE § 177-69.2
165:670
ARTICLE XI
Abatement for Rent-Controlled and Rent-Regulated Property
Occupied by Senior Citizens or Persons with Disabilities
[Adopted 8-17-2009 by L.L. No. 8-2009]
§ 177-70. Purpose; legislative intent.
§ 177-71. Definitions.
A. Both SCRIE and DRIE provide eligible residents age 62 and older, who
live in rent-controlled or rent-stabilized apartments, an exemption to
rent increases if their incomes and the proportion of their income spent
on rent meet eligibility guidelines. This is available in New York City
and in several municipalities in Nassau and Westchester Counties.
When a landlord raises the rent, tenants with SCRIE/DRIE do not have
to pay the increased rate. Instead of the increased rent, the landlord is
eligible for an equivalent credit on his or her property taxes. The local
municipality then reduces the property taxes owed by the landlord in
the amount equivalent to the credit. The impact of this article will
depend on the number of eligible citizens, as well as the proposed rent
increase. Essentially, the noneligible residents of Rye will be paying for
any loss in tax revenue by the City of Rye from residents who qualify for
and are granted this rent increase exemption.
B. The City Council of the City of Rye finds it in the public interest to adopt
legislation in accordance with the enabling legislation enacted by the
State Legislature with respect to tax abatements of real property taxes
for senior citizens and disabled persons living in rent-regulated/rentcontrolled
properties.
A. The following terms "disabled person," "dwelling unit," "head of
household," "income," "income tax year," "increase in maximum rent or
legal regulated rent" and "members of the household," as used in this
article, shall have the definitions ascribed to them in the Real Property
Tax Law § 467-b, Subdivision 1.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISABLED PERSON —
DWELLING UNIT — That part of a dwelling unit in which a head of
the household resides and which is subject to the Emergency Housing
A person currently receiving social security disability insurance
(SSDI) benefits, or disability pension or disability compensation
benefits provided by the United States Department of Veterans
Affairs; or
(1)
A person who previously received SSI or SSDI disability benefits
and is currently receiving medical association benefits based on a
determination of disability pursuant to Social Services Law § 366.
(2)
§ 177-70 SIGNS § 177-71
165:671
§ 177-72. Abatement of taxes.
All taxes of the City of Rye imposed on real property containing a dwelling
unit, by an amount not in excess of that portion of any increase in maximum
rent or legal regulated rent which causes such maximum rent or legal
regulated rent to exceed 1/3 of the combined income of all members of the
household, are hereby abated.
Rent Control Law53 or to the Rent and Rehabilitation Law or to the
Emergency Tenant Protection Act of 1974.54
HEAD OF HOUSEHOLD — A person who is 62 years of age or older,
or who qualifies as a person with a disability pursuant to the definition
of "disabled person," as defined in this section, and is entitled to the
possession or to the use or occupancy of a dwelling unit.
INCOME — Income from all sources after deduction of all income
and social security taxes and includes social security and retirement
benefits, supplemental security income and additional state payments,
public assistance benefits, interest, dividends, net rental income, salary
or earnings and net income from self-employment, but shall not include
gifts or inheritances, payments made to individuals because of their
status as victims of Nazi persecution, as defined in P.L. 103-286, or
increases in benefits accorded pursuant to the Social Security Act or a
public or private pension paid to any member of the household, which
increase, in any given year, does not exceed the consumer price index
(all items, United States city average) for such year which take effect
after the date of eligibility of head of the household receiving benefits
hereunder, whether received by the head of the household or any other
member of the household.
INCOME TAX YEAR — A twelve-month period for which the head of
household filed a federal personal income tax return or, if no such
return is filed, the calendar year.
INCREASE IN MAXIMUM RENT OR LEGAL REGULATED RENT —
Any increase in the maximum rent or the legal regulated rent for the
dwelling unit in question pursuant to the applicable rent control law
or to the Emergency Tenant Protection Act of 1974,55 respectively, or
such classes of increase thereunder as may be specified in a local law,
ordinance or resolution enacted pursuant to this section, over such
base period rent as specified in New York State Real Property Tax Law
§ 467-b, Subdivision 3, Paragraph c or d.
MEMBERS OF THE HOUSEHOLD — The head of household and any
person, other than a bona fide roomer, boarder or subtenant who is
not related to the head of the household, permanently residing in the
dwelling unit.
53.Editor's Note: See Unconsolidated Laws § 8601 et seq.
54.Editor's Note: See Unconsolidated Laws § 8621 et seq.
55.Editor's Note: See Unconsolidated Laws § 8621 et seq.
§ 177-71 RYE CODE § 177-73
165:672
§ 177-73. Exception; deductions.
§ 177-74. Application for certificate.
The head of the household must apply before January 29 of each year to the
Office of Rent Administration, Division of Housing and Community Renewal,
of the State of New York (the Office of Rent Administration), for a tax
abatement certificate on a form prescribed by said office. A tax abatement
certificate setting forth an amount not in excess of the increase in maximum
rent or legal regulated rent for the taxable period shall be issued by said
office to each head of the household who is found to be eligible under the
article. Copies of such certificate shall be issued to the owner of the real
property containing the dwelling unit of the head of the household and to
the City Clerk of the City of Rye.
§ 177-75. Eligibility.
Eligibility shall be determined as of the date of receipt in the Office of Rent
Administration of a properly completed form.
§ 177-76. Portion of taxes deducted or remitted.
A. The tax abatement provided under this article shall not be granted if the
combined income of all members of the household for the income tax
year immediately preceding the making of an application under this
article exceeds the amount listed in Subsection B below, provided that,
when the head of household retires or becomes disabled before
commencement of such year and the date of filing the application, the
income of such year may be adjusted by excluding salary or earning and
projecting the retirement income over the entire period of such year.
B. Maximum allowable income pursuant to the Real Property Tax Law
§ 467-b shall be $29,000.
C. Upon issuance of a tax abatement certificate as hereinafter provided,
the amount of increase in maximum rent or legal regulated rent set
forth in said certificate shall be deducted from the legal maximum rent
or legal regulated rent chargeable for a dwelling unit of head of the
household.
A. The portion of the increase in maximum rent or legal regulated rent for
the taxable period set forth in a tax abatement certificate shall be
deducted from the local taxes levied by the City of Rye on real property
containing one dwelling unit of a head of the household to whom the
certificate has been issued, effective the beginning of the next fiscal
year after the application has been filed, provided that the application
has been filed before the City's taxable status date.
B. Upon the vacancy of a dwelling for which an abatement certificate has
been issued, the owner thereof shall remit a pro rata portion of the tax
§ 177-73 SIGNS § 177-76
165:673
§ 177-77. Rent overcharge.
Where a tax abatement certificate has been issued to a head of the
household as authorized by this article and the landlord collects the
increase in the maximum or legal regulated rent for a dwelling unit
occupied by such head of the household, the amount of such abatement
shall be deemed a rent overcharge under the applicable rent control or rent
regulation law.
abatement to the City, and any amount due by reason of such vacancy
shall be a lien upon the property on and after the date of such vacancy.
§ 177-76 RYE CODE § 177-77
165:674
ARTICLE XII
Exemption for Historic Districts
[Adopted 12-18-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013]
§ 177-78. Legislative intent; review process; historic determination;
rights of property owner.
§ 177-79. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings.
ALTERATION — Only exterior work on a building that requires a building
permit or demolition permit.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A certificate issued by the Board
of Architectural Review authorizing a material change of appearance of a
Protected Site or Structure or within a district, subject to other applicable
permit requirements.
DEMOLITION — The destruction of the exterior of a building, in whole or
in part, whether or not the foundation is also destroyed pursuant to the
requirements of a duly issued demolition permit.
HISTORIC BUILDING — Any building that the Landmarks Advisory
Committee has determined to be of a historic nature consistent with the
criteria outlined in Chapter 117 of the Rye City Code and is located within
A. This real property tax exemption for historic property is being enacted
in order to achieve the following goals: to increase incentives for
property owners in historic districts to invest in the upkeep and
rehabilitation of properties; to provide an incentive for the restoration
and rehabilitation of commercial structures which qualify as landmarks
in order to provide financial advantages, not available elsewhere in the
country at this time, which may help to attract and retain businesses in
the City of Rye; to assist homeowners who are interested in restoring
their own properties but may not be able to afford to do so when faced
with potential increases in taxation as the result of alterations which
would qualify for this exemption; and to provide a concrete benefit for
restoring or improving historically or architecturally significant
properties which are subject to the regulations of Chapter 117,
Landmarks Preservation.
B. The City of Rye real property tax exemption is intended to apply to
alterations or rehabilitations of historic property as authorized
pursuant to §§ 96-a and 119-aa through 119-dd of the General
Municipal Law and § 444-a of the Real Property Tax Law and all other
powers granted to the City of Rye to provide such exemptions.
C. This article is intended to create a real property tax exemption that
preserves or increases the historic character of real property located
within the City of Rye.
§ 177-78 SIGNS § 177-79
165:675
an historic district. A historic building does not have to be designated as a
Protected Site or Structure.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area of the City of Rye delineated on the Zoning
Map of the City which has been recommended by the Landmarks Advisory
Committee to the City Council as "Historic" in that such area has added to
the historical or architectural significance of the City, and which has been
approved by the City Council.[Added 2-25-2015 by Ord. No. 3-2015]
LANDMARK — Any parcel or building or structure designated as a
Protected Site or Structure not located in a Preservation District or Historic
District, which nonetheless meets one or more of the criteria enumerated
in § 117-5 and is designated as a Protected Site or Structure pursuant to
§ 117-5E.[Amended 2-25-2015 by Ord. No. 3-2015]
REHABILITATE — The process of returning a property to a state of utility,
through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient
contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the
property which are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural
values.[Added 7-8-2015 by L.L. No. 5-2015]
REPAIR — Limited replacement in kind, or with compatible substitute
material, of extensively deteriorated or missing parts of features when there
are surviving prototypes.[Added 7-8-2015 by L.L. No. 5-2015]
RESTORE — To return the interior or exterior appearance to a particular
date or time period.[Added 7-8-2015 by L.L. No. 5-2015]
§ 177-80. Amount of exemption granted; qualifying criteria.
Real property within the City of Rye altered or rehabilitated subsequent to
the effective date of this article shall be exempt from City real property and
special ad valorem levies, subject to and in accordance with the schedule
set forth in § 177-8A and conditions outlined in § 177-80B and C.
A. Historic property which shall be defined hereafter shall be exempt from
taxation to the extent of any increase in value attributable to such
alteration or rehabilitation pursuant to the following schedule:
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 100%
2 100%
3 100%
4 100%
5 100%
6 80%
7 60%
8 40%
9 20%
§ 177-79 RYE CODE § 177-80
165:676
§ 177-81. Application for exemption; approval.
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
10 0%
B. No such exemption shall be granted for such alterations or
rehabilitation unless all of the following criteria are met.
(1) Such property must be "historic," which means that:
(a) The property has been designated as a landmark pursuant to
Chapter 117 of the Rye City Code; or
(b) The structure has been found to meet the criteria of being an
historic building by the Landmarks Advisory Committee and is
part of a historic district.
(2) Alterations or rehabilitation are consistent with the character of
the historic building.
(3) Such alterations or rehabilitation or reconstruction of the historic
building are approved by the Landmarks Advisory Committee and
the Board of Architectural Review prior to the commencement of
work and a certificate of appropriateness issued.
(4) The alterations or rehabilitation or reconstruction must otherwise
result in an increase in the assessed valuation of the real property.
(5) Alterations or rehabilitation or reconstruction are commenced
subsequent to the effective date of this article.
C. In the event a historic building is substantially demolished due to fire or
other act of nature not caused by the property owner, the
reconstruction of such building consistent with its historic character as
reviewed and approved by the Board of Architectural Review shall
qualify for the partial tax exemption, but in no event shall the
assessment for the taxes to be paid be less than the assessment that
existed prior to the substantial demolition.
A. The exemption may be granted only upon application of the owner or
owners of such historic building on a form prescribed by the New York
State Office of Real Property Services, or any successor agency.
B. The application must be filed with the Assessor on or before the
appropriate taxable status date.
C. The exemption shall be granted where the Assessor is satisfied that the
applicant is entitled to an exemption pursuant to this section.
D. All of the terms, conditions and exceptions as set forth in § 444-a of the
Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York, as amended, are
adopted herein unless otherwise specified, as though fully set forth
within this article.
§ 177-80 SIGNS § 177-82
165:677
§ 177-82. Designation of historic districts. [Added 7-8-2015 by L.L.
No. 5-2015]
A. The designated historic district shall be set forth in this section by block
and lot number, street designation, and if appropriate, by local
designation.
(1) Central Business Historic District: portions of downtown Rye
located in the B-2 Zone as designated on the accompanying map as
one historic district.56
(a) For purposes of the Central Business Historic District, an
"historic building" is defined as any building that is located
within the Central Business Historic District that is at least 100
years old as per the building census prepared by the
Landmarks Advisory Committee in November 2014, and that
the Landmarks Advisory Committee has determined to possess
one or more of the following characteristics as outlined in
Chapter 117 of the Rye City:
[1] Association with persons or events of historic significance
to the City, region, state or nation.
[2] Illustrative of historic growth and development of the City,
region, state or nation.
[3] Embodying distinctive characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction or representing the work of a
master, or possessing unique architectural and artistic
qualities, or representing a significant and distinguishable
entity whose components may lack individual distinction.
[4] In the case of interiors: possessing one or more of the
characteristics enumerated above and, in addition,
embodying distinctive characteristics of architectural
scale, form and visual homogeneity which are an integral
part of the character of the structure in which the space is
contained.
56.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the City offices.
§ 177-82 RYE CODE § 177-82
165:678
ARTICLE XIII
Real Property Assessment of Converted Condominiums
[Added 11-7-2018 by L.L. No. 7-2018]
§ 177-83. Legislative findings.
§ 177-84. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following term shall have the meaning indicated:
CONVERTED CONDOMINIUM — A dwelling unit held in condominium
form of ownership that has previously been on an assessment roll as a
dwelling unit in other than condominium form of ownership and has not
been previously subject to the provisions of § 581, Subdivision 1(a), of the
Real Property Tax Law or § 399-y, Subdivision 1(b), of the Real Property Tax
Law.57
§ 177-85. Applicability.
In accordance with § 581, Subdivision 1(c), of the Real Property Tax Law
and § 399-y, Subdivision 1(f), of the Real Property Tax Law,58 which
otherwise permits condominium units to be valued for purposes of real
property assessment by using a capitalization of income approach or a cost
approach, neither § 581, Subdivision 1(a), of the Real Property Tax Law nor
§ 399-y, Subdivision 1(b), of the Real Property Tax Law shall apply to any
converted condominium units in the City of Rye.
A. The City Council hereby finds that residential condominium units incur
a significant difference in property taxes compared to comparably
priced single-family homes under conventional forms of property
ownership.
B. By reason of the foregoing, the City Council believes it is necessary to
adopt a local law to prevent residential property owners from
converting to a condominium form of ownership that would result in a
lower assessment, which, if permitted, would unfairly lower the
property tax burden for the converted property, while increasing the
property tax burden to owners of property in a conventional form of
ownership.
C. The City Council does hereby ordain and enact Article XIII to
accomplish the aforesaid purpose.
57.Editor's Note: See § 339-y, Subdivision 1(b), of the Real Property Tax Law.
58.Editor's Note: See § 339-y, Subdivision 1(f), of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 177-83 SIGNS § 177-85
165:679
Chapter 180
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses — See Ch. 125. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 191.
§ 180-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter the
following words shall have the meaning given to them by this section:
DRIVER'S LICENSE — Any permission granted to any person to drive a
licensed taxicab upon the streets of the city.
OPERATOR — Any person owning or having control of the use of one or
more taxicabs used for hire upon the streets of the City or engaged in the
business of operating a taxicab.
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying persons
for hire, whether the same be operated from a street stand or subject
to calls from a garage or otherwise operated for hire, except vehicles
subject to the provisions of the Transportation Corporations Law or used by
undertakers in carrying on their business.
TAXICAB DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab, whether such person
be the owner of such taxicab or employed by a taxicab owner or operator.
TAXICAB LICENSE — Any permission granted to any person to operate or
keep for hire any taxicab in the city.
TAXICAB STAND — Any place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere
which is exclusively reserved for the use of taxicabs.
§ 180-2. General license requirements.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or keep for hlre or
pay within the City any taxicab without first having obtained and paid for a
license to drive or a license for operating or keeping for pay or hire, or both.
§ 180-3. Driver's license required.
No person shall drive a taxicab and no person shall permit anyone to drive
a taxicab within the City without a driver's license.
§ 180-4. Application for driver's license. [Amended 10-14-1981 by
L.L. No. 5-1981]
An application for a driver's license must be made on a blank form furnished
by the Police Department. The original application, which must have the
approval of the Commissioner of Police endorsed thereon, shall be filed with
§ 177-85 RYE CODE § 180-4
165:680
the Clerk, who shall issue a license as provided herein. The applicant must
file a copy of said application with the Commissioner of Police and comply
with the following to the satisfaction of the Commissioner of Police:
§ 180-5. Photograph of driver. [Amended 10-14-1981 by L.L. No.
5-1981]
Each applicant for a driver's license must file with his or her application
three unmounted, unretouched photographs of himself or herself, in such
position and in such size as the Commissioner of Police may direct, taken
within the 30 days preceding the filing of his or her application;
photographs shall be of a size which may be easily attached to his or her
license, one of which shall be attached to the license when issued, one shall
be filed with the Clerk and one shall be filed with the copy of the application
filed with the Commissioner of Police.
§ 180-6. Form of license; badge. [Amended 6-13-2012 by L.L. No.
4-2012]
Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the foregoing requirements, the Clerk shall
issue to the applicant a license, which shall be in such form as to contain the
photograph and signature of the licensee, with his or her license number
thereon, which must be constantly and conspicuously displayed on the
outside of the driver's outer garment when he or she is engaged in his or
her employment. All licenses shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in
the taxicab which is in the charge of the licensee.
A. First have obtained a chauffeur's license.
B. Be of sound physique with good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which
might render him or her unfit for the safe operation of a public vehicle.
C. Be clean in dress and person and not addicted to the use of intoxicating
liquors or drugs.
D. Be familiar with the provisions of this chapter, the vehicle and traffic
and highway laws of the state and the traffic regulations and geography
of the city.
E. Produce on forms to be provided by the Police Department:
(1) A testimonial affidavit from his or her employer.
(2) Affidavits of good character from two responsible persons who
have known him or her personally and have observed his or her
conduct for at least one year next preceding the date of his or her
application.
(3) An affidavit by the applicant, giving such additional information as
may be required.
§ 180-4 SIGNS § 180-7
165:681
§ 180-7. Renewal of driver's license. [Amended 10-14-1981 by L.L.
No. 5-1981; 6-13-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
A driver, in applying for a renewal of his or her license, shall make such
application not less than 60 days next preceding its expiration upon a blank
form to be furnished by the Police Department. A copy of said application for
renewal must be filed with the Commissioner of Police. The original renewal
application, which must have the approval of the Commissioner of Police
endorsed thereon, shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall thereupon issue a
license as provided herein.
§ 180-8. Fee for driver's license. [Amended 12-4-1985 by L.L. No.
16-1985; 12-18-1991 by L.L. No. 31-1991; 12-21-1994 by L.L. No.
4-1994; 12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 17-2000; 2-1-2006 by L.L. No.
3-2006]
An annual license fee shall be set annually by resolution of the City Council
before adoption of the budget for the following year for a driver's license or
renewal thereof; no allowance shall be made for any part of a year.
§ 180-9. Record of driver's license. [Amended 10-14-1981 by L.L.
No. 5-1981]
The Commissioner of Police shall keep a complete record of each license
issued to a driver and of all renewals, suspensions and revocations thereof.
§ 180-10. Application for license for vehicle. [Amended 10-14-1981
by L.L. No. 5-1981]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated a
taxicab upon the streets of the City without first having obtained therefor
a taxicab license. An application for a taxicab license shall be made by the
owner on a blank form to be furnished by the Police Department, and a
copy of said application shall be filed with the Commissioner of Police. The
original application, which must have the approval of the Commissioner of
Police endorsed thereon, shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall issue a
license as provided herein.
§ 180-11. Inspection of vehicles before licensing. [Amended
10-14-1981 by L.L. No. 5-1981]
No vehicle shall be licensed until it has been thoroughly and carefully
inspected and examined by the Commissioner of Police and found to be
in a thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of passengers. If,
upon inspection, a taxicab is found to be of lawful construction and in
proper condition in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the
Commissioner of Police shall endorse his or her approval on the application
to be filed with the Clerk. Each vehicle shall be inspected each year by the
Commissioner of Police.
§ 180-7 RYE CODE § 180-12
165:682
§ 180-12. Vehicle license fees. [Amended 12-4-1985 by L.L. No.
16-1985; 12-18-1991 by L.L. No. 31-1991; 12-21-1994 by L.L. No.
4-1994; 12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 17-2000; 2-1-2006 by L.L. No.
3-2006]
Each taxicab licensed under this chapter shall pay an annual license fee set
annually by resolution of the City Council before adoption of the budget for
the following year as follows:
§ 180-13. Register of licensed taxicabs. [Amended 10-14-1981 by
L.L. No. 5-1981]
The Commissioner of Police shall keep a register of the name of each person
owning or operating a taxicab licensed under this chapter, together with
the license number and the description and make of such vehicle, with the
date and complete record of inspections made of it. Such record shall be
open to the inspection of the public at all reasonable times. If a taxicab
shall be disabled, disqualified for service or sold, the Commissioner of Police
may, in his or her discretion, permit the license granted for such taxicab
to be used in connection with the taxicab purchased in its place. Should
the state license number of a taxicab be changed during the term of the
taxicab license, such change and number shall be immediately reported by
the licensee to the Commissioner of Police and the Clerk.
§ 180-14. Payment of fares. [Amended 5-6-1964 by Ord. No. 8-1964;
6-16-1970 by Ord. No. 6-1970; 5-1-1974 by Ord. No. 1-1974;
5-18-1977 by Ord. No. 4-1977; 8-15-1979 by Ord. No. 6-1979;
3-5-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986; 4-21-1993 by L.L. No. 2-1993; 2-6-2002
by L.L. No. 2-2002; 6-13-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
A. Taxicabs seating up to seven passengers.
B. Coach or bus seating over seven passengers.
A. Taxicab zones. The following taxicab Zones A to C are hereby
established as shown on the annexed map which is made a part
hereof:59
Zone Fare
A $6.00
B $7.00
C $7.50
B. Maximum fares to or from railroad station. The maximum fares for
taxicabs between the railroad station and points within the taxicab
zones shall be as follows:
59.Editor's Note: The Taxi Fare Zones Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-12 SIGNS § 180-14
165:683
§ 180-15. Prepayment of fare.
Every driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand payment of the legal
fare in advance and may refuse employment unless so prepaid, but no driver
of a taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person
or persons upon request anywhere in the City unless previously engaged or
unable to do so.
Route Maximum Fare
Between railroad station $6.00
and points in Zone A
Between railroad station $7.00
and points in Zone B
Between railroad station $7.50
and points in Zone C
C. Maximum fares between points other than to or from railroad station.
The maximum fare between points within Zone A other than the
railroad station shall be the regular fare of Zone A, plus $0.50, and
between points within other zones or between other zones shall be the
regular fare of the highest zone involved, plus $0.50.
D. Minimum fare. The minimum fare on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays
shall be $6, and on other days between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. it
shall be $9.
E. Additional passengers. Each additional passenger coming from the
same location as the passenger first engaging the taxicab and going to
the same destination shall pay $3.
F. Single passengers. Any single passenger who shall insist upon riding
alone to the exclusion of other passengers waiting at the point of origin
may be charged two whole fares.
G. Children. Children under six years, when accompanied by an adult,
shall not be charged.
H. Rates per hour shall be as follows:
Service Fee
Waiting time, shopping within the city, touring $45
I. Rate card and Taxi Fare Zone Map. A card on which the above taxi fare
rates are plainly printed and a copy of the Taxi Fare Zone Map shall be
fastened and maintained in a conspicuous place in the taxicab so as to
be conveniently read by passengers.
§ 180-14 RYE CODE § 180-16
165:684
§ 180-16. Disputed fares.
All disputes as to fares shall be determined by the officer in charge at the
police station, and failure to comply with such determination shall be a
violation of this chapter and punishable as hereinafter provided. Whenever
a passenger asks for a receipt, it shall be given to him by the driver. Such
receipt shall state the name of the driver, the name of the owner of the
taxicab, the number of the taxicab, the time when the trip began and ended
and the amount of fare collected.
§ 180-17. Overcharging.
No person shall charge or attempt to charge any person a greater rate of
fare than that to which the taxicab is entitled under the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 180-18. Cruising and soliciting.
No vehicle offered to the public for hire, while waiting employment by
passengers, shall stand on any public street or place other than a taxicab
stand designated in accordance with the rules and ordinances of the city;
nor shall any driver of such vehicle seek employment by repeatedly and
persistently driving his vehicle to and from in a short space before, or
by otherwise interfering with the proper and orderly access to or egress
from, any theater, hall, hotel, public resort, railway or ferry station or other
place of public gathering; but any such driver may solicit employment by
driving through any public street or place without stops, other than those
due to obstruction of traffic, and at such speed as not to interfere with
or impede traffic, and may pass and repass before any theater, hall, hotel,
public resort, railway or ferry station or other place of public gathering;
provided that after passing such public places he shall not turn and repass
until he shall have gone a distance of at least 500 feet upon the streets
and highways of the city; and no person shall solicit passengers for a public
vehicle as aforesaid, upon the public streets of the city, except the driver
thereof, when sitting upon the driver's seat of his vehicle.
§ 180-19. Articles found in taxicabs.
Every driver of a taxicab, immediately after the termination of any hiring or
employment, must carefully search such taxicab for any property lost or left
therein, and any property, unless sooner claimed or delivered to the owner,
must be taken to the police station and deposited with the officer in charge
within 24 hours after the finding thereof.
§ 180-16 SIGNS § 180-19
165:685
Chapter 183
TAX LIENS, DISPOSITION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax administration — See Charter, Art. 22. Taxation — See Ch. 177.
§ 183-1. Sale of tax liens.
The right of the City of Rye, hereinafter referred to as the "city," to receive
taxes and assessments and the lien or liens therefor may be sold by the
city, and after such sale, shall be transferred in the manner provided by this
chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, each installment of an assessment
payable in annual installments shall be deemed a separate assessment. In
this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the word "tax" shall
be interpreted as including water rents, expenses incurred in repairing,
grading and removing snow and ice from sidewalks and all other items
inserted in the annual tax roll and made a part of the annual tax upon
lands and tenements thereon. The right and lien so sold shall be called "tax
lien" and the instrument by which it is assigned shall be called "transfer
of tax lien." Whenever any tax or assessment on lands or tenements in the
City of Rye shall remain unpaid on the tax rolls of the City of Rye for the
previous year, the Comptroller shall advertise, in the manner hereinafter
provided, the tax liens on the said lands and tenements, including in such
advertisement the tax lien for all items due and unpaid for said year and
all years previous thereto, with interest thereon, up to a date named in
the advertisement, except the city taxes or assessments of the current
year for which a transfer of tax lien has not been sold, but including the
unpaid school taxes affecting such lands and tenements, and included in
such advertisement shall be a statement to the effect that the owner or
owners of such lands and tenements, respectively, shall be required to
pay the amount of such taxes and assessments with the penalties thereon
so remaining unpaid, to the time of payment, with the charges of such
notice and advertisement, to the said Comptroller, and notice shall be given
by such advertisement that if default shall be made in such payment on
or before the date specified in said notice, the tax lien on such lands
and tenements will be sold at public auction at a day and place therein
to be specified, for the lowest rate of interest, not exceeding 12% per
annum, at which any person or persons shall offer to take the same, in
consideration of advancing the aggregate sum of said taxes, assessments
and penalties, as the case may be, the interest thereon to the time of sale,
the charges of the above-mentioned notice and advertisement and all other
costs and charges accruing thereon; and if, notwithstanding such notice,
the owner or owners shall refuse or neglect to pay such tax, assessment
and penalties with interest as aforesaid and the charges attending such
notice and advertisement, then it shall and may be lawful for the said
Comptroller to cause such tax lien on said lands and tenements to be sold
§ 180-19 RYE CODE § 183-1
183:686
at public auction for the purpose and in the manner expressed in said
advertisement, and such sale shall be made on the day and at the place for
that purpose mentioned in said advertisement as aforesaid and such sale
shall be continued from time to time, if necessary, without further notice,
until all of the tax liens on the lands and tenements so advertised shall be
sold. The sale of tax liens under the provisions of this chapter shall be held
on the second Thursday of May in each year.
§ 183-2. Notice of sale.
No such sale of any tax lien for the nonpayment of any tax or assessment
as herein provided shall be held unless notice of such sale shall have
been published once in each week for the three consecutive weeks next
preceding the date fixed for such sale in the official newspaper of the city;
such sale shall take place on or after the 21st day and on or before the 28th
day after the day of the first publication. Any period of seven successive
days shall constitute a week under this section; said advertisement shall
contain appended to such notice a detailed statement of the property the
tax lien on which is to be sold, by giving the block and lot number or
numbers, together with such other description, if any, as the Comptroller
may direct, or the said Comptroller, at his option, may cause such detailed
statement and description of the premises the tax lien on which is to be sold
to be printed in a pamphlet, in which case copies of the pamphlet shall be
deposited in the Comptroller's office and shall be delivered to any person
applying therefor. Such detailed statement and description shall also give
the total sum for the nonpayment of which a tax lien is to be sold. In the
event that the Comptroller shall determine to print a pamphlet as aforesaid,
the notice provided for in this section to be given of the sale of tax liens
on lands and tenements shall state that the detailed statement of taxes and
assessments and the property taxes or assessments as aforesaid is to be in
pamphlet form and that copies of the pamphlet are deposited in the office of
the Comptroller and will be delivered to any person applying for the same.
No other notice or demand of the tax or assessment shall be required to
authorize the sale of tax or assessment liens on any lands and tenements as
hereinbefore provided. The Comptroller may cancel any transfer of tax lien
for unpaid taxes and assessments held by the City of Rye or to which the city
has acquired the right, and upon such cancellation the lien of such tax or
assessment shall be the same as if no sale for such unpaid tax or assessment
has been made.
§ 183-3. Authorization for additional sales.
In addition to the annual sale of tax liens as herein provided, the Council
may at any time direct the Comptroller to sell the lien of taxes and
assessments unpaid for more than one year since the same became due and
payable, in which case the Comptroller shall forthwith take the same steps
hereinbefore provided, without regard to the time limitations hereinbefore
specified, and offer such liens for sale in the same manner as hereinbefore
provided.
§ 183-1 TAX LIENS, DISPOSITION OF § 183-4
183:687
§ 183-4. Postponement of sales.
It shall be lawful for the Comptroller to suspend or postpone any sale or
sales of tax or assessment liens on lands and tenements or any portion
thereof which shall have been advertised for sale, to any time not exceeding
30 days from the day specified in any such advertisement. All sales which
shall be so postponed or suspended may be made without further
advertisement, other than a general notice of such postponement, to be
published once in the official newspaper of the city. Interest at the rate of
12% per annum shall be added to the amount of tax and assessment liens
for the period of such postponement.
§ 183-5. Comptroller to conduct sales.
The Comptroller or his deputy shall conduct the sales hereinbefore provided
to be made, and no auctioneer other than said Comptroller or his deputy
shall be employed to make such sale, and no auctioneer's fees shall be
charged thereon. The Comptroller shall require from each purchaser of a
tax or assessment lien at the time of such sale a deposit on account of
20% of the amount of the tax lien purchased by him, and not later than 30
days from the date of the sale, the balance shall be paid to the Comptroller
at his office. If no bid shall be received for a tax lien offered for sale,
the Comptroller on behalf of the City of Rye may bid in the said tax or
assessment lien, and upon such bid no deposit or payment in cash shall
be required from the city. When the city has bid in any tax or assessment
lien, a transfer of tax or assessment lien to the city shall be executed by
the said Comptroller in the form and manner prescribed for other transfers
of tax liens, and the city shall have the same rights in, to and under such
transfer of tax or assessment liens as if the same had been bought by any
other person. The city at any time either before or after the institution
of a foreclosure action may accept a deed of conveyance of the property
covered by the transfer of tax lien, conveying to the city the fee of said
premises, but such deed shall not be taken subject to any mortgage, lien,
judgment or other encumbrance, except unpaid taxes, leases and restrictive
covenants of record. The city shall sell any such property so acquired upon
such terms and for such sums as the Council may by resolution fix and
determine, and the Mayor on behalf of the city shall execute, acknowledge
and deliver a deed therefor. Transfers of tax or assessment liens shall be
made and delivered to the purchaser without charge upon payment of the
amounts therein shown to be due. In case any purchaser shall not complete
his purchase in accordance with the terms prescribed as herein provided,
then the amount deposited by him at the time of the sale shall be forfeited
to the city, and the entire tax or assessment lien upon the lands affected
by such purchase shall be sold again. Such resale shall be held at such
time as the Comptroller may direct, and shall be advertised in the official
newspaper of the city twice in the 10 days immediately preceding the sale.
All deposits forfeited as aforesaid shall be paid into the general fund of the
City of Rye.
§ 183-4 RYE CODE § 183-6
183:688
§ 183-6. Transfer of tax liens.
A transfer of tax lien shall operate to transfer and assign the tax lien
upon the lands or tenements described therein for taxes and assessments
with the penalties and interest thereon and the charges of the notices
and advertisement given pursuant to this chapter and all other costs and
charges so advertised for sale, and to create a lien upon property affected
thereby for the interest to which the purchaser may be entitled under his
bid, but such tax lien so sold shall be subject to all taxes and assessments,
including school taxes or interest acquired from the sale, or lease of the
premises for the same, which are still unpaid and due and owing to the city
and to the Town of Rye, and subject to tax liens and transfers of tax liens
which are still unpaid and due and owing to the city and to the Town of
Rye, also subject to all city taxes, special district assessments and school
taxes which have or may become a lien subsequent to the lien of the taxes
or assessments for which the tax lien is sold, also subject to any and all
subsequent transfer of tax lien against said premises. A transfer of tax lien
shall contain a transfer and assignment by the city of the tax lien sold
to the purchaser, the date of the sale, the aggregate amount of the lien
so transferred and the items of taxes, assessments, penalties and interest
composing the tax lien, the annual rate of interest which the purchaser has
bid and will be entitled to receive, the date when the amount of the tax
lien will be due and the description of the real property affected by the tax
lien, and shall refer for certainty to the designation of said property on the
Official City Map by its block and lot number and such other identifying
description as the Comptroller may deem proper to advertise. Each transfer
of tax lien shall be subscribed by the Comptroller or his deputy, or his
successor in office, and shall be acknowledged by the officer subscribing the
same in the manner in which a deed is required to be acknowledged to be
recorded in Westchester County. The Comptroller may assign any transfer
of tax lien made and delivered to the city upon payment of the amount
thereof with interest at the rate bid to the time of such assignment.
§ 183-7. Record of transfer of tax liens.
The Comptroller shall keep in his office a public record of sales of tax liens
and a copy of each transfer of such liens issued by him. Assignments of
transfer of tax liens duly acknowledged may be filed and recorded in the
office of the Comptroller. Transfer of tax liens and all assignments thereof
shall, upon request, be recorded by recording officers of Westchester
County in the same manner as mortgages and assignments thereof but
without the payment of a mortgage tax under the Tax Law. A transcript of
any record of a transfer of tax lien or assignment thereof in the office of the
Comptroller or any recording officer, duly certified, shall be evidence in any
court with like effect as the original instrument of record. Unless a contrary
intent appears, a tax or assessment lien shall be presumed to be satisfied
and discharged whenever it shall appear from recorded instruments that
the tax lien has been transferred or assigned to the owner of such lands or
tenements, notwithstanding other intervening estates or liens.
§ 183-6 TAX LIENS, DISPOSITION OF § 183-8
183:689
§ 183-8. Rights of purchaser of tax liens.
The aggregate amount of each tax lien transferred pursuant to this chapter
shall be due one year from the date of the sale. Until such aggregate amount
is fully paid and discharged, the holder of the transfer of tax lien shall be
entitled to receive interest on such aggregate amount from the day of sale,
semiannually on the first day of June and December, at the rate which the
purchaser shall have bid. At the option of the holder of any transfer of tax
lien, the aggregate amount thereof shall become due and payable after the
expiration of nine months from the date of sale either after default in the
payment of interest on such transfer of tax lien for three months and/or
after default for three months after the date of the sale of the tax lien in the
payment of any taxes or assessments which become a lien subsequent to
the taxes and assessments for which the tax lien so held is sold. The holder
of a tax lien may pay to the Comptroller, after default, the amount of any
subsequent taxes or assessments which have become a lien subsequent to
the taxes and/or assessments for which the lien so held was sold, and the
amount so paid shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the
date of such payment, and the amount so paid with interest may be added
to the aggregate amount of the tax lien upon foreclosure of the tax lien.
Upon the payment of such tax or assessment as aforesaid by the holder of
such a tax lien, the Comptroller shall note such payment with the name and
address of the holder of such tax lien on the tax record. The owner of the
property affected thereby shall have the right to repay such amount so paid
with interest at any time before the starting of an action to foreclose the
tax lien. In any instance where the city has bid in the tax lien and received
a transfer thereof, and the assessed value of the lot or parcel of land as
assessed upon any subsequent roll is less than $100, the Comptroller is
authorized to advance on behalf of the city the amount of any subsequent
tax or assessment, and in that event the tax lien for the amount of such tax
so paid shall not be sold, but the amount so paid with 12% interest from the
date of such payment shall be due and payable upon any redemption of the
transfer of the tax lien so held, or upon foreclosure thereof, as hereinafter
provided as a part of such tax lien.
§ 183-9. Payment of tax liens.
A. Any person having an interest as owner or mortgagee in the property
affected by a tax lien may satisfy or obtain an assignment of the same by
payment to the Comptroller of the city in the following manner:
(1) At any time prior to the service of notice to redeem, as hereinafter
provided, the payment shall consist of the principal amount due
and/or unpaid for or on account of such transfer of tax lien with
interest at the rate bid to 30 days after the date of payment, less
any payments made by any party on account thereof.
(2) The holder of the transfer of tax lien or any party to an action to
foreclose the same or any party in interest may give written notice
to the Comptroller of the city that notice to redeem has been served
or that an action to foreclose has been commenced, and upon
§ 183-8 RYE CODE § 183-9
183:690
receiving such written notice the said Comptroller shall require the
payment of the amounts hereinafter set forth.
(3) After the service of notice to redeem, as provided in § 183-13
hereof, if payment is made within the 30 days provided in said
notice, such payment shall consist of the amount set forth in the
notice to redeem, or if such payment is made after the expiration of
such 30 days but prior to the time that the Comptroller shall have
had notice of the commencement of a foreclosure thereof, attached
to a copy of the lis pendens with the date of filing in the County
Clerk's office endorsed thereon, the payment shall consist of the
amount unpaid and due on such transfer of tax lien with interest at
the rate bid for all unpaid interest thereon to 30 days after the date
of payment with disbursements as hereinafter set forth.
(4) After the Comptroller shall have had notice of the commencement
of an action to foreclose such transfer of tax lien and prior to
judgment of foreclosure, any person having an interest as owner or
mortgagee in the property affected by such tax lien may file in the
office of the Comptroller of the city a written notice of his intention
to redeem and shall pay to said Comptroller a sum equal to the
principal amount unpaid and due on such tax lien with interest at
the rate bid to 30 days after the date of payment. Such notice and
payment shall stay the proceedings in the foreclosure action except
as hereinafter provided. Upon receiving such notice and payment,
the Comptroller shall thereupon within five days give notice of such
filing and payment personally or by mail to the attorney for the
holder of such tax lien at the address appearing on the copy of lis
pendens filed with the lien; and therein direct that costs be taxed
by the clerk of the court in which the action is pending on five days'
written notice to the person filing notice of intention to redeem,
mailed to the address stated in such notice of intention. The bill of
costs shall not exceed $10 for costs, and disbursements actually
made or incurred not exceeding $25 for all authorized searches for
each tax parcel and postage paid in connection with the service of
notice to redeem and not exceeding $2 for each person served with
a summons, together with the other taxable disbursements,
including referee's fees, if any, actually paid or incurred to which
the plaintiff may be entitled and $5 for discontinuance, cancellation
and other services as hereinafter provided. Such bill of costs shall
also set forth the names and addresses of persons to whom said
disbursements were paid or are payable and the nature of each
item of disbursement. After said costs have been taxed by the clerk
of the court in which the action is pending, a certified copy thereof
shall be filed in the office of the Comptroller. If such certified copy
of bill of costs be filed with the Comptroller within 25 days after the
filing of such notice of intention to redeem and payment, the
transfer of tax lien, by the further payment to the Comptroller of
the amount of said bill of costs within said period of 30 days after
the filing of the notice of intention to redeem as above provided,
§ 183-9 TAX LIENS, DISPOSITION OF § 183-9
183:691
shall be discharged and satisfied of record or an assignment
thereof given. If no such certified copy of bill of costs be filed with
the Comptroller within said 25 days as above provided, the holder
of such transfer of tax lien shall immediately execute and deliver
to the party redeeming a duly acknowledged satisfaction or a duly
acknowledged assignment thereof. At the time of the delivery of
any satisfaction or assignment as provided in this subsection and
before the payment by the Comptroller of any sum to the holder of
the transfer of tax lien or to his attorney, such holder of the transfer
of tax lien shall cause to be delivered without any further payments
the original transfer of tax lien and any and all assignments thereof,
if any, also a consent to the discontinuance of the action and
a cancellation of the lis pendens without costs, also an affidavit
showing the parties served, the date of service and whether any
of them have appeared, attaching to the affidavit the original or a
copy of all notices of appearances and answers, if any. If payment
of costs is not made in the manner above provided, the stay of
proceedings shall be thereby vacated and the plaintiff authorized
to continue the action but shall give credit in the judgment of
foreclosure for all amounts paid as hereinafter provided.
(5) All payments made to the Comptroller as provided in this section
shall be received by him for the benefit of the holder of the tax lien
so paid, and he shall give notice thereof to said holder or a personal
representative or assignee by mail, addressed to such address that
may appear on the records of the Comptroller. The Comptroller
shall pay the amount of such payments so received to the person
who, according to the records of his office, appears to be entitled
thereto, or to the personal representative of such person, upon
such Comptroller's receiving a surrender of such transfer of tax
lien with assignment thereof, if any, together with a certificate of
cancellation or an assignment thereof as requested by the party
paying, and, in the event a foreclosure of such tax lien is pending, a
consent to the discontinuance of such action and the cancellation of
the lis pendens without costs. If a foreclosure action shall have
been pending at the time of payment and such payment shall have
been insufficient to discharge said transfer of tax lien as provided
in Subsection A(4) hereof, and shall so continue within the times
therein provided, the Comptroller shall pay the amount so received
by him to the person who, according to the records of his office,
appears to be entitled thereto or the personal representative of
such person. Any foreclosure of tax lien action may be ordered
discontinued, and any notice of pendency of such action ordered
canceled, by the court in which such action is pending upon proof
of the discharge of the tax lien being foreclosed in the manner
aforesaid.
B. Any person having an interest as owner or mortgagee in property
affected by a tax lien may pay the amount due on such tax lien directly
to the holder thereof. The amount payable shall be the same amount as
§ 183-9 RYE CODE § 183-9
183:692
§ 183-10. Apportionment of tax liens.
The City Assessor shall, at the written request of the owner, mortgagee
or prospective purchaser or mortgagee, apportion any transfer of tax lien
affecting property which is to be subdivided, or a part thereof sold or
mortgaged, or where two or more lots have been assessed together, and file
such apportionment with the Comptroller. The Comptroller shall, upon the
filing of such apportionment in his office, give written notice thereof by mail
to the holder of any transfer of tax lien so apportioned and also to all owners
or mortgagees as are shown in an affidavit to be filed by the applicant
for such apportionment. The applicant shall file with the Comptroller an
affidavit showing who are the owners of the property, with their names and
addresses, and also the names and addresses of all mortgagees holding
mortgages against the whole or any part of the property in reference to
which the transfer of tax lien is to be apportioned. The holder of any
such transfer of tax lien or any owner or mortgagee may, within 10 days
thereafter, given written notice to the Comptroller if he objects to the
apportionment and shall, within 10 days after filing written notice, proceed
to review by certiorari the action of the Assessor in making such
apportionment. In the event of the failure of the holder of any transfer
of tax lien or owner or mortgagee to file objections to the apportionment
within said 10 days, or, if he files objections, to proceed to review said
apportionment within 20 days, such apportionment shall be effective and
the Comptroller or the holder of any transfer of tax lien shall thereupon
accept payment of the amount so apportioned as affecting any part so
apportioned, and thereafter all provisions in this chapter contained in
reference to the payment of the transfer of tax lien or the foreclosure
thereof shall apply to the apportioned amounts.
§ 183-11. Discharge of tax liens.
A tax lien sold pursuant to the provisions of this chapter must be discharged
upon the record thereof by the Comptroller when payment is made to him
may be paid to the Comptroller of the city, and it shall be unlawful to
demand or receive a greater amount in payment of a transfer of tax lien
than that provided in Subsection A hereof. Upon making such payment,
such person shall be entitled to receive from the holder of such tax
lien the same documents as if such payment had been made to the
Comptroller, all as provided in Subsection A(4) hereof.
C. The record owner or holder of a transfer of tax lien shall, on request by
any person having a legal or beneficial interest in property affected by a
transfer of tax lien, furnish a statement of the balance due and unpaid
on account of any such lien, giving balance due on account of principal
and interest thereof, giving rate and date from which interest is
charged to date of statement.
D. The Comptroller shall furnish suggested forms for assignment and also
for satisfying transfer of tax liens.
§ 183-9 TAX LIENS, DISPOSITION OF § 183-11
183:693
of the amount due under the transfer of tax lien as provided in this chapter,
and also when the transfer of tax lien is surrendered to him for cancellation
and there is presented to him a certificate executed by the purchaser or
the personal representative or assignee of the purchaser, acknowledged
so as to be entitled to be recorded in Westchester County, certifying that
the tax lien has been paid or has been otherwise satisfied and discharged.
The transfer of tax lien thus surrendered and such certificate of discharge
must be filed by the Comptroller, and he must note upon the margin of the
record of such sale, upon such transfer of tax lien and upon the copy of
the transfer of tax lien kept in his office, a minute of such discharge and
the date of filing thereof. If the transfer of tax lien shall have been lost,
destroyed or mutilated and if payment of the amount due thereon be made
to the Comptroller, the said amount shall not be paid to the alleged holder
or owner of such transfer of tax lien except on an order of the court after
notice of application to the party or person paying such amount due and due
proof that such transfer of tax lien has been lost, destroyed or mutilated.
The filing of a certified copy of such order with the Comptroller shall be
taken in the place and stead of the transfer of tax lien so lost, destroyed or
mutilated. The Comptroller shall upon demand issue his certificate showing
the discharge of any tax lien which may have been duly discharged as
provided in this section, and such certificate may be filed in the office of the
Clerk of the County of Westchester, and said Clerk shall record the same
and, upon the margin of the record of such transfer of tax lien in his office,
shall note a statement that the same has been discharged, with reference to
the record of such certificate in his office.
§ 183-12. Exemption from taxation.
Tax liens and transfers of tax liens shall be exempt from taxation by the
state or any local subdivision thereof, except as to taxes imposed by Article
10 of the Tax Law. The real property affected by any tax lien shall not be
exempt from taxation by reason of this section.
§ 183-13. Foreclosure of tax liens.
A. If the amount of any tax lien which shall have been transferred by a
transfer of tax lien shall not be paid as provided in this chapter, or
redeemed after notice as provided in this chapter, when under the
terms and provisions of this chapter and of the transfer of tax lien such
amount shall be due, the holder of such tax lien may maintain an action
in the Supreme Court or in the County Court of Westchester County to
foreclose such tax lien. No action to foreclose a tax lien shall be
instituted hereunder unless the holder of such tax lien shall have served
notice to redeem upon the record owner or owners of the premises
affected by such tax lien, and also on the mortgagee or mortgagees
affected by such tax lien. Said notice to redeem shall require the
persons served to pay the amount due under such transfer of tax lien to
the Comptroller of the city or to the holder of such transfer of tax lien
within 30 days from the service of said notice, and shall set forth a
verified statement of the amount required for redemption, which shall
§ 183-11 RYE CODE § 183-13
183:694
consist of the amount due on account of such tax lien with interest at
the rate bid up to the date of the expiration of said thirty-day period,
together with disbursements actually made or incurred not exceeding
$25 for all authorized searches for each tax parcel and disbursements
for postage. The notice shall be served by registered mail addressed to
the last known address, if any, as shown by the records in the office
of the Comptroller and/or in the office of the Clerk of the County of
Westchester. In the event that such records fail to disclose the names
of such owners or mortgagees or fail to disclose the addresses of any
such owners or mortgagees, the Comptroller shall, at the request of
the owner of such transfer of tax lien or his or its representative, post
such notice in his office, and upon the expiration of 30 days from the
date of such posting, the transfer of tax lien holder shall have the same
rights as if the registered notice was given as herein provided. In an
action to foreclose a tax lien any person shall be a proper party of
whom the plaintiff alleges that such person has or may have or whom
the plaintiff has reason to believe that such person has or may have
an interest in or claim upon the real property affected by the tax lien.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an action to foreclose a
tax lien shall be regulated by the provisions of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules, including the right to the appointment of a receiver of rents
and profits pending such foreclosure proceedings as in the case of the
foreclosure of a mortgage, the same rules and laws applying, and by
all other provisions of law and rules of practice applicable to actions to
foreclose mortgages on real property. The people of the State of New
York may be made party to an action to foreclose a tax lien in the same
manner as a natural person. Where the people of the State of New York
or the city is made a party defendant, the complaint shall set forth, in
addition to the other matters required to be set forth by law, detailed
facts showing the particular nature of the interest in or the lien on the
said real property of the people of the State of New York or the city,
and detailed facts showing the particular nature of the interest in or the
lien on said real property which plaintiff has reason to believe that the
people of the State of New York or the city has or may have in the said
real property, and the reason for making the people of the State of New
York or the city a party defendant. Upon failure to state such facts, the
complaint shall be dismissed as to the people of the State of New York
or the city. Separate transfer of tax liens against the same lot or against
two or more lots or parcels of land may be foreclosed in one action.
In the event that any defendant to such an action desires to have the
action severed, an order to that effect may be granted upon due notice
to the plaintiff, and continued as to such defendant or defendants under
such conditions as the court may provide, or the complaint dismissed
as to such defendants, but without costs, or it may be severed on the
application of the plaintiff as to one or more defendants upon due
notice to such defendants as to which the severance is sought who have
appeared, but upon such conditions as the court may provide, or the
complaint dismissed as to such defendants but without costs.
§ 183-13 TAX LIENS, DISPOSITION OF § 183-13
183:695
§ 183-14. Pleading transfer of tax lien.
Whenever a cause of action, defense or counterclaim is for the foreclosure
of a tax lien or is in any manner founded upon a tax lien or a transfer of
a tax lien, the production in evidence of an instrument executed by the
Comptroller, in the form prescribed in § 183-6 hereof for a transfer of tax
lien subscribed by or in behalf of the Comptroller, shall be presumptive
evidence that the lien purported to be transferred by such an instrument
was a valid and enforceable lien and that it has been duly assigned to
the purchaser, and it shall not be necessary to plead or prove any act,
proceeding, notice or action preceding the delivery of such transfer of tax
lien nor to establish the validity of the tax lien transferred by such transfer
of tax lien. If a party or person in interest in any such action or proceeding
claims that a tax lien is irregular or invalid or that there is any defect
therein or that a transfer of tax lien is irregular, invalid or defective, such
invalidity, irregularity or defect must be specifically pleaded or set forth and
must be established affirmatively by the party or person pleading or setting
forth the same.
B. In any transfer of tax lien foreclosure brought by and on behalf of the
city where the property affected thereby has heretofore been sold for
any lien against the same and all back taxes and assessments due at the
time of such sale are not paid within 35 days after the date of such sale,
the city shall be entitled, on application to the court in which its action
is pending or any judge thereof, without notice, to the immediate
appointment of the City Comptroller as receiver of the rents and profits
of such property so affected by such lien, without bond or security, and
all fees received by him shall be paid into the city treasury.
C. A description of the property by block, lot or other description as shown
on the Tax Map, used in the tax rolls and shown in the transfer of tax
lien shall be sufficient for such foreclosure.
D. The referee or other official making the sale shall sell each transfer of
tax lien parcel separately, except that he may sell adjoining parcels with
a frontage of not to exceed 75 feet in width on the street front together,
but the court in and by the judgment may direct such other or different
method as may seem just and proper.
E. The referee or other official making the sale insert such additional
description in the deed as to him shall seem proper for convenience of
record identification.
F. The attorney for the plaintiff in the foreclosure of a transfer of tax lien
shall append to the notice of sale the approximate amount, including
penalties and interest, due for unpaid real property taxes and
assessments, including the amount due on the transfer of tax lien being
foreclosed, which are a lien against the premises so being sold.
§ 183-13 RYE CODE § 183-15
183:696
§ 183-15. Judgment upon tax lien.
In every action for the foreclosure of a tax lien and in every action or
proceeding in which a cause of action, defense or counterclaim is in any
manner founded upon a tax lien or transfer of tax lien, such transfer of tax
lien and the tax lien which it transfers shall be presumed to be regular and
valid and effectual to transfer to the purchaser named therein a valid and
enforceable tax lien. Unless in such an action or proceeding such tax lien
or transfer of tax lien is found to be invalid, they shall be adjudged to be
enforceable and valid for the amount thereof and the interest to which the
holder may be entitled, and to be a tax lien transferred by a transfer of tax
lien effectual to transfer such tax lien to the purchaser named therein.
§ 183-16. Judgment of foreclosure of tax lien.
A. In an action to foreclose a tax lien, unless the defendants obtain
judgment, the plaintiff shall be entitled to a judgment establishing the
validity of the tax lien so far as the same shall not be adjudged invalid,
and of the transfer of tax lien, and directing the sale of the real property
affected thereby or such part thereof as shall be sufficient to discharge
the tax lien or such items thereof as shall not be adjudged invalid and
the interest thereon and all other accrued taxes, assessments and water
rents affecting the real property, together with the expenses of the sale
and the costs of the action, except that the fees and/or allowances to a
referee or other official appointed to compute shall not exceed $10
unless there are five or more tax parcels in the action, in which event
the allowance shall not exceed $20, and the fee and/or allowance to the
referee or other official appointed to sell shall not exceed the rate
allowed to the referee appointed to compute. Costs in any foreclosure
action brought under the provisions of this chapter shall be in the
discretion of the court, but in no event shall such costs exceed the sum
of $20 unless there are five or more separate tax parcels included in
one action, in which event the costs shall not exceed $40. The award of
costs in any action shall carry with it the right to recover taxable
disbursements, together with such amount as the court shall allow for
authorized searches, not to exceed $10 for each tax parcel included in
the action. The judgment of foreclosure shall direct the payment of:
(1) The costs, disbursements and expenses of the foreclosure action.
(2) All taxes, assessments, tax liens and transfers of tax liens due and
owing to the Town of Rye, or shall provide that the tax parcel be
sold subject thereto, and if sold subject thereto, the notice of sale
shall state the approximate amount thereof, including penalties and
interest.
(3) All taxes and special district assessments, school taxes and
penalties payable to the Comptroller, and also all liens or transfers
of tax liens for same which are a lien against the premises so sold
subsequent to the taxes or assessments covered by the lien so
foreclosed, or shall provide that the tax parcel be sold subject
§ 183-15 TAX LIENS, DISPOSITION OF § 183-16
183:697
§ 183-17. Effect of judgment foreclosing tax lien.
thereto, and if sold subject thereto, the notice of sale shall state the
approximate amount thereof, including penalties and interest.
(4) All taxes and assessments, including school taxes or interest
acquired from the sale or lease of the premises for the same, which
are still unpaid and due and owing to the city, making the sale as of
the date of the taxes for which such tax lien has been sold, or shall
provide that the tax parcel be sold subject thereto, and if sold
subject thereto, the notice of sale shall state the approximate
amount thereof, including penalties and interest.
(5) The amount of the tax lien foreclosed with interest thereon.
B. In the event that the city is the plaintiff, the holder of any city tax lien
affecting the tax parcel sought to be sold shall be made a party to the
action, and such tax lien shall be sold free and clear of all city tax liens
and/or taxes due or owing to the city for state, county and city and
school taxes and special district assessments, and the proceeds of such
a sale after paying the costs and disbursements as herein provided shall
be applied to the cancellation of all such taxes and special district
assessments or tax liens therefor in the inverse order of the dates of the
liens of such taxes or assessments. The judgment of foreclosure and
sale shall also recite the transfer of the tax lien and each assignment
thereof, and unless such transfer of tax lien and each assignment
thereof has been duly recorded in the office of the County Clerk, the
same shall be attached to and form a part of the judgment.
C. In the event that the owners of one or more parcels are joined as
defendants, the judgment of foreclosure and sale shall provide for an
equitable division of the costs and disbursements as against each parcel
to be sold as in said judgment provided.
A. Every final judgment in an action to foreclose a tax lien shall be binding
upon, and every conveyance upon a sale pursuant thereto shall transfer
to and vest in the purchaser all the right, title, interest and estate in the
real property affected by such judgment of:
(1) The plaintiff.
(2) Each defendant upon whom the summons is served or who
appeared in the action either in person or by attorney.
(3) Each person claiming from, through or under such a defendant by
title accruing after the filing of notice of pendency of the action or
after the entry of the judgment and filing of the judgment roll in the
proper County Clerk's office.
(4) Each person not in being when the judgment is rendered, who
afterward may become entitled to a beneficial interest attaching to,
or an estate or interest in, such real property or any portion
§ 183-16 RYE CODE § 183-17
183:698
§ 183-18. Disposition of surplus.
Any surplus of proceeds of sale, after paying the expenses of sale and
the costs and disbursements, together with the payments as provided in
§ 183-16 hereof, must be paid into court for the use of the person or persons
entitled thereto, and the judgment shall provide that if such surplus remains
in court for a period of upwards of three months and no application has
been made therefor, the same shall be invested at interest for the benefit of
the person or persons entitled thereto, to be paid upon the direction of the
court.
§ 183-19. Disposition of real estate acquired by city.
The Comptroller is hereby authorized to sell any or all of the real property
acquired by the city upon the foreclosure of any tax or assessment lien or
the transfer of such lien, either at private sale or public auction, for the best
price that can be obtained. He shall not, however, sell the same at private
sale for a price less than the amount fixed and determined by a committee
consisting of the Comptroller, the Corporation Counsel and the Assessor,
which determination must be in writing, shall be approved by the Council
and shall be filed in the office of the Comptroller. The proceeds of the sale
of all such property shall be deposited to the credit of the miscellaneous
revenue of the city, subject to any interest therein or claim thereto by the
Towns of Rye and/or Harrison arising out of unpaid taxes on such property.
§ 183-20. Sale for less than amount of lien.
If at any time prior to the sale of real property in an action to foreclose
a transfer of tax lien held by the city, it shall be determined by the
Comptroller, the Corporation Counsel and the Assessor that the property is
not reasonably worth or will not sell for a price sufficient to pay all of the
thereof, provided that the person presumptively entitled to such
beneficial interest, estate or interest is a party to such action or
bound by such judgment.
B. In the event that the amount bid at such foreclosure sale is not
sufficient to pay the taxes, assessments, interest and penalties due the
city and the Town of Rye, then and in that event the final judgment shall
provide that the premises are sold subject to the lien of the same, after
deducting the amount actually paid on account thereof in connection
with such sale, but the City Council may after such sale direct that the
whole or any part of such taxes, interest and penalties be canceled if it
finds the total thereof exceeds the value of the property so sold. So
much of Section 317 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules as requires the
court to allow a defendant to defend an action after final judgment shall
not apply to an action to foreclose a tax lien. Delivery of the possession
of real property affected by a judgment to foreclose a tax lien may be
compelled in the manner prescribed in § 221 of the Real Property
Actions and Proceedings Law.
§ 183-17 TAX LIENS, DISPOSITION OF § 183-20
183:699
taxes, assessments and charges against the property and the expenses of
foreclosure and sale, they are hereby authorized and empowered, subject to
the approval of the Council, to fix a fair market price for the same, and the
Comptroller may, but shall not be obligated to, bid above the price so fixed,
and he hereby is further authorized and empowered to cancel all of the
taxes, assessments and charges against the same upon receiving payment
of the amount so fixed. The amount received from such sale shall be applied
in the manner provided for in the preceding section. The determination of
the Comptroller, the Corporation Counsel and the Assessor shall be stated
in writing, shall be approved by the Council and shall be filed in the office
of the Comptroller.
§ 183-21. Corporation Counsel to protect interest of city.
It shall be the duty of the Corporation Counsel to protect the interest of
the city in all matters, actions and proceedings relating to tax liens and
transfers of tax liens; to intervene on behalf of the city or of the holder of a
transfer of a tax lien in, or to make the city a party to, any action in which
he believes it to be to the interest to the city so to do, by reason of any
matter arising under or relating to any tax lien or transfer of tax lien, or
advertisement of sale of tax liens.
§ 183-22. Duplicate transfer of tax lien.
Whenever any transfer of tax lien given by the Comptroller as provided
in this chapter shall be lost, destroyed or mutilated, the holder or owner
thereof may apply to the court, on due proof of such loss, destruction or
mutilation, for an order directing the Comptroller to execute and deliver a
duplicate to such holder or owner. The filing of a certified copy of such order
with the Comptroller shall be taken in the place and stead of the transfer of
tax lien so lost, destroyed or mutilated.
§ 183-23. Other remedies not affected.
The remedy provided herein for the collection of taxes is in addition to the
other methods provided by law for the collection of taxes and assessments
in the City of Rye, including the procedure for the collection of delinquent
taxes under Article 11 of the Real Property Tax Law.
Chapter 185
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Filming — See Ch. 93.
§ 183-20 RYE CODE § 185-1
185:700
§ 185-1. Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the "Multichannel Service
Providers Regulatory Local Law for the City of Rye, New York."
§ 185-2. Construal of provisions. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
This chapter shall be construed in accordance with the applicable federal
and state laws governing multichannel service practices, which specifically
includes the operation and provision of a cable television system. Moreover,
with respect to the operation and provision of a cable television system,
this chapter shall be construed in accordance with any applicable rules and
regulations of the PSC.
§ 185-3. Scope.
This chapter shall apply within the geographical limits of the city, including
any areas subsequently annexed by the city, unless state law prescribes
otherwise or in some fashion restricts or alters the effect of this chapter to
a subsequently annexed area of the city.
§ 185-4. Severability. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection or other portion of
this chapter or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is
declared void, unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, then such word,
phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the
proscribed application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining
provisions of this chapter, and all applications thereof, not having been
declared void, unconstitutional or invalid shall remain in full force and
effect.
§ 185-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED CALLS [Repealed 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996] —
A/B SWITCH or INPUT SELECTOR SWITCH [Repealed 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996] —
ACCESS CHANNEL — A government, education or public channel which is
carried on a multichannel system but which is not part of any institutional
network.
ACTIVATED CHANNEL — A channel engineered at the head end of the
multichannel system for the provision of services generally available to
residential subscribers of the multichannel system, regardless of whether
such services actually are provided, including any channel designated for
governmental, educational or public use.
§ 185-1 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-5
185:701
AFFILIATE — Used in relation to any person, another person who owns or
controls, is owned or controlled by or is under common ownership or control
with such person.
ALTERNATIVE USER CHARGE — A charge used in place of a traditional
franchise fee that the Council requires as payment for the privilege of using
the streets, easements, public ways, or rights-of-way of the city in order to
construct, maintain and/or operate a multichannel system. An alternative
user fee is not based on an MCS provider's gross annual revenues (as is
the case in a franchise fee), but rather is based, to the extent permitted by
applicable law on the value of the city property that an MCS provider uses
to construct, maintain, and operate its multichannel system.[Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
APPLICANT — A person submitting an application or proposal to the city
for a license or franchise (where required) to operate a multichannel system
under the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter, and any state
regulations (including, where applicable, those of the PSC).
APPLICATION or PROPOSAL (synonymous for the purposes of this chapter)
— The process by which the applicant submits a request and indicates
a desire to be granted a license or franchise (where required) for all
or a part of the city. An "application" or "proposal" includes all written
documentation and verbal statements and representations, in whatever
form or forum, made by an applicant to the Council/franchising authority
concerning the construction, rendering of services, maintenance or any
other matter pertaining to the proposed multichannel system.
ASSIGNMENT OF A FRANCHISED MCS PROVIDER'S FRANCHISE — Any
transfer of a franchise to a party other than a majority owned affiliate,
whether by sale, assignment, lease or other form of alienation other than a
hypothecation made to secure indebtedness.[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
AUXILIARY EQUIPMENT — Equipment supplied by the MCS provider (such
as a converter, remote control unit or device, digital tuner or input selector
switch) to enhance or assist in the reception or provision of multichannel
service.
BASIC CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE — Any service tier which includes
the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational and government access channels. In the event that the
definition of "basic cable television service" is amended by either Congress
or the FCC, then this chapter's definition of "basic cable television service"
shall be likewise amended to conform thereto and be consistent therewith.
CABLE ACT or CCPA — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as
amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act
of 1992, and as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which in
large part is codified at 47 USC § 521 et seq.[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
CABLE CHANNEL or CABLE TELEVISION CHANNEL or DATA CHANNEL
or INFORMATIONAL CHANNEL — A portion of the electromagnetic or light
§ 185-5 RYE CODE § 185-5
185:702
frequency spectrum used in a cable system which is capable of delivering a
television channel (as "television channel" is defined by the FCC regulation).
CABLE OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons who or which:
CABLE SERVICE [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996] —
CABLE SYSTEM or CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM [Amended 5-29-1996
by L.L. No. 4-1996] — A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment
that is designed to provide cable service which includes video, voice or data
programming, and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city.
However, such terms do not include the following:
CHAPTER — The Multichannel Service Providers Regulatory Local Law for
the City of Rye, New York.
CHARGE — A one-time or non-regularly occurring cost paid by the
subscriber and which is associated with the installation, maintenance,
service or repair of the multichannel service. Specifically, a "charge"
includes, but is not limited to, address change charges for subscribers;
disconnection fees; downgrade charges; costs for closed-captioned devices
and equipment, remote control devices and equipment for hearing-impaired
Provides cable television service over a cable system and directly or
through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such
cable system; or
A.
Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the
management and operation of such a cable system.
B.
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or
other programming service.
A.
Subscriber interaction, if any, or other programming which is required
for the selection or use of such video programming service.
B.
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1)
or more broadcast stations;
A.
B. A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way;
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to
the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that
such facility shall be considered a cable system [other than for purposes
of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act, codified at 47 USC § 541] to the
extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming or
service directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to
provide interactive on-demand services;
C.
An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Cable Act,
to be codified at § 47 USC; or
D.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems.
E.
§ 185-5 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-5
185:703
customers; installation charges for video camera recorders and players;
installation charges for digital radio; and trip or service call charges.
CITY — The City of Rye, New York.
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of Rye, New York, or his or
her duly authorized designee.
COLLECTION CHARGE — A charge or fee imposed on a customer by an
MCS provider for such provider's efforts at collecting or attempting to
collect a past-due account.
COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE — With respect to any requirement
applicable to an MCS provider, means that it is commercially impracticable
for such an MCS provider to comply with such requirement as a result of a
change in conditions which is beyond the control of such an MCS provider
and the nonoccurrence of which was the basic assumption on which the
requirement was based.
CONVERTER — Any electric, electronic or other device, separate and apart
from the subscriber's receiver, that is capable of converting or changing
signals to a frequency not intended to be susceptible to interference within
the television, video or data receiver of a subscriber and by an appropriate
channel or other type of selector may also permit a subscriber to view or
otherwise use signals delivered at designated dial locations or such other
reception and use allocations as may be applicable and required for the
practical use of the signal.
COUNCIL or COUNCIL/FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — The City Council of
the City of Rye, New York.
CUSTOMER — A lawful subscriber or user of the services and/or facilities
of the multichannel system provided by an MCS provider.[Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
DECODER or DESCRAMBLER — A device which enables a subscriber to
convert a scrambled signal into a viewable or otherwise usable signal.
DISASTER EMERGENCY — An imminent, impending or actual natural or
humanly induced situation wherein the health, safety or welfare of the
residents of the city is threatened. A "disaster emergency" (by illustration)
may include a sudden or expected insect infestation (such as with locusts,
grasshoppers or bees); snowstorm; flood; hailstorm; tornado; severe
thunderstorm; hazardous waste infiltration; fire; petroleum, munitions or
nuclear explosion; or aircraft crash.
DOWNGRADE — A change in the level of a subscriber's multichannel
service from a more comprehensive level of multichannel service (in terms
of services or channels provided) to a less comprehensive level of
multichannel service (in terms of services or channels provided). Though
not mandatory, a "downgrade" in the level of service normally results in the
decrease in the periodic rate for the provision of such multichannel services
to the subscriber.
§ 185-5 RYE CODE § 185-5
185:704
DROP — A small branch of cable or other transmitting medium which
connects the terminals on the back of the subscriber's receiver to the trunk
or feeder cable or future technical equivalent.
EASEMENT — Shall include any public or private easement or other
compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for
public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever, including cable
television, or any multichannel service. "Easement" shall include a private
easement used for the provision of cable service or any other multichannel
service.[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission and/or such other federal
regulatory agency as now or in the future may have jurisdiction to oversee
multichannel service providers.[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
FIBER CABLE or FIBER OPTIC CABLE — Very thin and pliable cylinders or
strands of glass or plastic or any future developed technical equivalent used
to carry wide bands of multiple frequencies.
FRANCHISE — The initial authorization or subsequent renewal granted by
the Council/franchising authority in order for a person to construct, operate
and/or maintain a franchised MCS system in all or part of the city.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The separate contract by which the Council/
franchising authority grants an MCS provider the right to operate a
franchised multichannel system within all or a part of the city.
FRANCHISED MCS PROVIDER or FRANCHISEE — A person that is
awarded a franchise by the Council/franchising authority to construct or
operate a franchised multichannel system within all or part of the
city.[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
FRANCHISE EXPIRATION or FRANCHISE AGREEMENT EXPIRATION —
The date of expiration, or the end of the term of a franchised MCS provider,
as noted under a franchise agreement, or any lawful extension
thereof.[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
FRANCHISE FEE — A fee or charge that the city requires as payment for
the privilege of using the streets, rights-of-way, public ways and easements
of the city in order to construct, maintain and operate a franchised
multichannel system.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY or COUNCIL/FRANCHISING AUTHORITY —
The City Council of the City of Rye, New York.
FUNCTIONAL EQUIVALENT or FUNCTIONALLY EQUIVALENT — With
respect to a specifically named piece of multichannel system equipment,
another piece of multichannel system equipment that either:
Has the same or substantially similar characteristics, qualities,
operational capabilities and design functions as the original specifically
named piece of multichannel system equipment;
A.
Operates in substantially the same form and fashion as the original
specifically named piece of multichannel equipment; or
B.
§ 185-5 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-5
185:705
GROSS REVENUE [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996] —
HEAD END — The electronic control center, where incoming signals,
including those of television broadcast stations, are amplified, modulated,
filtered, converted or in any way processed or converted for redistribution
to subscribers.
HOLIDAY — A day in which a substantial portion of the area's workers are
exempt from work even though paid, including but not limited to all holidays
recognized by either the state or federal government.
HYPOTHECATION — Providing security for a loan or indebtedness of an
MCS provider in a manner and method that does not specifically include the
assignment or transfer of possession or sale of the multichannel system or
franchise.[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
INPUT SELECTOR SWITCH — Intended to perform the same function as an
a/b switch.
Operates in a technologically superior manner to the original
specifically named piece of multichannel equipment.
C.
For any period, any and all revenues received by the franchisee or other
MCS provider for that period which are derived from the operation of
the MCS system to provide MCS services, or in the case of a cable
operator, to provide cable service under the authority of the franchise
granted to it by the city.
A.
For purposes of the calculation of franchise fees pursuant to § 185-106
of this chapter, the "gross revenues" of the franchisee shall include any
and all compensation actually derived from such franchisee's operation
of its cable system to provide cable services under the authority of its
franchise whether received directly or indirectly by such franchisee in
the form of direct payment to such franchisee or to a controlling owner
or affiliate of such franchisee, and shall include the value of goods or
services and other non-subscriber revenues (including transmission or
advertising services) provided by such franchisee under the authority
of such franchise to a controlling owner or affiliate of such franchisee to
the extent not otherwise compensated to such franchisee by such owner
or affiliate in a manner consistent with established practice or available
to non-affiliated parties.
B.
However, "gross revenue" does not include any revenues billed but not
collected or credited when actually written off as bad debt, or revenues
refunded back to customers, or any taxes imposed and/or assessed by
law on subscribers which an MCS provider collects and pays in full
to the applicable authorities, nor any revenues received by any person
other than such franchisee or MCS provider with respect to cable
service or other service provided by such person over the franchisee's
or MCS provider's cable system for which charges are assessed to
subscribers but not received by such franchisee or MCS provider.
C.
§ 185-5 RYE CODE § 185-5
185:706
LATE CHARGE — A charge which is added to a customer's account or bill
for nonpayment of a previously due and delinquent account.
MAYOR — The Mayor for the City of Rye, New York, or the Mayor's
authorized designee.
MCS — Multichannel service.
MCS PROVIDER or MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDER [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996] —
MDS — Multipoint distribution system.
MDS PROVIDER or MULTIPOINT DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM PROVIDER —
Any person or group of persons authorized by the FCC to transmit
specialized multichannel programming to subscriber-selected locations.
MENU-DRIVEN or MENU-DRIVEN CABLE or MENU-DRIVEN PROGRAM/
SERVICE — The process whereby the MCS provider offers multichannel
services via the multichannel system in a format that allows the subscriber
to select and be charged for multichannel services on either a per channel,
per program or per event basis. Menu-driven cable allows the subscriber
to create his or her own service tier(s) or cluster(s) and the opportunity to
change the composition of his or her tier(s) or cluster(s) on a periodic basis.
MULTICHANNEL PROGRAMMING SERVICE or MULTICHANNEL
SERVICE —
MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDER — The same as "MCS provider."
Any person or group of persons who:
Provides multichannel communications service over a multichannel
system, irrespective of the technology employed and subject to
federal and state preemption or limitation, and directly or
indirectly owns a significant interest in such multichannel system;
or
(1)
Who otherwise controls or is responsible through any arrangement,
the management and operation of such a multichannel system.
(2)
A.
The term "MCS provider" or "multichannel service provider"
specifically includes the terms "cable operator," "MDS provider" or
"multi-point distribution system provider," "MMDS provider," personal
communications network system provider (where applicable and
permitted under state rule or regulation, including that of the PSC), and
"SMATV operator"; provided, however, that when used in reference to
a "franchised MCS provider" such use shall mean only the "franchisee."
B.
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming service, irrespective of the technology employed
and subject to federal and state preemption or limitation.
A.
Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such
video programming or other programming service.
B.
§ 185-5 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-5
185:707
MULTICHANNEL SYSTEM [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996] —
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Those service conditions which
are within the control of the franchisee. Those conditions which are not
within the control of the franchisee include, but are not limited to, natural
disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages
and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are
ordinarily within the control of the franchisee include, but are not limited
to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak
or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the cable
system.[Added 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
NYSCCT [Repealed 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]NYSPSC or PSC —
The New York State Public Service Commission or any successor
agency.[Added 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE — Information that an MCS provider
(specifically including a cable operator) makes available to all subscribers
generally.
PAY-PER-VIEW or PREMIUM CHANNEL — The delivery over the
multichannel system of audio and/or video signals for a rate or amount (over
and above the rate for basic service) on a per event or per program or per
channel basis.
A facility consisting of a closed transmission paths and associated
signal generation reception, and control equipment;
A.
A facility consisting of infrared transmission or point-to-point
transmission (as permitted by law); or
B.
Any functional equivalent that is designed to provide multichannel
service which includes video, voice, or data programming to multiple
subscribers within the city.
C.
However, such term does not include the following:
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
(1) or more broadcast stations;
(1)
A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-ofway;
(2)
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole, or in part,
to the provision of Title II of the Communication Act of 1934, except
that such facility shall be considered a multichannel system [other
than for purposes of Section 621 (c) of the Cable Act, codified at 47
USC § 541] to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of
video, voice or data programming or service directly to subscriber;
or
(3)
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility.
(4)
D.
§ 185-5 RYE CODE § 185-5
185:708
PEG — Public, educational and governmental.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership,
association of two (2) or more persons having a joint common interest, jointstock
company or governmental entity.
PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK or PCN or PRIVATE
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — Any ancillary or aligned component of
an MCS provider's system consisting of communications lines, cables,
equipment or facilities which are used to provide telecommunications
service that in any manner uses or occupies the streets, easements, public
ways or rights-of-way within the city (as annexed). However, "private
communications network" does not include any part of a state- or FCClicensed
local government, local exchange telephone company or any part
of a federal, state, county or local government-owned telecommunications
system.
PROPOSED ABANDONMENT OF MULTICHANNEL SERVICE or
PROPOSED WITHDRAWAL OF MULTICHANNEL SERVICE or PROPOSED
CESSATION OF MULTICHANNEL SERVICE [Repealed 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996] —
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS FACILITIES —
PUBLIC WAY — Any public street, public way, public place, easement or
rights-of-way now laid out or dedicated, and the space on, above or below
it, and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the area served by the
MCS provider.[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
RATE — The periodic price paid by a subscriber for the receipt of any
multichannel service provided for by an MCS provider.
REVOCATION, TERMINATION or NONRENEWAL — An official act by the
city whereby the Council/franchising authority removes, repeals or rescinds
previously approved authorization for a licensed or franchised MCS
provider to conduct the running of a multichannel system within the city.
SERVICE CLUSTER — The grouping, aligning or packaging of one (1) or
more multichannel programming services by category (such as sports and/
or news) or by rate or by some other identifiable method and charging a
separate price or rate for each service cluster.
SERVICE OUTAGE — For purposes of credit, the loss of picture or sound
on all basic subscriber channels or one (1) or more auxiliary programming
channels (including tiers and clusters). For purposes of response to a
service call, a "service outage" means a loss of picture or sound or other
service provided by an MCS provider which is not caused by the failure
or malfunction of a subscriber's television receiver or monitor or by the
misfeasance or malfeasance of the subscriber.
Channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental
use.
A.
B. Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
§ 185-5 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-5
185:709
SERVICE TIER — A category of multichannel service or other programming
service provided by an MCS provider and for which a separate rate is
charged by an MCS provider.
SMATV — Satellite Master Antenna Television.
SMATV OPERATOR or SATELLITE MASTER ANTENNA TELEVISION
OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons who or which:
SMATV SYSTEM — A private multichannel system not crossing any public
rights-of-way and which is located on private property, and serving private
dwellings, provided that such a system is exempt from municipal franchise
requirements by applicable provisions of federal or state law.[Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
STATE — The State of New York.
STREET — The surface of and the space above and below a public street,
road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way or place, alley, court,
boulevard, parkway, drive or other easement now or hereafter held by the
city (including any street, as defined, which is acquired by eminent domain)
for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rightsof-
way now or hereafter held by the city (including any easements or rightsof-
way acquired by eminent domain) which shall, with their proper use and
meaning, entitle the city and MCS provider to use thereof for the purpose
of installing or transmitting multichannel system transmissions over poles,
wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, viaducts, manholes, amplifiers,
appliances, attachments and other property as may ordinarily be necessary
and pertinent to a multichannel system.
SUBSCRIBER — A person lawfully receiving multichannel service delivered
by an MCS provider.
U.S.C. — United States Code.
USER — A person or organization utilizing a multichannel system and/or its
equipment for purposes of production and/or transmission of material, as
contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING — Programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast
station.
§ 185-6. Statement of intent; threshold requirements.
A. Provides multichannel service over an SMATV system; or
Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the
management of an SMATV system.
B.
A. The Council recognizes the United States Congress' intent in approving
the Cable Act (expressed in Section 601, codified at 47 U.S.C. § 521). As
such, the Council reaffirms and adopts those principles and ideals as
part of the city's intent with respect to cable television and expands its
intent (where applicable) to cover all MCS providers.
§ 185-5 RYE CODE § 185-6
185:710
B. As expressed by Congress and adopted by the Council, its intent is as
follows:
(1) To establish a local policy concerning communications and
technologies.
(2) To establish franchise procedures and standards which encourage
the growth and development of cable systems and which assure
that cable systems are responsive to the needs and interests of the
city.
(3) To establish guidelines for the exercise of local authority with
respect to the regulation of cable systems.
(4) To assure that cable communications provide, and are encouraged
to provide, the widest diversity of information and services to the
public.
(5) To establish an orderly process for franchise renewal which
protects franchisees against unfair denials of renewal where a
franchisee's past performance and proposal for future performance
meet the standards set by the Cable Act and this chapter.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
(6) To promote competition in cable communications and minimize
unnecessary regulation that would impose an undue economic
burden on cable systems.
C. In addition to the principles and ideals listed in Subsection B, the
Council also expresses that its intent covers the following:
(1) To create a set of regulations, standards and procedures for MCS
providers.
(2) To create a comprehensive customer service and consumer
protection policy for MCS providers.
(3) To provide for access and inspection of an MCS provider's books
and records in order to monitor compliance with local, state and
federal laws and any franchise agreement (if one has been
granted).
(4) To create a thorough construction and installation policy for an
MCS provider's system.
(5) To provide for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
city in light of the MCS provider's construction, operation and
maintenance of the system.
(6) To provide for the periodic inspection of an MCS provider's
facilities and equipment by the city or its designated agents.
§ 185-6 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-6
185:711
§ 185-7. Designation of officer; delegation of powers and authority.
(7) To provide for emergency override capability, so that citizens of the
city may be warned of a potential, imminent or actual disaster or
emergency situation that exists in the area.
(8) To provide for the introduction and installation of safety alert
technology in order to notify both subscribers and nonsubscribers
of imminent disaster emergencies.
(9) To create a thorough procedure for collecting and monitoring
franchise fees and alternative user charges.
(10) To create a viable alternative to franchise fees in case such fees, or
their collection, are ruled invalid, unenforceable or
unconstitutional.
(11) To create a thorough default and revocation procedure for licensed
and franchised MCS providers.
(12) To provide for continuity of services in the event of city acquisition,
abandonment, withdrawal, cessation of service, revocation,
termination, nonrenewal or expiration of an MCS provider.
(13) To create a performance review procedure in order to assist the
city in its periodic evaluation of a franchised MCS provider's
performance.
D. Further, the Council recognizes that with respect to MCS providers
classified as "cable operators," the Council's power to adopt regulations
is, in part, authorized under Sections 632, 634 and 636 of the Cable Act
(codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 552, 554 and 556, respectively) as well as the
Council's police powers, due to the potential for physical scarcity and
public disruption when cable either occupies or uses the public rightsof-
way.
E. With respect to the rules and regulations of the PSC, it is expressly
understood that such rules and regulations establish threshold
requirements that are to be met in order to operate a multichannel
system classified as a "cable system" within the city. Consequently, such
threshold rules and regulations of the PSC may be supplemented and/or
exceeded unless specifically preempted by the PSC or unless the extent
of the city's authority is determined otherwise by way of formal PSC
action. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
F. However, unless determined otherwise by the state or a court of
competent jurisdiction, the rules and regulations of the PSC are
applicable only to MCS providers classified as "cable operators." For all
such other MCS providers, the Council/franchising authority may
develop and implement its own set of rules and regulations, to the
extent permitted by both state and federal law. [Amended 5-29-1996
by L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 185-6 RYE CODE § 185-7
185:712
§ 185-8. Applicability.
§ 185-9. Exemption.
A. Unless otherwise designated by the Council, the Council/franchising
authority is hereby designated the officer of the city who is responsible
for the continuing administration of this chapter. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. Unless prohibited by federal or state law (including the PSC), the
Council/franchising authority may delegate its powers and authority
with respect to administering this chapter with regard to a franchise
agreement to a duly authorized official of the city. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
C. However, the Council/franchising authority may never delegate its
franchising or revocation power to another person or representative.
A. Unless exempted entirely from this chapter or exempted under one (1)
or more provisions of this chapter or of a franchise agreement or
granted relief (by either the PSC or the Council/franchising authority)
from one (1) or more provisions and/or requirements of this chapter,
then this chapter shall be applicable to an MCS provider, and this
chapter shall have full effect and be enforceable in its entirety.
Moreover, an MCS provider shall be expected to comply with this
chapter no later than twelve (12) months after this chapter becomes
effective, except where a different compliance date is given or noted
(including a different date noted in an applicable franchise agreement).
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. Subsection A of this section is not intended to repeal, and does not have
the effect of repealing, any current franchise agreement that presently
exists between the Council/franchising authority and a franchised MCS
provider.
C. As a result of Subsection B of this section, the provisions of this chapter
shall have no effect on an existing franchise agreement until the
expiration of the existing franchise agreement or until the following
occurs:
(1) Prior to the expiration of the franchise agreement, the Council/
franchising authority and the affected franchised MCS provider
either execute an amended franchise or renewal franchise
agreement in which both parties agree to be bound by the terms of
this chapter (except as specifically granted relief, exemption,
clarification or comparable policy); or
(2) Both parties agree to a specific date for expiration of said existing
franchise, which in fact is prior to the present expiration date.
A. MCS providers which are exempted from complying with the provisions
of this chapter are as follows:
§ 185-7 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-9
185:713
§ 185-10. Relief.
(1) An MCS provider who is exempted from this chapter as a result of
an applicable FCC or PSC ruling; or [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
(2) An MCS provider which is exempted from this chapter as a result of
an applicable judicial ruling, from which no subsequent appeal can
be taken.
B. It is expressly understood that an exempted MCS provider remains
exempted only as long as it meets one (1) or more of the specifications
of this particular section.
C. It also is expressly noted that the extent of the exemption for a qualified
MCS provider is only for this chapter. Consequently, such an exempted
MCS provider is expected to abide by and comply with any other
applicable city, state (including applicable PSC) or federal laws and
regulations, including any applicable federal or state consumer
protection or customer service laws and regulations. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
A. Any MCS provider affected by this chapter may file a written petition at
any time with the Council/franchising authority seeking relief from one
(1) or more provisions of this chapter. The relief requested may
specifically include the exemption from or delay in implementation (as
to the petitioning MCS provider only) of one (1) or more provisions of
this chapter or that a specific provision be required for only part of any
franchise term. The position shall set forth the relief requested and the
basis thereof with such supporting information and material as may be
applicable.
B. In order to receive any relief from one (1) or more of the provisions of
this chapter, an MCS provider must satisfactorily demonstrate to the
Council/franchising authority that at least one (1) of the following facts
exists:
(1) The provision and/or requirement is expressly prohibited by federal
law, the FCC or state law or (where applicable) PSC rule or
regulation. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
(2) Where applicable, that the provision in question materially affects
and is in conflict with an expressed right that is specifically noted in
an existing franchise agreement (but only for the term of the
existing franchise) [this provision covers situations where an MCS
provider classified as a "cable operator" seeks and is granted
modification of an existing franchise agreement under Section 625
of the Cable Act (codified at 47 U.S.C. § 545)].
(3) That compliance with a particular provision and/or requirement
will be commercially impracticable for an MCS provider.
§ 185-9 RYE CODE § 185-10
185:714
§ 185-11. Compliance required.
An MCS provider shall not be excused from complying with any of the
requirements of this chapter or any subsequently adopted amendments
to this chapter by any failure of the Council/franchising authority on any
one (1) or more occasions to seek or insist upon compliance with such
requirements or provisions.
(4) That one (1) or more time frames listed in this chapter are either
impossible to meet or impractical to meet in light of the MCS
provider's operational policy.
(5) That the MCS provider has its own construction, maintenance,
operation or customer service policy which the Council/franchising
authority deems comparable to or exceeding any provision and/or
requirement from which the MCS provider seeks relief.
(6) That the health, safety and welfare interests of the city otherwise
warrant the granting of such relief.
C. Unless delegated to another authorized representative of the city, the
Council/franchising authority shall have the responsibility of
determining whether an MCS provider's construction, maintenance,
operation or customer service policy is comparable to or exceeds a
similar provision in this chapter.
D. As an alternative to seeking an exemption or requesting relief, an MCS
provider may petition for clarification on the precise intent and effect
that one (1) or more provisions or sections of this chapter have on the
petitioning MCS provider.
E. In accordance with this chapter, the Council/franchising authority may
charge the petitioning MCS provider with the actual costs for
processing such a petition, including any costs incurred by outside
consultants who are retained by the city to review an MCS provider's
petition, provided that the franchised MCS provider seeks a substantial
waiver of material provisions of this chapter previously understood to
be applicable to the franchisee and if such petition is deemed likely to
cause the city to incur additional and otherwise unnecessary costs not
previously anticipated in the determination of its franchise fee.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
F. In those instances where the Council/franchising authority grants an
exemption or relief to a franchised MCS provider or deems a franchised
MCS provider's operational policy to be comparable to a local law
provision, the franchise agreement (initial, existing or renewal) shall be
deemed amended to reflect the exact extent of such exemption and/or
relief. It should be specifically noted that the benefit of such exemption,
relief, clarification or comparable policy extends only to the MCS
provider granted such exemption, relief, clarification or comparable
policy. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 185-10 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-12
185:715
§ 185-12. Present and future laws to apply.
§ 185-13. Inconsistent provisions.
§ 185-14. Federal or state regulations.
A. Any MCS provider, its assignee or transferee or buyer shall be subject
to, and expected to comply with, all local laws now or hereafter adopted
and in effect within the city, including this chapter, to the extent that
said MCS provider or its predecessor in interest has not received an
exemption or relief from said local law(s), and to the extent that said
local laws do not materially conflict with the rights granted and
standards expressed in a franchise or franchise agreement between an
MCS provider and the city. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. Any MCS provider, its assignee or transferee shall be subject to, and
expected to comply with, all federal and state laws, and with all rules
and regulations issued by all applicable regulatory agencies (including,
where applicable, the FCC and PSC) now or hereafter in existence.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
C. Any MCS provider, its assignee or transferee shall be subject to all
lawful exercise of the city's police power.
D. With respect to future local laws noted in this section, nothing
contained herein prevents an MCS provider from exercising any and all
of its administrative and legal rights in order to challenge the
constitutionality, applicability and enforceability of said future local
laws.
A. Except as noted in Subsection B of this section, to the extent that there
is any prior resolution, ordinance or local law which, in part or in whole,
is directly inconsistent with this chapter, such part or such whole of the
prior resolution or local law shall be repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency.
B. Subsection A of this section is not intended to repeal and does not have
the effect of repealing any current franchising ordinance or franchise
agreement that presently exists between the Council/franchising
authority and a franchised MCS provider.
A. In any case of an actual inconsistency between any provision or section
of this chapter and any provision or section of a federal or state rule,
regulation or law preemptive in nature and effect, then the preemptive
federal or state rule, regulation or law shall not only supersede the
effect of the local law, but also control in any local application.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. The above subsection specifically includes any situation wherein an
applicable federal or state judicial decision creates an actual
inconsistency with any provision or section of this chapter. In such a
§ 185-12 RYE CODE § 185-14
185:716
§ 185-15. Inconsistencies with existing franchise. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 185-16. Arbitration.
If the Council/franchising authority and a franchised MCS provider agree
to such and the federal or state law does not expressly prohibit such, then
arbitration or settlement mediation may be used to resolve any dispute that
arises out of this chapter or franchise agreement. The terms and conditions
relating to the arbitration or settlement mediation process (including
possible cap on costs expended by both parties, composition of the hearing
panel and liability, if any, for the costs expended) shall be stated with
specificity in the franchise agreement; provided, however, that the parties
may agree, in writing, to such terms and conditions of the process prior to
the arbitration or settlement mediation.
§ 185-17. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
situation, the federal or state judicial decision shall not only supersede
the effect of this chapter but also control in any local application.
A. Where there is a conflict (actual or apparent) between this chapter and
an existing and applicable franchise agreement, the local law shall
control and prevail unless administratively or judicially determined
invalid, unenforceable or unconstitutional or unless the provisions of
Subsection B of this section apply to the MCS provider and its franchise
agreement.
B. In the case where a franchised MCS provider receives an exemption,
relief, clarification from one (1) or more provisions or section of this
chapter or has one (1) or more of its policies deemed comparable to a
provision contained in this chapter, said franchisee's franchise
agreement shall be deemed to be amended to reflect the same such
exemption, relief, clarification or comparable policy, to whatever extent
may be necessary, and to the extent that such an exemption, relief,
clarification or comparable policy as contained in a franchise
agreement is inconsistent with a provision contained in this chapter,
then the specifically noted exemption, relief, clarification or comparable
policy language contained in the franchise agreement shall control.
A. Any franchisee or other MCS provider willfully violating or failing to
comply with any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a civil
violation and upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine or other
penalty of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.) as provided
for by state law. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a
separate violation and shall be subject to a separate fine or civil penalty.
A violation that consists of a single instance and which is promptly
corrected upon awareness or notification shall not be considered the
§ 185-14 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-17
185:717
§ 185-18. (Reserved)
§ 185-19. Council/franchising authority's retained rights and
authority. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
equivalent of multiple violations for the period predating discovery and
notification.
B. In addition to any other penalties prescribed in this section, the city's
Corporation Counsel may maintain an action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain by injunction any
violations of the provisions of this chapter. Each day upon which there
exists a violation of this chapter or a failure to abide by or comply with
any provision or requirement of this law after due notice and an
opportunity to cure the violation has been afforded the MCS provider
shall constitute a separate occurrence and may subject the MCS
provider to separate penalties.
C. In instances where a franchise agreement provides for assessed
charges or liquidated damages for the breach or violation of that
franchise agreement, then such assessed charges or liquidated
damages shall be considered controlling and an adequate alternative to
the remedies described in this law. Such assessed charges or liquidated
damages shall not be used by the city until after it first attempts to
resolve the matter in the manner prescribed by this chapter.
A. Subject to preemption by, or other approval authority of, the FCC or any
other federal or state governmental entity or agency (including, where
applicable, the PSC), and to the extent permitted by any applicable law,
the Council/franchising authority retains the authority to provide for:
(1) The regulation and control of any multichannel system within the
geographical limits of city.
(2) The award and grant of an MCS franchise (where required)
subsequent to review of an application or proposal by the Council/
franchising authority.
(3) The periodic review and/or amendment or repeal of all or part of
this chapter; except as it may not unilaterally impose substantial
capital requirements not anticipated in the franchise agreement.
(4) If mutually agreed to with a franchised MCS provider, the periodic
review and/or amendment of any existing franchise agreement.
B. The Council/franchising authority, to the extent permitted by Section
623 or other provisions of the Cable Act (codified at 47 USC § 543),
retains the power to approve the rates or charges associated with the
providing of multichannel service classified as "cable service" by an
MCS provider classified as a "cable operator."
§ 185-17 RYE CODE § 185-19
185:718
§ 185-20. (Reserved)
§ 185-21. Notices.
§ 185-22. (Reserved)
§ 185-23. (Reserved)
§ 185-24. (Reserved)
§ 185-25. (Reserved)
§ 185-26. Defense and indemnification.
C. Subject to pre-emption by, or other approval authority of, the FCC or
any other federal or state governmental entity or agency (including in
certain instances, the PSC), the Council/franchising authority retains
the jurisdiction to enforce all laws and regulations relating to
multichannel customer service practices and consumer protection.
D. If the FCC, Congress, the State, PSC or other governmental agency
with authority over cable or any other MCS provider ever abrogates,
deletes, removes or otherwise disposes of rules or standards that are
referenced in this chapter or relied upon by the Council/franchising
authority for purposes of MCS provider compliance with this chapter,
then the Council/franchising authority may, to the extent not preempted
by or inconsistent with later-adopted law or regulations, reinstate such
rules or standards. In such case, the reinstated rules will have the same
weight (as allowed under prevailing law) as they had prior to their
initial deletion.
A. Both the Council/franchising authority and each MCS provider shall
provide the other party with the name and address of the contact
designated to receive notices, filings, reports, records, documents and
other correspondence. All notices affecting the rights of such parties
shall be delivered to each party's contact by certified mail, return
receipt requested, personal service with a signed receipt of delivery or
overnight with receipt verification, unless otherwise provided in an
applicable franchise agreement. All other filings, reports, records,
documents and other correspondence may be delivered by any
permissible means including, but not limited to: facsimile transmission
("faxing"); personal service; overnight mail or package delivery or
delivery via cable. The delivery of all notices, reports, records and other
correspondence shall be deemed to have occurred at the time of receipt
(unless otherwise designated by state law or PSC rule or regulation).
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. If the MCS provider is required to maintain a franchise, then the
designation of such contact person for notice purposes may be
contained within a franchise agreement.
§ 185-19 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-26
185:719
§ 185-27. Liability insurance. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
A. To the extent permitted by law, an MCS provider shall, as a condition of
the exercise of its rights to use the city's streets or ways, be required to
at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save harmless and exempt the
city, the City Manager, the Council/franchising authority, their officers,
agents, servants and employees from any and all, penalty, damage or
charges arising out of claims, suits, demands, causes of action or award
of damages, whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising
therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might be claimed now or in
the future, which may arise out of or be caused by the construction,
erection, location, products performance, operation, maintenance,
repair, installation, replacement, removal or restoration of the
multichannel system within the city by a negligent act or omission of an
MCS provider, its agents or employees, contractors, subcontractors,
independent contractors or implied or authorized representatives. With
respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein,
reasonable attorneys' fees, consultants' fees and expert witness fees
are included as those costs which may be recovered by the Council/
franchising authority. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. The city, City Manager and the Council/franchising authority
specifically reserve the right to retain counsel of their own choice, at
their own expense.60
C. Neither the city, the City Manager nor the Council/franchising authority
shall unreasonably withhold its approval of counsel.
D. With respect to an MCS provider's own defense of such actions noted in
this section, it is understood that such MCS provider reserves the right
to select and retain, without the Council/franchising authority's
approval, counsel of the MCS provider's choice, at such MCS provider's
expense.
E. It is specifically intended that the obligation to indemnify the city, the
City Manager, the Council/franchising authority and their officers,
agents, servants and employees shall not be limited to the MCS
provider operating under authority of this chapter but shall include any
parent of the MCS provider.
A. An MCS provider shall secure and maintain, for as long as it provides
multichannel service to subscribers, liability insurances in at least the
following amounts, each inclusive of annual aggregate:
(1) Commercial general liability: one million dollars ($1,000,000.)
combined single limit per occurrence for personal injury or death
and/or property damage.
60.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which dealt with obtaining and approving counsel,
was repealed 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996. This local law also renumbered former
Subsections D, E and F as C, D and E.
§ 185-26 RYE CODE § 185-27
185:720
§ 185-28. Bonds.
(2) Automobile liability: one million dollars ($1,000,000.) combined
single limit per accident.
(3) Umbrella liability: five million dollars ($5,000,000.).
B. An MCS provider's public and personal liability insurance policy shall
specifically include the city, the City Manager and the Council/
franchising authority as additional insureds.
C. The public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy
shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state.
D. The public liability and property damage insurance policy shall contain
an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the
Council/franchising authority with at least thirty (30) days' written
notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance.
E. Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the
Council/franchising authority before the expiration of the insurance
which such policies are to renew or replace.
F. Before a multichannel system provides multichannel service to
subscribers, the MCS provider shall deliver the policies or certificates
representing the insurance to the Council/franchising authority.
G. If the Council, state or PSC permits an MCS provider to self-insure or to
provide other evidence of adequate security of its obligations, then the
MCS provider may exercise its right to self-insure, so as long as the
minimal amounts of insurance coverage outlined in this section or
similar levels of security are met and maintained for the entire period
that the affected MCS provider is self-insured.
A. An MCS provider shall furnish to the Council/franchising authority, in
an amount totaling at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.), a
performance bond or security bond executed by a surety licensed to do
business in this state and acceptable to the Council/franchising
authority, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld. The purpose
of the performance bond is to ensure performance of any requirements
imposed by this chapter on an MCS provider. Further, the purpose is to
guarantee that should the MCS provider not fulfill any obligations
imposed by this chapter (or, where applicable, a franchise agreement),
then the surety will make whole (to the extent of the policy) any
monetary losses incurred by the city.
B. Unless an alternative form of financial guarantee or security is
accepted by the Council, an MCS provider shall furnish to the Council/
franchising authority, a construction/completion bond prior to the time
it commences a construction, upgrade, rebuild or repair/maintenance
project required by its franchise or license that has a capital
§ 185-27 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-28
185:721
§ 185-29. Records and reports.
construction cost or outlay exceeding one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.) in value. The amount of the bond shall equal ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.). The construction/completion bond shall remain in
force at all times until the subject construction is complete, unless relief
is granted or a reduction schedule is detailed in an agreement between
the Council/franchising authority and the MCS provider. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
C. The construction/completion bond or security bond shall specifically
guarantee that an MCS provider will timely abide by its required
construction, upgrade, rebuild, or repair/maintenance schedule for the
multichannel system and/or any timetable for technical and service
improvements or additions to the multichannel system as may be
committed to, or agreed upon, from time to time, by the Council/
franchising authority and MCS provider. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
D. If the city draws on a performance or completion bond or cash deposit
or other guarantee as a result of an MCS provider's failure to timely
discharge its obligations or failure to construct and activate the
multichannel system or failure to complete a multichannel system
upgrade or rebuild or repair/maintenance, then the MCS provider shall
be required, within thirty (30) days, to replenish the completion and
performance bond or security bond, or guarantee, to the minimal level
required by the Council/franchising authority. [Amended 5-29-1996
by L.L. No. 4-1996]
E. Should the Council/franchising authority make a formal determination
that due to the MCS provider's past performance (such as a
documented history of repeated or multiple franchise violations) or
increased cost [greater than fifty percent (50%) of the original
estimated cost], the Council/franchising authority (unless preempted by
either the state or PSC) may raise the required amount of either the
performance or the construction/completion bond. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
F. The performance bond or security bond shall be in force at all times
unless relief is granted or a reduction schedule is detailed in a separate
agreement, executed between the MCS provider and the Council/
franchising authority. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
A. The Council/franchising authority recognizes that advances in
technology and the adoption and application of multichannel laws,
rules, regulations and court decisions may have a profound effect and
impact on an MCS provider in any given year.
B. Consequently, it is incumbent that the Council/franchising authority
take measures to reduce the risk that multichannel service or the
multichannel system will be adversely affected in any given year.
§ 185-28 RYE CODE § 185-29
185:722
§ 185-30. Furnishing of reports.
§ 185-31. Accounting; review of records.
C. Therefore, the evaluation of legal, technical, financial, character
qualifications and practices related to customer service and consumer
protection of an MCS provider is viewed as a continuing undertaking on
the part of the city. Each MCS provider shall maintain and retain all
records and reports necessary for the Council/franchising authority to
determine compliance with the obligations imposed on it by this
chapter and to determine the MCS provider's (legal, technical, financial
and character) qualifications.
A. Within ninety (90) days after this chapter becomes effective or the
grant of a franchise or license pursuant hereto, an MCS provider shall
submit a list to the Council/franchising authority or designee of the
principal files, reports, records, data or other information that the MCS
provider periodically files with the FCC or another federal or state
agency. As part of a performance evaluation or for any legitimate
matter related to the administration of an MCS provider agreement, the
Council/franchising authority may specifically request that it be
provided with any of the pertinent reports, records, data or other
information that were originally filed with the FCC or another federal or
state agency (including the PSC). However, unless specifically
authorized by the state, an MCS provider shall not be required to
provide to the Council/franchising authority any state or federal tax
returns or any documents (inclusive of all above-referenced categories)
exempted under state or federal privacy laws, including Section 631 of
the Cable Act (codified at 47 USC § 551). [Amended 5-29-1996 by
L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. In addition to the requirements noted in Subsection A of this section, an
MCS provider shall timely submit those reports, statements and logs
required by this chapter, including but not limited to the following:
(1) A periodic gross revenue statement in the manner set forth in this
chapter.
(2) A periodic certification that answering of phones is meeting the
specifications listed in this chapter.
(3) The satisfactory resolution of problems and complaints in the
manner set forth in this chapter.
(4) Preventive maintenance reports in the manner set forth in this
chapter.
(5) Any other reports or information required by another section of this
chapter or by the Council/franchising authority which is necessary
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.
(6) If required, an annual registration and compliance statement.
§ 185-29 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-31
185:723
§ 185-32. (Reserved)
§ 185-33. (Reserved)
§ 185-34. (Reserved)
§ 185-35. (Reserved)
§ 185-36. Annual registration; compliance statement.
A. An MCS provider shall keep complete and accurate books of its
pertinent accounts and records of the business and operations under
and in connection with the MCS system, including records of its
telephone responses. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. The Council/franchising authority shall have the right to be provided for
review (either by mail or at the MCS provider's local office) all pertinent
records (needed for the administration and enforcement of this chapter
and/or franchise agreement) on seven (7) days' written notice, unless
specifically exempted by the Council/franchising authority. Such review,
unless mutually agreed upon or judicially ordered, should occur within
the MCS provider's regular office hours. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
C. The Council/franchising authority shall have the right to hire, at its own
expense, an independent certified public accountant or other business
or financial expert to review the books and records of an MCS provider.
If after a financial audit it is determined that the MCS provider has
underpaid amounts owed to the city by five thousand dollars ($5,000.)
or greater amount, then the city may require the MCS provider to
reimburse the city for the actual cost of the audit. Absent fraud, any
audit that is agreed to by subject parties shall be binding on all parties
concerned. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
D. A false entry into the books and/or records of an MCS provider, made by
an MCS provider, of a material and substantial fact shall constitute a
material violation of this chapter. However, an erroneous entry, made in
good faith, shall not constitute a material violation of this chapter.
E. An MCS provider shall keep complete and accurate books and records
of the pertinent aspects of the multichannel system's operation for at
least the preceding three (3) years in such a manner that all matters
pertaining to the city can be easily produced and/or verified at the city's
request. Also, the MCS provider shall keep and shall make available and
provide upon request any other applicable records and information that
may be required by any other federal or state agency (including PSC)
having jurisdiction over one (1) or more classes of MCS providers.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
A. Within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date that this chapter
becomes effective, the city shall develop a registration and compliance
§ 185-31 RYE CODE § 185-36
185:724
§ 185-37. Compliance with state law required. [Amended 5-29-1996
by L.L. No. 4-1996]
In addition to any and all requirements of this chapter, each and every
MCS provider shall comply with and abide by all applicable provisions of
any state law concerning consumer sales practices (and including, where
applicable, consumer protection rules and regulations of the PSC).
§ 185-38. Provider responsibilities; notice to customer.
statement for any MCS provider or class of MCS provider that is not
a franchisee and is not subject to the periodic performance evaluation
detailed elsewhere in this chapter. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
B. The Council/franchising authority declares as its purpose that the
registration and compliance statement is intended to furnish the
Council/franchising authority with periodic operational and compliance
information concerning MCS providers operating within all or part of
the city who are not otherwise subject to a periodic performance
evaluation and are not franchisees. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
C. Prior to January 15 of each calendar year, the Council/franchising
authority shall furnish each such affected MCS provider a registration
and compliance statement. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
D. Prior to March 1 of each calendar year, the affected nonfranchised MCS
provider shall return to the Council/franchising authority a completed
and executed compliance statement. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
E. There shall be no charge or fee associated with returning the annual
registration and compliance statement. However, if the MCS provider
supplies incomplete information which requires independent
verification by the city (including a consultant hired by the city), then
the MCS provider may be required to reimburse the city for all costs
associated with the independent verification. Moreover, failure to
submit a statement by the deadline or the submission of false
information (of a material nature) within the statement may subject the
affected MCS provider to any and all penalties listed in this chapter.
However, before subjecting an MCS provider to potential penalties, the
Council/franchising authority must first allow the affected MCS
provider the opportunity to cure and/or to correct the incorrect nature
of the submission or cure the item of alleged noncompliance.
A. The Council/franchising authority recognizes that it is critical that a
customer of an MCS provider fully understand and realize the rights
and responsibilities of both the customer and MCS provider with
§ 185-36 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-38
185:725
§ 185-39. Notification.
respect to the provision, maintenance and repair of multichannel
service.
B. Further, the Council/franchising authority believes that if sufficient,
timely and easily understood information is provided to a customer on
certain customer service practices such as rates, billing periods,
number and types of services provided and rules concerning equipment
use and return, then that customer will have the information necessary
to make an informed decision on what, if any, multichannel services to
subscribe to and receive.
C. In order to provide customers with the variety of information needed to
make an informed decision and to ensure that customers are notified of
their and the MCS provider's rights and responsibilities with respect to
the multichannel system, an MCS provider must provide a customer
with a written Notice of a Customer's and MCS Provider's Rights and
Responsibilities With Respect to the Provision of Multichannel Service
or the effective equivalent thereof. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
D. The Notice of a Customer's and MCS Provider's Rights and
Responsibilities With Respect to the Provision of Multichannel Service
shall be provided at the time of initial installation. Thereafter, a
subscriber shall be provided with a written notice at least once every
twelve (12) months. If, however, an MCS provider amends, repeals,
adds, deletes, modifies or makes other changes to any customer service
practice that is required in this chapter, then said MCS provider shall
provide a subscriber with such written notification with no more than
thirty (30) days following the effective date of such amendment, repeal,
addition, deletion, modification or other change, unless earlier notice is
required by applicable federal or state law or rules. An MCS provider
will use its best efforts to provide written notice thirty (30) days prior to
effective date. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
E. Unless expressly prohibited by the state or PSC, an MCS provider may
comply with the notice requirements by providing said notice over the
MCS system on a channel clearly designated for the dissemination of
such information (such a channel need not be solely designated for
dissemination of such information and may, in fact, be used at other
times for any lawful purpose). [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
F. If the notice in Subsection E preceding is provided over the MCS
system on a channel clearly designated for the dissemination of such
information, such notice shall be cablecast at least once hourly, twentyfour
(24) hours a day, for thirty (30) consecutive days.
A. At the time an MCS provider is required to furnish an initial or annual
notice, such notice shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
§ 185-38 RYE CODE § 185-39
185:726
(1) A timely listing of the specific multichannel services provided,
clearly indicating and isolating the basic, premium and
informational services offered, as well as the service tiers or
service clusters offered. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
(2) Notification of a subscriber's ability to purchase or lease from the
MCS provider a lock box, parental control mechanism or other
device which will prohibit the viewing of a particular multichannel
service during a period selected by the subscriber.61
(3) A comprehensive listing and explanation of all rates and charges
(including rates for basic and premium channels/services,
particular service tiers or service clusters, generally applicable
discount or promotional fees, installation charges and security
deposits, if any, but excepting pay-per-view single event prices).
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
(4) If service clustering is available, then a description and explanation
of any penalties, credits, restrictions, upcoming service clustering
changes or differing alignments or other pertinent information.
(5) A comprehensive listing and explanation of all billing options
available (such as monthly, quarterly or yearly and/or discounts for
prepayments).
(6) The customer service office hours and telephone number(s) in a
manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this chapter.
(7) The billing practices of an MCS provider in a manner consistent
with the specific policy set forth in this chapter.
(8) The specific customer complaint/inquiry resolution policy that is
adopted and followed by an MCS provider and which is consistent
with the parameters set forth in this chapter.
(9) The method of securing a voluntary disconnection in a manner
consistent with the specific policy set forth in this chapter.
(10) Rules relating to both connections and involuntary disconnections.
(11) The extent of the credit/refund policy in a manner consistent with
the specific policy set forth in this chapter.
(12) The equipment use and return policy, together with any required
security deposits in a manner consistent with the specific policy set
forth in this chapter.
61.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3), which immediately followed this subsection and
dealt with the use of an a/b or input selector switch, was repealed 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996. This local law also renumbered former Subsections A(4) through A(14) as A(3)
through A(13), respectively.
§ 185-39 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-39
185:727
§ 185-40. Billing practices.
(13) The additional rights of blind, hearing-impaired or ambulatoryimpaired
customers in a manner consistent with the specific policy
set forth in this chapter.
B. The notice shall be understandable and legible, and any exclusions,
limitations or caveats shall be clearly indicated as such in the notice.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
C. The notice may be delivered to the subscriber via an insert in the
subscriber's periodic invoice or through a special mailing or over an
MCS channel clearly designated for the dissemination of such
information or by hand delivery, provided that a receipt is executed by
the subscriber.
D. If the MCS provider chooses to avail itself of the opportunity to provide
the notice over the MCS system, on a channel clearly designated for the
dissemination of such information, such notice shall be cablecast
continuously, at least once hourly, twenty-four (24) hours a day, for
thirty (30) consecutive days. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
A. Within the notice that is required by this chapter, subscribers shall be
informed of at least the following billing practices of an MCS provider:
(1) Billing procedures (including payments necessary to avoid
discontinuance of service).
(2) Payment due and delinquent dates.
(3) Amount or percentage of late charges, if any.
(4) Advance billing options.
(5) Resolution procedures for billing disputes, complaints and
inquiries.
(6) Refund/credit policy for service interruptions or uncontracted
service.
(7) Current service rates in a detailed and understandable format.
(8) Procedure and amount of charges for installation or relocation of
an MCS provider's facilities and/or equipment.
(9) Current schedule and explanation for any billed charges or other
non-regularly occurring fees invoiced to subscribers, including but
not limited to installation, reconnection, upgrades or downgrades
in service and service or repair calls.
(10) Any lower-income or fixed-income rates, together with any
qualifications to obtain such rates.
§ 185-39 RYE CODE § 185-40
185:728
§ 185-41. Billing credit; unsolicited service. [Amended 5-29-1996 by
L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. Any information concerning billing practices which is contained in the
notice shall be consistent with and include any matter specified by PSC
rules and regulations. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-199662]
C. Existing subscribers shall be informed of the items listed in Subsection
A of this section at least once every twelve (12) months. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
D. Whenever there is a change in an MCS provider's billing practices or
payment requirements, all subscribers must be notified in writing by no
later than thirty (30) days after such billing practices or payment
requirements become effective, unless earlier notice is required by
applicable federal or state law or rules. MCS provider will use its best
efforts to provide written notice thirty (30) days prior to the effective
date of such change. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
E. Pursuant to PSC regulations, in any case where a subscriber requests a
cancellation or reduction of service within thirty (30) days after the
notification of a scheduled rate or charge adjustment, then the
subscriber's liability for such service received during the thirty (30)
days following the date of notice until the cancellation or reduction of
service shall be determined in accordance with the rates or charges in
effect prior to such change. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
A. An MCS provider shall adhere to and comply with applicable state laws
and regulations, including those of the PSC, with respect to service
outages or interruptions.
B. Consistent with Subsection A of this section and to the extent permitted
by either state law or PSC rule and regulation, then the Council/
franchising authority requires that an MCS provider (not covered by
preemptive state law or PSC rules and regulations) automatically
(without a separate request from the subscriber) provide a subscriber
with credit for a service outage or interruption or loss of any signal or
service exceeding four (4) hours in length whenever such MCS provider
may reasonably be expected to be able to determine the existence of the
outage and the extent of such outage. For a service outage or
interruption of a pay-per-view event that exceeds more than one-fourth
(1/4) of the scheduled or projected length of the pay-per-view event, or
four (4) hours (whichever is shorter), then the MCS provider must
provide a subscriber with a credit for the full amount of the pay-perview
event; provided, however, that such credit shall not exceed the
62.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which immediately followed this subsection and dealt
with periodic service bills, was repealed 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996. This local law also
renumbered former Subsections D, E and F, as C, D and E, respectively.
§ 185-40 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-41
185:729
§ 185-42. Affirmative requests required for services.
cost of one (1) full day of such pay-per-view event programming for an
outage that does not exceed twenty-four (24) hours.
C. To the extent permitted by the rules of the FCC or by the state or PSC,
the Council/franchising authority may prescribe rules for giving credit
to a subscriber in cases where a substandard signal or substandard
picture quality is furnished by the MCS provider. Substandard signal or
picture quality being a signal not delivered with the quality or lack of
degradation reasonably able to be provided given the performance
capabilities of the receiving and distribution equipment of the system.
D. In the case of a charge for unsolicited service, an MCS provider shall, to
the extent required by applicable federal and state law or rules, provide
a subscriber with an adjustment or billing credit on the next available
billing statement. Moreover, in such a case, an MCS provider shall not
consider a subscriber delinquent for failure to pay a charge for
unsolicited service. This is not intended to prevent an MCS operator
from adding new programming services so long as there is no increased
cost to the subscriber.
A. The Council/franchising authority both recognizes and determines that
as a matter of consumer protection a subscriber should be charged only
for those services that such subscriber has affirmatively requested.
Therefore, an MCS provider may not bill or invoice any subscriber for
any multichannel service that is not affirmatively requested by the
subscriber.
B. For purposes of this section, a subscriber's affirmative request need not
be in writing, but an MCS provider relying on an oral request must keep
an accurate record of the date when the request was made. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
C. For purposes of this section, a subscriber shall be deemed to have
affirmatively requested a multichannel service if:
(1) The subscriber voluntarily makes payment for the multichannel
service after an initial free trial period.
(2) There was included in the notice or advertising material describing
the service as well as on the first periodic invoice after the service
was instituted a statement clearly advising the subscriber that such
subscriber has incurred no obligation to pay for such service and
that such subscriber need not take any action to avoid incurring
any such obligation.
D. Moreover, an MCS provider may not automatically enroll a subscriber
into a different class or tier of multichannel service, including any or all
equipment needed, without first promptly informing such subscriber of
any and all costs associated with such a different class or tier of
§ 185-41 RYE CODE § 185-42
185:730
§ 185-43. Menu-driven systems, service clusters and packaging of
service tiers.
multichannel service or equipment. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
E. Additionally, an MCS provider may not invoice a subscriber for
disconnecting or downgrading from a negatively promoted or
automatically enrolled class or tier of multichannel service.
F. Should a subscriber be charged for a multichannel service in violation
of this section, then the MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with
an adjustment or billing credit on the next available billing statement.
Moreover, in such case, an MCS provider shall not consider a
subscriber delinquent for failure to pay a charge for a non-affirmatively
requested multichannel service.
G. If the PSC adopts rules and regulations concerning this practice, then
those rules and regulations should control and be operative with
respect to an MCS provider classified as a "cable operator." [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
A. The Council/franchising authority recognizes that the concept of menudriven
program/service selection has both positive and negative
aspects. On the one hand, menu-driven program/service selection
allows the greatest flexibility for a subscriber in that it permits the
subscriber to essentially create a program/service package tailored to
the subscriber's budget, viewing habits and informational needs. On the
other hand, menu-driven program/service selection is susceptible to
unauthorized or unknowing purchases and uninformed program
choices if certain procedural and operational safeguards are not
maintained.
B. Should an MCS provider implement and/or offer menu-driven program/
service selection for all or the majority of the MCS provider's
multichannel services, then the Council/franchising authority reserves
the power to adopt (consistent with any applicable PSC rules and
regulations) additional rules and regulations (subject to the conditions
listed in Subsection C of this section) concerning the following potential
problem areas: [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
(1) Notification to the subscriber [on a periodic (at least annual) basis]
of the costs for each menu-driven program/service, including any
installation or equipment rental charges, but this is not intended to
include single-event pay-per-view programming.
(2) Notification of what constitutes or what is required for selection or
subscription to a particular program/service.
(3) Limitations on negative option marketing plans when done in
connection with a menu-driven system unless the subscriber
provides written consent to be included on a list of potential
§ 185-42 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-43
185:731
§ 185-44. Customer service.
subscribers and is informed initially and periodically thereafter (at
least annually) of the right to refuse such consent.
(4) Restricting access to menu-driven program/service selection by
subscribers (through the use of individual, nonduplicative access
codes or some other means), in order to limit unauthorized
purchases or purchases above a certain preset amount.
C. If at the time an MCS provider implements and/or offers menu-driven
program/service selection such MCS provider also adopts an
operational policy which protects subscribers from those potential
problem areas listed in Subsection B of this section, then the Council/
franchising authority shall not exercise its additional regulatory
authority on this subject, unless there is documentation that the
adopted policy of the MCS provider is not being enforced or is
ineffective in safeguarding subscribers from the potential abuses listed
above.63
D. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as mandating any
particular programming choice being provided to a subscriber. Nor
should this section be construed as requiring any particular program,
service, cluster or tier. Rather, this section is designed to promote
cluster and tier stability, so that a subscriber may choose a program,
service, cluster or tier that best suits the subscriber's individual
programming and informational needs.
A. In order to facilitate the needs of the local customers, an MCS provider
shall maintain a customer service office which is both within reasonable
proximity to the city and easily accessible to customers. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. The customer service office shall be open at least forty (40) hours per
week (exclusive of holidays).
C. Within the forty (40) hours per week that a customer service office must
be open, an MCS provider must provide office hours either on at least
two (2) evenings (after 5:00 p.m.), or on Saturdays and/or Sundays (if
not prohibited by state law, including PSC rules and regulations).
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
D. The customer service office should have an adequate and
knowledgeable staff in order to handle the vast majority of customer
service inquiries, specifically including, but not limited to, billing
inquiries, refunds, credit, service outages, equipment service and
repair, payment of bills and other charges and inquiries from disabled
or physically impaired customers.
63.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, which immediately followed this subsection and dealt
with service clusters and the packaging of service tiers, was repealed 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996. This local law also renumbered former Subsection E as Subsection D.
§ 185-43 RYE CODE § 185-44
185:732
E. An MCS provider may install (at its customer service office) an afterhours
depository in order to collect invoice payments and receive
requests for service appointments (including connections and
disconnections) after scheduled office hours.
F. An MCS provider may install an automated (audio or video) customer
assistance device or machine which can handle various types of
customer inquiries, so long as the caller has the option and ability to
speak with a live representative of the MCS provider during the hours
that the office is open and service calls are performed, pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter.
G. Where not prohibited by the state (including PSC rules and
regulations), an MCS provider may install an interactive customer
assistance service over one (1) or more multichannels which can handle
various types of customer inquiries. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
H. Neither the presence of an after hours depository nor automated
customer service device nor interactive customer service channel
relieves an MCS provider from maintaining the minimal required
number of office hours or adequate staff of customer service
representatives to handle the service inquiries [unless the MCS
provider can demonstrate to the Council/franchising authority's
satisfaction that the efficiency of such devices or service channel(s)
reduces the need for customer service hours or customer service staff].
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
I. Any MCS provider shall be able to certify to the Council/franchising
authority that each customer service representative (CSR) has taken
and passed an MCS provider-implemented course designed to train
customer service representatives to handle their jobs in a courteous,
efficient and responsive manner. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
J. An MCS provider shall maintain at least one (1) toll-free and/or local
telephone number to accommodate normal business inquiries.
K. An MCS provider shall maintain a twenty-four-hour toll-free and/or
local telephone number to facilitate calls concerning repair of
equipment and extended interruption of service. During any hours that
the customer service office is open, the MCS provider must have, or
make available, in-house personnel to address a customer's inquiries.
During other hours, the franchisee's service telephone lines may be
manned by remotely located staff or by an automatic answering device.
Incoming calls are to be monitored at all times to determine the
existence of any service outages and to facilitate the franchisee's
prompt response to such outages consistent with all applicable
standards of this chapter or federal or state rules. Three (3) or more
related service outage calls from the same area will receive immediate
attention. The MCS provider shall not be required to make in-person
§ 185-44 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-44
185:733
§ 185-45. Special service requirements. [Amended 5-29-1996 by
L.L. No. 4-1996]
Notwithstanding any other requirements mandated by this chapter or by
federal or state law (including PSC rules and regulations), an MCS provider
shall comply with the following special service requirements for blind,
hearing-impaired or ambulatory-impaired customers. The MCS provider
shall:
§ 185-46. Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited.
telephone contacts to subscribers at a rate which exceeds sixty (60)
calls per hour. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
L. An MCS provider shall have adequate staff and/or extension lines
(except during special marketing promotion periods, peak billing cycles
and service outages) in order to handle calls and inquiries directed to
the general information number so that the following standards may be
met at least ninety percent (90%) of the time as measured on a
quarterly basis under normal operating conditions: [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
(1) Ninety-five percent (95%) of all customer calls received in a year
shall be attended within three (3) minutes by a representative of
the MCS provider or by a device that is capable of complaint/
inquiry resolution.
(2) All customer calls shall be answered properly within thirty (30)
seconds. The rate of abandoned calls shall be less than five percent
(5%) over any thirty-day period of time. "Abandoned calls" shall in
no event be deemed to include calls in which the caller hangs up
within forty-five (45) seconds of making the call.
M. With respect to the standards listed in Subsection L of this section, it
shall be the MCS provider's responsibility to be able, if required, to
quarterly certify to the Council/franchising authority that the affected
MCS provider is meeting the minimal standards. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
A. Provide wheelchair accessibility to an MCS provider's customer service
office.
B. Provide, for which it may impose a nondiscriminatory charge, and if
otherwise made available, a remote control device and/or converter for
ambulatory-impaired subscribers or subscribers with a permanent
medical or physical ambulatory impairment.
C. Where applicable, provide modified or special instructions for use of
equipment by individuals who have physical impairments.
A. An MCS provider shall not, as to rules, regulations, rates, charges,
provision of service or use of a provider's facilities and equipment,
§ 185-44 RYE CODE § 185-46
185:734
§ 185-47. Equipment; security deposit.
make, allow or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person
nor subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage on the basis of
age, race, creed, color, sex, national origin, nonrelevant handicap as
defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act or religious affiliation.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. Consistent with Section 621(a)(3) of the Cable Act [codified at 47 U.S.C.
§ 541(a)(3)], MCS providers classified as "cable operators" shall not
deny cable service or the extension of cable service to any group of
potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the
residents of the local area in which such group resides.
C. Subsection A of this section, however, does not prohibit an MCS
provider from:
(1) Offering a promotional or incentive discount rate or charge as long
as the rate or charge does not exceed three hundred seventy (370)
days in length. This subsection does not prohibit an MCS provider
from offering special incentive rates, such as one-month basic
service free if twelve (12) months of basic service are paid in one
(1) payment or within a certain time frame or similar types of
prepayment discounts (as long as such is not prohibited by the
NYSCCT).
(2) Denying service based on location of residence if that residence is
outside the parameters for line extension as detailed in a franchise
agreement (if applicable).
(3) Denying service to a subscriber who is more than thirty (30) days
delinquent in the payment of any periodic service or special service
bill, so long as the requirements for disconnection (as outlined in
this chapter) have been satisfied.
(4) Implementing a service tier or service cluster for lower-income
and/or fixed-income individuals. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
(5) Making agreements or entering into multichannel service
agreements with multiple-dwelling-unit owners (including hotel,
motel and mobile park owners) to provide multichannel service
under a bulk billing or other type of arrangement.
A. Prior to formally delivering any equipment, including auxiliary
equipment, to a customer, an MCS provider shall have tested a
representative sample [at least one percent (1%)] of such equipment to
make sure that it is in proper working order, unless such equipment has
been pretested already or such equipment is tested at the time of
installation. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 185-46 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-47
185:735
B. If needed for proper operation or requested by a customer, an MCS
provider shall deliver to a customer handwritten or typed instructions
detailing the proper use of rented, loaned or purchased equipment.
Unless required by another section of this chapter, an MCS provider
may comply with this section by delivering the manufacturer's
instructions to a customer.
C. An MCS provider is not required to seek a security deposit from a
customer for use or rental of the MCS provider's equipment.
D. An MCS provider shall comply with any and all applicable state rules
(including any applicable PSC rules and regulations) concerning the
imposition, retention and return of security deposits. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
E. If the state and/or PSC is silent on the security deposit for a particular
piece of equipment, then the MCS provider shall be prohibited from
charging any security deposit for equipment which exceeds the value of
the equipment. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
F. As a matter of consumer protection, an MCS provider shall be
prohibited from charging any security deposit for multichannel service
which exceeds twice the basic monthly rate.64
G. An MCS provider shall return a security deposit held to secure
equipment return (together with any interest earned) after the
equipment is satisfactorily returned, and a deposit held to secure
service payment shall be returned when the subscriber maintains a
satisfactory payment history (which is determined as no payment
delinquencies within the preceding twelve-month period). There shall
be separate deposits for equipment and service if deposits are required.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
H. A customer shall maintain any equipment rented or leased from an MCS
provider in good working order and operate such equipment only in the
manner specified by the MCS provider or manufacturer of the
equipment.
I. A customer shall totally and fully reimburse an MCS provider for any
damage or loss to an MCS provider's equipment that is due to the
customer's failure to properly maintain and operate such equipment.
J. A customer shall be relieved from any responsibility for reimbursing an
MCS provider for equipment which malfunctions or does not operate
due to a hidden or latent defect in the equipment or for equipment
which fails to operate or improperly operates due to natural
occurrences conditioned by the normal wear and tear of such
equipment.65
64.Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, which immediately followed this subsection and dealt
with changing a security deposit after involuntary disconnection, was repealed 5-29-1996
by L.L. No. 4-1996. This local law also renumbered former Subsections I, J and K as H, I
and J, respectively.
§ 185-47 RYE CODE § 185-48
185:736
§ 185-48. Service inquiry logs.
§ 185-49. (Reserved)
§ 185-50. (Reserved)
§ 185-51. (Reserved)
§ 185-52. (Reserved)
A. An MCS provider shall be required to keep and maintain service inquiry
logs subject to any limitations imposed by the PSC or by state or federal
law, including (for MCS providers classified as "cable operators") any
subscriber privacy limitations imposed by the Cable Act. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. The purpose of the service inquiry logs is to assist the city in assessing
(in the aggregate) the type, degree and resolution of customer service
requests, inquiries and complaints.
C. At a minimum, the service inquiry logs should contain the following:
(1) The time and date of initial receipt of any service request, inquiry
or complaint relating to service outage or transmission problems,
together with the time and date of initial response to that service
request, inquiry or complaint. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
(2) The nature of the service request, inquiry or complaint.
(3) The precise action taken by an MCS provider in order to resolve the
service inquiry, request or complaint.
(4) Whether the service request, inquiry or complaint was resolved by
allowing a credit or refund of some sort.
(5) The area, location or quadrant of the city where the service
request, inquiry or request was generated.
D. In addition to any other right of inspection that the Council/franchising
authority may possess, it shall have the right to review and inspect a
compilation of such logs. However, the Council/franchising authority
shall not have the right of access, review or inspection for any service
inquiry logs or any information contained within service inquiry logs
that are otherwise protected from access, review or inspection by
federal or state law (including any applicable PSC rules and
regulations). [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
E. This section does not require MCS providers to maintain service inquiry
logs on scheduled installations.
65.Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, which immediately followed this subsection and dealt
with equipment damaged by an act of nature, was repealed 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996.
§ 185-48 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-53
185:737
§ 185-53. (Reserved)
§ 185-54. (Reserved)
§ 185-55. (Reserved)
§ 185-56. Restoration of a subscriber's property.
A. At any time an MCS provider (in furtherance of its right to construct,
operate and maintain a multichannel system) disturbs the yard,
residence or other real or personal property of a subscriber and/or upon
a request by the subscriber for restoration of property, such MCS
provider shall ensure that the subscriber's yard, residence or other
personal property is returned, replaced and/or restored to a condition
that is reasonably comparable to the condition that existed prior to the
commencement of the work. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
B. The costs associated with both the disturbance and the return,
replacement and/or restoration shall be borne by the MCS provider
unless the disturbance was made at the request of the subscriber or
property owner. This subsection also requires the MCS provider or the
subscriber to reimburse the private property owner for any actual
physical damage caused by the MCS provider, its subcontractor or its
independent contractor in connection with the disturbance of the
private property owner's property. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
C. The types of acts specifically included in this section are the following,
subject to existing easement rights: [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
(1) Removal of a property owner's sod, lawn, plants, shrubbery,
flowers, trees, driveway or fence to install, trench, repair, replace,
remove or locate cable or other equipment of an MCS provider;
(2) Installation or removal of cable or other equipment of an MCS
provider within a residence which requires drilling, excavating,
plastering or the like on the part of the MCS provider;
(3) Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a
fixture of a subscriber (such as a motor vehicle, fence, airconditioning
or heating unit or the like) in order to perform some
sort of construction, maintenance or repair on the multichannel
system; or
(4) Permanently removing an MCS provider's cable or equipment due
to either the revocation, termination or nonrenewal of a franchise
(if applicable) or the abandonment, withdrawal or cessation of
multichannel service to any portion of the city.
§ 185-53 RYE CODE § 185-56
185:738
§ 185-57. Service requirements. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
D. The requirements imposed upon the MCS provider extend to any
subcontractor or independent contractor that the MCS provider might
employ to perform the tasks outlined in this section.
E. In light of the foregoing, an MCS provider has the responsibility to
diligently take all reasonable steps to protect the system and its
component from conflicts (contact) with tree limbs (e.g., employing the
accepted practice of installing tree guards).
A. Except in times of a natural or man-made emergency or an appointment
scheduled with the mutual consent of a subscriber, an MCS provider
shall, under normal operating conditions, respond to the service
inquiries, requests and complaints of subscribers within such MCS
provider's normal business or service hours and within the time
schedules detailed in Subsections B through F of this section. The MCS
provider shall be considered in compliance by the Council/franchising
authority if the standards of service outlined in Subsections B through F
are met or exceeded at least ninety-five percent (95%) of the time over
any calendar quarter. Moreover, except in emergency situations, an
MCS provider shall inform the customer that there is a choice as to
whether the service call is scheduled for the morning, afternoon or
evening hours. If the service call has to be canceled or rearranged by
the MCS provider, then the MCS provider shall make every effort to
notify the customer as soon as possible and shall reschedule the service
call within twenty-four (24) hours of the original scheduled service call
unless otherwise mutually agreed upon.
B. In the case of a signal or service interruption (such being defined as a
visually discernible degradation in picture or sound), an MCS provider
shall respond to and begin working on the problem within twenty-four
(24) hours from the time the MCS provider first received notification of
the signal or service interruption.
C. In the case of a "blank" or "no-picture" situation of any given level of
billing or service (except for pay-per-view events), an MCS provider
shall respond to and begin working on the problem within twenty-four
(24) hours from the time the MCS provider first received notification of
the "blank" or "no-picture" situation and continue working until the
problem is resolved.
D. In the case of a defective, improperly operating or nonoperating piece
of equipment affecting the transmission of cable television or MCS
service, an MCS provider shall make its best efforts to respond and
remedy the problem the same day, but in no case will the response be
later than twenty-four (24) hours or one (1) working day from the time
the MCS provider first received notification of the defective, improperly
operating or nonoperating piece of equipment.
§ 185-56 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-57
185:739
§ 185-58. Maintenance and repair.
E. In no case shall a subscriber's service request or inquiry relating to an
area service outage [three (3) or more related calls from the same area]
go unresponded or unattended to for more than twelve (12) hours from
the time the MCS provider first received notification of the service
inquiry or request. Moreover, except in emergency situations and with
the exception of Sundays and regularly scheduled holidays, all service
outage complaints shall receive an immediate response and, if required,
a visit from a service technician on the same day if feasible or by no
later than twenty-four (24) hours following the complaint. In any event,
except for calls or inquiries generated on Sundays or regularly
scheduled holidays, all requests and inquiries shall generate a
telephone response within twenty-four (24) hours unless prevented by
circumstances beyond the service provider's control, and appropriate
collective action or adjustment shall be implemented within one (1)
week from the time the MCS provider first received notification.
F. In case of a dispute concerning the precise time that the MCS provider
received notification or the precise circumstances surrounding the
MCS provider receiving the notification or whether notification was
received at all, the Council/franchising authority reserves the right and
authority to settle such a dispute with the consent of the parties.
However, for MCS providers classified as "cable operators," such MCS
providers have the option of choosing the PSC for the resolution of the
timing dispute.
A. Except in times of natural or man-made emergency, an MCS provider
shall, at all times, have access to and be able to secure sufficient
maintenance and repair parts and equipment for the MCS system so
that the MCS provider can respond to and begin appropriate steps to
correct all subscriber service interruptions within the time periods
specified in this chapter. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. Having access to and being able to secure sufficient maintenance and
repair parts and equipment is necessary to promptly restore a
subscriber's multichannel service and avoid delays caused by having to
obtain needed parts and equipment.
C. Except in times of natural or man-made emergency or strike by the
employees of the MCS provider [whose duration has been less than
seventy-two (72) hours], an MCS provider shall have sufficient
maintenance and repair personnel so that the MCS provider can
respond to and begin appropriate steps to correct subscriber service
interruptions within the time periods specified in this chapter.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
D. An MCS provider shall be able to certify to the Council/franchising
authority that each service technician has taken and passed an MCS
provider-implemented course designed to train service technicians to
handle their jobs in a courteous, efficient and responsive manner. Also,
§ 185-57 RYE CODE § 185-58
185:740
§ 185-59. Installations; connections.
§ 185-60. Disconnection for nonpayment.
the course should be designed to provide continuing education to
service technicians in changes in technology, repair/maintenance
procedures and related matters. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
E. Notwithstanding the other requirements and provisions contained in
this section, an MCS provider shall maintain at least one (1) service
technician on call twenty-four (24) hours per day.
A. Under normal operating conditions, new installations, promotional,
short-term or seasonal connections, reconnections and upgrades of
multichannel service by an MCS provider shall be performed and
completed within seven (7) days (excluding holidays) of a customer
requesting such. This standard shall be met no less than ninety-five
percent (95%) of the time as measured on the basis of a calendar
quarter. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. The provisions of Subsection A of this section shall not apply to pay-perview
or menu-driven connections.
C. While an MCS provider may charge a customer for installing,
connecting or reconnecting multichannel service, such charge must be
explained to and approved by the customer prior to the installation,
connection or reconnection.
D. In the case of a promotional or seasonal connection, any limitations or
restrictions must be explained to the subscriber prior to the
promotional or seasonal connection.
E. An MCS provider may charge an appropriate reconnection charge or
require a security deposit. However, the reconnection charge or
security deposit related to an involuntary disconnection must not be
based on the location or address of the residence or structure.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
F. Downgrading a particular service level or service cluster to a lowerpriced
or less comprehensive service or cluster level shall not subject
the subscriber to an installation or service change charge in excess of
that authorized and permitted under applicable federal and state law
and rules or, in the absence of such law or rules, in an amount greater
than the cost of implementing such downgrade. [Amended 5-29-1996
by L.L. No. 4-1996]
G. An MCS provider classified as a "cable operator" shall comply with any
and all rules and regulations of the PSC concerning downgrading.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 185-58 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-60
185:741
§ 185-61. Voluntary disconnections and downgrades.
A. As regards subjecting a subscriber to involuntary disconnection, a
subscriber shall not be considered delinquent in payment until at least
forty-five (45) days after the posting of the bill to the subscriber.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. Before disconnection of a subscriber's multichannel service (either
physically or electronically) takes place, the following must occur:
(1) The subscriber must in fact be delinquent in payment of
multichannel service; and
(2) At least five (5) days have elapsed after a separate written notice of
impending disconnection has been personally served upon the
subscriber; or
(3) At least eight (8) days have elapsed after mailing a separate written
notice of impending disconnection to the subscriber; or
(4) At least five (5) days have elapsed after the subscriber has either
signed for, or refused to accept, a separate written notice of
impending disconnection.
C. The written notice of disconnection must expressly and clearly state the
amount that is owed by the subscriber to an MCS provider, the
minimum amount required to be paid to avoid disconnection and the
date and place where such payment must be made.
D. Disconnection of service must occur both on a normal service day and
within normal business hours of an MCS provider unless the subscriber
agrees otherwise or is given the opportunity to pay the full amount of
the past due account. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
E. An MCS provider which physically retrieves its equipment (including
converter, remote control unit or digital audio tuner) from a subscriber
must do so within both a normal service day and normal service hours
of an MCS provider, unless otherwise agreed to by the subscriber.
F. Receipt of a bad check from a subscriber, in response to a written notice
of disconnection, does not constitute payment, and the affected MCS
provider need not give the subscriber further notice prior to
disconnecting multichannel service.
G. An MCS provider may add a reasonable collection charge to the
subscriber's bill if the applicable provisions of this chapter and any
applicable state regulations (including those of the PSC) are followed.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
H. Any refund due to a subscriber after such a disconnection shall be made
within sixty (60) days of the disconnection for nonpayment unless the
subscriber has changed addresses without notifying the MCS provider.
§ 185-60 RYE CODE § 185-61
185:742
A. At any time, a subscriber may request that a particular service tier,
service cluster, menu-driven program/service, premium channel,
informational service or the entire multichannel service be
disconnected.
B. Where provided by an MCS provider, a subscriber may request a
downgrade from a particular level of service to a less comprehensive
level of service or a less expensive level of service.
C. From the date that such a subscriber makes such a request for either a
disconnection or downgrade, then the MCS provider shall have seventytwo
(72) hours or three (3) service days, whichever is longer, to
disconnect or downgrade the service tier, pay channel, premium
channel, informational service or entire multichannel service. In the
event that an MCS provider does not disconnect or downgrade service
within seventy-two (72) hours, a subscriber's obligation to pay for such
service shall cease, or, in the case of a downgrade, a subscriber's
obligation to pay for the more comprehensive and/or higher priced
service shall cease.
D. For a service tier, service cluster, menu-driven service, premium
channel or informational service which is voluntarily disconnected, a
subscriber shall pay a pro rata share of the monthly rate for such
service tier, service cluster, menu-driven service, premium channel or
informational service.
E. Once a valid connection to a menu-driven program or a pay-per-view
event occurs, then the MCS provider may collect the full advertised or
quoted rate, should the customer then attempt to disconnect the menudriven
program or pay-per-view event.
F. For MCS providers classified as "cable operators," any charge or billing
imposed on a subscriber as a result of a downgrade by such MCS
providers shall be no more than the maximum permitted by FCC and
PSC rules and regulations. For other MCS providers, the Council/
franchising authority reserves the right to approve any charge or billing
that would be imposed on a subscriber as a result of a downgrade in
service. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
G. If, however, an MCS provider's equipment is or has been lost,
appropriated or damaged by a subscriber prior to such disconnection,
then the MCS provider may charge the subscriber with the entire cost
for such loss or damage, provided that the MCS provider notify the
subscriber within thirty (30) days of the disconnection. A subscriber
shall not be required to pay for equipment failure if the circumstances
fall within the normal wear and tear or acts of nature guidelines
established in this chapter. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
H. Any refund due a subscriber after voluntary disconnection and/or
downgrade shall be made within sixty (60) days after such
§ 185-61 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-61
185:743
§ 185-62. Seamless technology. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
The Council/franchising authority recognizes the fact that it is in the
public's interest to be able to utilize the functions inherent in subscriber
receiving equipment without having to incur additional costs to obtain
the same functions. Consequently, the Council/franchising authority may
require that the MCS provider comply with applicable federal or state law
or rules relating to the availability of compatible customer equipment.
§ 185-63. (Reserved)
§ 185-64. (Reserved)
§ 185-65. (Reserved)
§ 185-66. Protection of subscriber privacy. [Amended 5-29-1996 by
L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 185-67. Complaints; inquiries.
disconnection unless the subscriber has changed addresses without
notifying the MCS provider.
I. In no event will this section be viewed as abridging the rights and
remedies afforded by the subscriber complaint/inquiry resolution
process outlined in this chapter.
J. The provisions contained in this section concerning downgrades shall
be considered supplemental to any applicable rules and regulations of
the PSC. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
A. An MCS provider shall abide by any and all subscriber privacy rules or
regulations of the federal or state governments (including any
applicable rules and regulations of the PSC).
B. For MCS providers classified as cable operators, such operators shall
also abide by and comply with any subscriber privacy protection
requirements and procedures listed in Section 631 of the Cable Act
(codified at 47 USC § 551).
A. An MCS provider is required to develop a comprehensive complaint/
inquiry resolution policy that is consistent with the rules and
regulations outlined in this chapter.
B. An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall be reduced
to writing, and such policy shall be available upon request to any
person. In any event, a subscriber shall receive notice of such policy in
the manner that is prescribed by this chapter and any state rules and
regulations (including those of the PSC). Further, nothing in this section
shall prohibit a customer from seeking relief from the PSC for any
§ 185-61 RYE CODE § 185-67
185:744
§ 185-68. Multichannel service.
matter within its jurisdiction. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
C. An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall contain at
least the following minimal standards: [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
(1) Except in the event of circumstances beyond the control of the
service provider, e.g., natural disaster, the initial response to any
complaint/inquiry relating to a service problem shall occur no later
than twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the complaint/inquiry,
with the exception of Sundays and regularly scheduled holidays.
Appropriate collective action or adjustment shall be implemented
within one (1) week.
(2) Every reasonable attempt will be made to resolve the complaint/
inquiry relating to service problems within twenty-four (24) hours
after receipt of the complaint/inquiry.
(3) Complaints/inquiries that fall into the category of inquiries for
service changes or additions shall be addressed by the procedure
set forth in this chapter.
(4) Informing subscribers of the credit/refund policy which is
consistent with this chapter and any applicable state regulations
(including those of the PSC).
(5) Informing subscribers of the billing disputes policy which is
consistent with this chapter and any applicable state regulations
(including those of the PSC).
A. The Council/franchising authority declares that as part of its right to
establish multichannel customer service guidelines it is in the public
interest to ensure continuity of multichannel service for all subscribers.
In that light, the Council/franchising authority also determines that it
may take appropriate measures in order to ensure that no portion of the
city is threatened or faced with a disruption, interruption or
discontinuance of multichannel service due to the actions of any MCS
provider.
B. In addition to the principles and ideals enumerated in Subsection A, the
Council/franchising authority also expresses that its policy covers the
following:
(1) To provide for continuity of multichannel service in the event of
acquisition by the city.
(2) To provide for continuity of service in the event of a proposed
abandonment, withdrawal or cessation of multichannel service by
an MCS provider.
§ 185-67 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-68
185:745
(3) To provide for continuity of service in the event of revocation,
termination or nonrenewal of a franchised MCS provider's
franchise.
(4) To provide for continuity of service in the event that a transaction
occurs that affects the ownership or control of the MCS provider,
such as an assignment, sale, transfer or merger.
(5) To provide for continuity of service in the event of an expiration of a
franchise.
(6) To prevent disruption of multichannel service which would provide
a hardship on those subscribers who rely on a multichannel system
as their primary or secondary source of information.
(7) To prevent the interruption or cessation of multichannel service
which would disrupt or eliminate the diversity of programming
choices enjoyed by subscribers of a multichannel system and
thereby restrict their ability to receive information.
C. In any situation (including any of those mentioned above), which
threatens the city and subscribers with the loss or interruption in the
continuity of multichannel service, then the MCS provider shall, to the
extent that it has adequate advance knowledge, provide the Council/
franchising authority with at least forty-five (45) days notice (except in
extreme circumstances) prior to the effective date of any action which
would cause a loss or interruption in the continuity of multichannel
service. The purpose of the notice is to apprise the Council/franchising
authority of the possibility of such loss or interruption in the continuity
of multichannel service so that it might explore its options and take
appropriate measures. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
D. Whenever any situation occurs (including those mentioned above)
which threatens the city and subscribers with the loss or interruption in
the continuity of multichannel service, then the Council/franchising
authority may permit the MCS provider for a period of up to twenty-four
(24) months to do everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers
receive continuous, uninterrupted multichannel service of the same
quality, mix and level(s) regardless of the circumstances. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
E. During the interim period, the Council/franchising authority shall work
with the MCS provider in order to secure a new multichannel system
owner or rectify the problem so that the threat of loss of continuity is
removed at the earliest possible instance.
F. During any interim period in which the MCS provider continues to
provide multichannel service to subscribers, the MCS provider is
entitled to all revenues collected, except any sums owed (including
franchise fees, alternative user charges and taxes) to the city or to other
persons.
§ 185-68 RYE CODE § 185-68
185:746
§ 185-69. Individual antennas protected; multichannel service not
required.
§ 185-70. (Reserved)
§ 185-71. (Reserved)
§ 185-72. (Reserved)
§ 185-73. (Reserved)
§ 185-74. (Reserved)
§ 185-75. (Reserved)
§ 185-76. Construction schedule.
In order to establish minimum uniform standards, the Council/franchise
authority requires any MCS provider to adopt the following minimal
construction schedule and construction-related requirements:
G. In the event that the threat of loss of continuity is not resolved within
twenty-four (24) months, then the Council/franchising authority may
extend the interim period on a month-to-month basis until the situation
is satisfactorily resolved. Also, in such a circumstance, the Council/
franchising authority may adopt any emergency rules or procedures
which will ensure that the subscribers will receive continuous,
uninterrupted multichannel service of the same quality, mix and
level(s).
H. Nothing in this section should be construed as requiring an MCS
provider to operate a multichannel system at a continued financial loss
(due to bankruptcy or insolvency) for an extended period of time.
Consequently, the Council/franchising authority may take appropriate
steps to ensure the continuity of service. [Amended 5-29-1996 by
L.L. No. 4-1996]
A. The Council/franchising authority does not intend to prohibit the
erection or continued use of individual television antennas within the
city so long as the individual television antennas conform to any and all
applicable zoning and/or land use regulations. Consequently, no person
shall be required to receive multichannel service or to physically
connect to a multichannel system.
B. It is also noted that no person shall be penalized or fined (through
either a home sales contract, deed of restrictive covenants or other type
of agreement) for failing or refusing to receive multichannel service or
physically connecting to a multichannel system.
§ 185-68 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-76
185:747
§ 185-77. Construction quality.
During any phase of construction, installation, maintenance and repair of
the multichannel system, the MCS provider shall use materials of good and
durable quality, and all such work shall be performed in a safe, thorough
and reliable manner.
§ 185-78. Use of streets and public ways.
A. Construct, install, maintain and repair the multichannel system in
accordance with the requirements noted in this chapter.
B. Use streets and public ways as set forth in this chapter.
C. Where applicable, remove franchise property from public streets, as set
forth in this chapter.
D. Adopt the construction standards, as set forth in this chapter.
E. Adopt the system expansion standards, as set forth in this chapter.
F. Adopt the construction schedule as referred to in this chapter.
G. Abide by and act in strict accordance with all current technical codes
adopted by the city or the state or the United States, as noted in this
chapter.
H. Maintain all permits and licenses, as noted in this chapter.
A. All wires, conduits, cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) and
other property and facilities of an MCS provider shall be so located,
constructed installed and maintained so as not to endanger or
unnecessarily interfere with usual and customary use, traffic and travel
upon the streets, rights-of-way, easements and public ways of the city.
To prevent the unnecessary disruption of the flow of traffic during peak
traffic hours, any MCS provider shall make reasonable efforts to
minimize unnecessary work associated with construction, installation
(other than in subscriber homes) activities that involve working on or
within the street system between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. or 3:00 p.m.
and 6:00 p.m. on regular business weekdays. [Amended 5-29-1996 by
L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. In the event that an MCS provider's system creates a hazardous or
unsafe condition or an unreasonable interference with property, then,
at its own expense, such MCS provider shall, voluntarily or upon the
request of the Council/franchising authority, remove that part of the
system that creates the hazardous condition from the subject property.
C. An MCS provider shall not place equipment where it will interfere with
the rights of property owners or with gas, electric or telephone fixtures
or with water hydrants or mains or with wastewater lift stations, any
traffic control system or any other service or facility that benefits the
city's or its residents' health, safety or welfare.
§ 185-76 RYE CODE § 185-78
185:748
§ 185-79. Removal of franchised properties.
D. An MCS provider, at either its own expense or that of a private
contractor, shall protect rights-of-way and easements and support or
temporarily disconnect or relocate in the same street or other public
way any property of such MCS provider when necessitated by reason
of:
(1) Traffic conditions.
(2) Public safety.
(3) A street closing.
(4) Street construction or resurfacing.
(5) A change or establishment of street grade.
(6) Installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, storm drains, lift
stations, force mains, power or signal lines and any traffic control
system.
(7) Any improvement, construction or repair related to the city's or its
residents' health, safety or welfare.
E. It shall be the responsibility of an MCS provider (acting alone or in
conjunction with another person), upon request, to locate and mark or
otherwise visibly indicate and alert others to the location of its
underground cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) before
employees, agents or independent contractors of any entity install cable
in the marked-off area. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
F. An MCS provider shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit, temporarily remove, raise or lower the cable wires to
allow the moving of the building. The expense of temporary removal
shall be paid by the person requesting it, and such MCS provider may
require payment in advance. The affected MCS provider shall be given
not less than twenty-one (21) days' notice of a contemplated move to
arrange for temporary wire changes.
G. For any new installations occurring after the effective date of this
chapter and at the time that an MCS provider rebuilds or upgrades the
multichannel system, all trunk or feeder cable (coaxial, fiber or
functional equivalent) shall be placed underground when and if other
utilities are required to have their facilities placed underground.
Further, where both power and utilities are presently required to be
underground, multichannel system cable shall also be placed
underground. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
A. This section is applicable to any MCS provider required to maintain a
franchise to operate within the city.
§ 185-78 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-79
185:749
B. Unless the city or another MCS provider uses such multichannel
system, under the continuity provisions outlined in this chapter or
unless other arrangements have been agreed to by the Council/
franchising authority or the owners of the property where the subject
facilities are located, the affected franchised MCS provider shall
promptly remove any portions of its multichannel system property that
if not removed could pose a hazard to public health, safety or welfare or
a harm to the interests of the city from the streets, public ways and
private property located within the city whenever the following occurs:
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
(1) A franchised MCS provider ceases to operate all or part of the
multichannel system for a continuous period of six (6) months;
(2) A franchised MCS provider ceases and fails to construct the
multichannel system outlined in the application or proposal for
renewal or renewal franchise agreement;
(3) The Council/franchising authority elects not to renew the franchise
pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter; or
(4) The franchised MCS provider's franchise is revoked pursuant to the
provisions set forth in this chapter.
C. If not removed voluntarily by a franchised MCS provider, then the
Council/franchising authority may notify such franchised MCS provider
that if removal of any property that is found to be likely to constitute a
hazard or harm if not removed is not accommodated within two
hundred seventy (270) days or substantial progress towards removal is
not made within two hundred ten (210) days, then the Council/
franchising authority may direct officials or representatives of the city
to remove such franchised MCS provider's system property at that
franchised MCS provider's expense. The performance and/or
construction bond, irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit or full faith
and credit guarantee required as set forth in this chapter shall be
available to pay for such work. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
D. If officials or representatives of the city remove a franchised MCS
provider's system property and such franchised MCS provider does not
claim the property within ninety (90) days of its removal, then the
Council/franchising authority may take whatever steps are available
under state law to declare the property surplus and sell it, with the
proceeds of such sale (if permitted by state law) going to the city.
E. When such franchised MCS provider removes its multichannel system
property from the streets, public ways and private property located
within the city, the franchised MCS provider shall, at its own expense
and in a manner approved by the Council/franchising authority, replace
and restore such property in as good a condition as before the work
§ 185-79 RYE CODE § 185-79
185:750
§ 185-80. Construction standards.
causing the disturbance was done. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
A. Methods of construction, installation, maintenance and repair of any
multichannel system shall comply with the most current editions of the
National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electric Code, as they
affect the construction, installation and maintenance of electrical
supply and communication lines and attachments and supports. To the
extent that these are inconsistent with other provisions of a franchise or
state or local law, then the state law shall apply unless the state allows
the local law to control.
B. All construction, installation, maintenance and repair shall treat the
aesthetics of the property as a priority and shall not unreasonably
impair the appearance of the structure. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
C. All underground drops shall follow (to the greatest extent possible) all
reasonable construction and installation standards required under city,
state or federal rules. Underground installations shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications and requirements of the City of Rye
and the National Electric Safety Code and must be designed to
minimize disruption to the city's underground facilities associated with
the computerized traffic control system network. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
D. For existing multichannel system construction, installation and repair,
the provisions of Subsection C of this section shall apply only at the
time a scheduled upgrade or rebuild of the MCS provider's
multichannel system is actually commenced. For newly served areas,
then the provisions of Subsection C of this section shall apply at the
time of initial construction and/or installation.
E. In instances where either electrical or telephone utilities wire or cable
aerially, then the MCS provider may construct its multichannel system
aerially unless otherwise required by state law (including any
applicable PSC rules and regulations). [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
F. In instances where both electrical or telephone utilities are required to
place wire or cable underground, then the MCS provider shall construct
its multichannel system underground unless otherwise permitted by
state law (including applicable PSC rules and regulations). However,
where existing aerial electrical or telephone utilities convert to
underground facilities, an existing aerial MCS provider shall have the
option to continue remaining aerial for as long as it does not provide a
hazard and is permitted by state law (including any applicable PSC
rules and regulations). [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 185-79 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-81
185:751
§ 185-81. Construction schedule for franchised MCS providers.
§ 185-82. System expansion.
A. This section is applicable to any MCS provider required to maintain a
franchise to operate within the city which is required to construct or
rebuild an MCS system. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. A franchised MCS provider's construction schedule for the
multichannel system shall be detailed in the franchise agreement in a
form and format determined by the Council/franchising authority.
C. A franchised MCS provider who does not abide by the system
construction schedule shall be handled in the manner allowed under
either this chapter or, where applicable, a franchise agreement or
applicable federal or state law or rules. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
A. The Council/franchising authority recognizes that one of its primary
purposes in the franchising process is to ensure that the widest
diversity of programming sources shall be available to the greatest
number of city residents. The Council/franchising authority is also
cognizant that an MCS provider may have some constitutionally
protected rights with respect to when and what areas of the city are
provided service.
B. In order to balance those interests, the Council/franchising authority
sets the minimum guidelines for any system expansion on the part of a
franchised MCS provider.
C. A franchised MCS provider shall submit, within six (6) months of the
effective date of this chapter, a detailed plan for multichannel system
expansion to any area in which the public streets are not presently
served within the city. Such plan should not be construed as a
requirement for universal service, but rather as a means for achieving
the Council/franchising authority's goals mentioned in Subsection A.
However, at a minimum, a franchised MCS provider shall extend
multichannel service to any area within the city that has a density of
twenty (20) home or building passings per mile, or fractional equivalent
thereof, as measured from the extremity of the system nearest the
unserved area. Also, in such a case, a newly installed subscriber shall
not be assessed or apportioned the cost for installation, except for the
usual and normal connection fees paid by subscribers and except for
the costs of custom service arrangements or exceptional distance from
the public streets or ways, so long as the system expansion is
technically feasible. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
D. The detailed plan must include criteria for extending the provision of
service to isolated subscribers. For purposes of this section, "isolated
subscribers" means any potential customer of a franchised MCS
§ 185-81 RYE CODE § 185-82
185:752
§ 185-83. Permits and licenses.
An MCS provider shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses
required by local law, rule, regulation or ordinance and maintain the same,
in full force and effect, for as long as required by the city or other
appropriate entity.
§ 185-84. Technical and performance standards. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
The MCS provider shall comply with and abide by any and all applicable
rules and regulations of the NYSCCT concerning the performance and
integrity of the multichannel system.
§ 185-85. Proof-of-performance tests. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
The MCS provider shall design and conduct any and all tests necessary to
verify the performance and technical integrity of the multichannel system.
Such tests shall be performed at least annually and shall be in accordance
(where applicable) with any and all rules and regulations of the PSC
concerning proof-of-performance.
§ 185-86. Inspection to ensure compliance. [Amended 5-29-1996 by
L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 185-87. (Reserved)
provider who dwells in a house more than one-half (1/2) mile from the
nearest franchised MCS provider connection.
A. In order to verify that an MCS provider constructed and maintained the
multichannel system in the manner required by this chapter and
conducted the various performance, technical integrity (including
cumulative leakage), preventive maintenance and safety tests required
by federal, state (including PSC) and local laws required by this
chapter, the Council/franchising authority reserves the right to inspect
all facets of an MCS provider's construction as well as inspect
documents related to construction and inspect tests related to
performance, technical integrity, preventive maintenance and safety.
B. The Council/franchising authority shall pay for all its costs associated
with such an inspection, except for those circumstances precipitated by
an MCS provider's unreasonable refusal to provide necessary
information (such as, schematic drawings or as-built maps) or
occasioned by the repeated failure to construct, install, maintain,
repair, rebuild or upgrade in the manner specified and required by this
chapter or, where applicable, a franchise agreement. In such instances,
the MCS provider shall pay for such costs incurred by the city caused by
the MCS provider's refusal to supply necessary information or repeated
failure to abide by the rules.
§ 185-82 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-88
185:753
§ 185-88. (Reserved)
§ 185-89. (Reserved)
§ 185-90. Safety requirements.
§ 185-91. Emergency provisions.
A. The Council/franchising authority requires that the MCS provider's
construction, operation and maintenance of the multichannel system
meet certain threshold safety levels which are designed to protect the
public and lessen the likelihood of interruption of multichannel service.
B. Consequently, the Council/franchising authority requires any MCS
provider to adopt the following safety requirements:
(1) Emergency alert override activation in the manner set forth in this
chapter.
(2) Minimum standby power as noted in this chapter.66
(3) Implementing a periodic preventative maintenance program, as set
forth in this chapter.67
(4) Complying with and abide by any construction, safety or fire codes,
as noted in this chapter.
A. In order that subscribers may be alerted in the event of an impending,
imminent or actual natural or man-made emergency, all MCS providers
shall ensure that the multichannel system providing multichannel
service to all or part of the city is designed so as to permit an authorized
official of the city to override the audio portion of all channels by touchtone
phone (or functional equivalent) from any location.
B. In addition to any other requirements listed in this section, an MCS
provider shall:
(1) Designate a channel which will be used for emergency broadcasts
of both audio and video (this channel need not be solely used for
emergency broadcasts and may in fact be used for any lawful
purpose).
(2) Inform subscribers of the designated emergency channel on a
periodic basis with reasonable regularity (not less than once a
week). [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
66.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), which immediately followed this subsection and
dealt with signal alert technology, was repealed 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996. This local
law also renumbered former Subsection B(4) as B(3).
67.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), which immediately followed this subsection and
dealt with maximum cumulative leakage, was repealed 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996. This
local law also renumbered former Subsection B(6) as B(4).
§ 185-88 RYE CODE § 185-91
185:754
§ 185-92. (Reserved)68
§ 185-93. Preventive maintenance program.
(3) Test the emergency override system regularly, and remedy any
problems on operational deficiencies immediately. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
(4) Cooperate with the city on the use and operation of the emergency
alert override system.
(5) Develop a plan (with the city's concurrence) in order to provide
continuity of multichannel service and response to service calls in
the event of a natural or man-made emergency.
C. As one (1) method of providing continuity of multichannel services in
the event of a natural or man-made emergency, an MCS provider shall,
unless exempted by the Council/franchising authority, have the capacity
for three-hour automatically activated standby power on all trunk and
feeder cable and all head ends, hubs and receiver sites associated with
the distribution of cable service to and throughout the city.
A. It shall be the duty of an MCS provider to devise and implement a
periodic preventative maintenance program for the multichannel
system in order to ensure that there is no material degradation of the
multichannel system that would affect the citizens' health, safety and
welfare or negatively affect the quality of multichannel services being
provided.
B. Such a program may be reviewed and approved by the Council/
franchising authority. Such approval by the Council/franchising
authority shall not be unreasonably withheld for an MCS providerdesigned
preventive maintenance plan that meets the objectives of the
Council/franchising authority. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
C. Within forty-five (45) days after the completion of any preventive
maintenance component test, the MCS provider shall be prepared to
make available for inspection a written report (except for daily or
weekly components and tests which may be submitted once a quarter)
to the Council/franchising authority detailing the results of the tests
conducted and all items performed or addressed during the periodic
preventive maintenance program. Although not exhaustive, the
following areas should be included in a preventive maintenance
program and subsequent report: [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
(1) Inspection and repair, if needed, of the head end.
68.Editor's Note: Former § 185-92, Safety alert technology, was repealed 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996.
§ 185-91 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-93
185:755
§ 185-94. Construction, fire and safety codes.
§ 185-95. (Reserved)
§ 185-96. (Reserved)
§ 185-97. (Reserved)
(2) Inspection and repair, if needed, of the antenna tower.69
(3) The conducting of signal leakage tests that are in accord with FCC
requirements.
(4) Removal of tree roots, limbs and branches that interfere with or
come in contact with the MCS provider's cable.
(5) The periodic servicing, testing and calibration of the MCS
provider's equipment, including service vehicles and field test
equipment.
(6) Employing a status monitoring system or other adequate practices
to identify problems or situations in which the multichannel system
electronics are operating outside preprogrammed parameters.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
(7) Testing of the emergency alert system to ensure that it will function
properly during an emergency situation.
(8) Testing of any safety alert system or technology. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
(9) Testing and the recording of test data for all signals (audio and
video) at the head end and all system extremity points.
(10) Testing as required or allowed by federal or state law (including
any applicable or required PSC testing). [Amended 5-29-1996 by
L.L. No. 4-1996]
(11) Meeting or exceeding all operating parameters as set or allowed by
the FCC and as such may be revised or amended from time to time.
A. An MCS provider shall construct, operate, maintain, repair, remove,
replace or restore the multichannel system in strict compliance with all
current technical codes adopted by the Council/franchising authority,
the state (including any applicable codes of the PSC) or the United
States. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. The codes referred to specifically include, but are not limited to,
construction, fire and safety and zoning codes.
69.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(3), which immediately followed this subsection and
dealt with weatherproofing, was repealed 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996. This local law also
renumbered former Subsections C(4) through C(12) as C(3) through C(11), respectively.
§ 185-93 RYE CODE § 185-98
185:756
§ 185-98. (Reserved)
§ 185-99. (Reserved)
§ 185-100. Alternative user charge.
A. This section is applicable to any licensed but otherwise authorized
nonfranchised MCS provider and to any franchised MCS provider who
has had its franchise ruled unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid.
For all franchised MCS providers the provisions concerning franchise
fees shall be applicable. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. Where not specifically prohibited by federal or state law and as an
alternative to the imposition of a franchise fee as set forth in this
chapter, the Council/franchising authority may impose, extract and
collect a charge from an affected MCS provider for the use by such
provider of the streets, rights-of-way, easements and public ways of the
city.
C. Such an alternative user charge shall be based on the value of the
public rights-of-way being used by the affected MCS provider. However,
in no event shall the alternative user charge exceed five percent (5%) of
the affected MCS provider's gross revenue for the reporting period.
D. The Council/franchising authority adopts such an alternative user
charge in order to receive fair compensation for the affected MCS
provider's use of the public streets and public ways if such
compensation cannot be obtained by imposing a flat percentage fee on
such MCS provider's annual gross revenue. However, an affected MCS
provider may agree to an alternative charge that is based on a flat
percentage of gross revenue, as long as that charge does not exceed
five percent (5%) of an affected MCS provider's annual gross revenue.
E. Also, recognizing that an alternative user charge may affect a
franchised MCS provider, please note that the franchise agreement may
contain express language which details a different method or manner to
handle a situation in which franchise fees as historically calculated (as a
percentage of gross revenue) are ruled unconstitutional or
unenforceable, in order to protect and preserve the city's source of
revenue and compensation for the use of the public rights-of-way.
F. It is expressly understood that a franchise fee and an alternative user
charge will not be imposed on the same MCS provider at the same time
for the same period.
G. An affected MCS provider shall at no time be charged or obligated to
pay an alternative user charge that exceeds five percent (5%) of such
provider's gross revenue (as defined by this chapter) for any particular
reporting period. In the event that the alternative user charge does
exceed five percent (5%) of gross revenue, then such alternative user
§ 185-98 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-100
185:757
§ 185-101. Franchise required; exception.
§ 185-102. Nonexclusive franchises.
charge shall be reduced to reflect an amount not greater than the fivepercent
cap.
H. An affected MCS provider shall pay twenty-five percent (25%) of the
alternative user charge at the end of every three (3) months.
A. Except as provided in Subsections B, C and D of this section, no person
or MCS provider shall be permitted to construct, operate or maintain a
multichannel system which requires the laying or positioning or use of
cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) across the rights-of-way of
the city without having first obtained from the city an MCS franchise
which is then in effect or whose provisions have been renewed or
extended temporarily. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. Pursuant to the Cable Act, a local government may own and operate a
multichannel system classified as a "cable system." No franchise shall
be required for the city, or any local or municipal authority affiliated
with it, operating as an MCS provider in the franchised area.
C. If, as a result of annexation (either previous to or subsequent to the
effective date of this chapter), a previously unfranchised MCS provider
comes under the jurisdiction of the city, then such MCS provider shall
not be required to obtain a franchise and enter into a franchise
agreement unless the Council/franchising authority expressly gives
written notification to the MCS provider that it is required to do so.
D. Where a person or MCS provider is required by the Council/franchising
authority to obtain a franchise, then the Council/franchising authority
shall notify the person or MCS provider, in writing, within thirty (30)
days of the Council/franchising authority's formal action.
E. After receipt of notification, the affected person or MCS provider shall
have ninety (90) days in which to submit an application or proposal in
substantially the same form and format as required by the Council/
franchising authority. Then the affected person's or MCS provider's
application will be handled as set forth by either state or local law.
A. Consistent with Section 621(a)(1) of the Cable Act (codified at 47 U.S.C.
§ 541), the Council/franchising authority may award one (1) or more
nonexclusive multichannel service franchises within its geographical
limits.
B. A franchised MCS provider shall be selected as part of a public
proceeding and hearing which affords due process to both the city and
the applicant and in accordance with the procedure set forth by the
federal, state (including any applicable PSC rules and regulations) and
local laws and regulations. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 185-100 RYE CODE § 185-103
185:758
§ 185-103. Franchise agreement; requirement.
§ 185-104. Responsibilities upon award of franchise.
A. An MCS provider may not lay or use any cable (coaxial, fiber or
functional equivalent) until the franchise agreement is executed by both
the MCS provider and the Council/franchising authority and is then in
effect.
B. A franchise agreement shall be in sufficient detail in order to clearly
delineate the rights and duties of both the franchised MCS provider and
the Council/franchising authority.
C. At a minimum, a franchise agreement shall contain, to the extent
appropriate, provisions for the following: [Amended 5-29-1996 by
L.L. No. 4-1996]
(1) A detailed definition of "gross revenue" which specifically includes
an explanation of what constitutes the revenue base for
determining what revenues are subject to any franchise fee or
alternative user charge.
(2) The term or duration of the franchise.
(3) Indemnity and holds harmless clauses.
(4) Insurance.
(5) Performance and completion bonds or security deposits.
(6) Construction, upgrade or rebuild schedule.
(7) Compensation, including franchise fees.
(8) Continuity of multichannel programming service.
(9) Assignment, transfer or sale of an existing franchise.
(10) Repeal of prior inconsistent franchise agreements.
(11) A severability clause.
(12) The law that governs the franchise agreement.
(13) Any exemptions or relief from this chapter granted or any local law
clarifications noted with respect to the MCS provider's operation of
a franchised multichannel system.
A. Upon an award of a franchise, in accordance with the terms of such
franchise agreement, an MCS provider required to obtain and maintain
a franchise may construct, erect, install, maintain, operate, repair,
replace, remove or restore a multichannel system within the
geographical limits set forth in the franchise agreement.
§ 185-103 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-104
185:759
§ 185-105. Term of franchise.
§ 185-106. Application for franchise. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
B. The franchised multichannel system may be located in, upon, along,
across, over and under the streets, rights-of-way, easements and public
ways of the city.
C. If necessary and except to the extent that easement rights are conveyed
by the grant of a municipal franchise pursuant to the provisions of
federal law, the responsibility of obtaining easements for private
property (including privately owned utility or streetlight poles) shall be
that of a franchised MCS provider. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
D. A franchised MCS provider, through a separate pole or utility easement
agreement with an affected utility, may locate the multichannel system
on or within the property of such utility company. This provision
specifically includes MCS providers classified as "cable operators."
A. The term of an initial MCS franchise may be for a period not to exceed
ten (10) years from the date that a franchise agreement is both
approved and executed by the Council/franchising authority (and,
where applicable, the PSC). [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
B. The term of a renewal franchise may be for a period not less than five
(5) years nor more than ten (10) years from the date that a franchise
renewal agreement is both approved and executed by the Council/
franchising authority (and, where applicable, the PSC). [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
C. If an initial franchise or renewal franchise is for a period of six (6) years
or less, then the city shall detail the reasons for granting the shorter
franchise, in the franchise agreement or elsewhere.
A. The Council/franchising authority may develop rules and regulations
with respect to the submission and processing of applications for a
franchise. Such rules shall be consistent with and/or subordinate to any
applicable rules and regulations of the state (including, where
applicable, those of the PSC). Further, such rules and regulations shall
primarily be aimed at determining the legal, financial, technical and
character qualifications of the applicant for a franchise.
B. Unless prohibited by any state agency (including the PSC) and unless
inconsistent with applicable federal law, an applicant shall pay an
application fee which shall be no greater than the administrative and
consulting costs associated with processing an application for a
franchise. The total application fee must be paid, unless waived (totally
or partially), regardless of whether the applicant receives or does not
§ 185-104 RYE CODE § 185-106
185:760
§ 185-107. Franchise fees.
receive a franchise. The total application fee must be paid (or waived)
prior to the Council/franchising authority's formal action on the
applicant's request for a franchise.
A. Any franchised MCS provider (specifically including any MCS provider
classified as a "cable operator") awarded a franchise or renewal
franchise after the date this chapter becomes effective shall pay to the
city for the privilege and use of the streets, rights-of-way, easements
and public ways and other facilities of the city in the operation of the
multichannel system and for the city's supervision thereof during the
term of the franchise a sum equal to five percent (5%) of gross revenue
for the required period for payment of such franchised MCS provider,
provided that such fee shall be reduced to the extent necessary to
comply with applicable federal and state law and rules when added to
the fees, charges and taxes paid to the PSC or other state or local
entities. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. If the FCC, Congress or other governmental entity with authority over
multichannel service ever allows a governmental entity or Council/
franchising authority to increase the franchise fee beyond five percent
(5%), then the Council/franchising authority shall have the authority to
increase the franchise fee to the maximum percentage allowable,
provided that no increase in fee may be imposed upon a franchisee
during the term of a franchise agreement without the consent of the
franchisee, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law or regulation.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
C. For franchised MCS providers classified as "cable operators," such
franchised MCS providers (consistent with the Cable Act and the
applicable rulings of the FCC or the PSC) may pass through to
subscribers the amount of any increase in a franchise fee unless the
Council/franchising authority demonstrates that the rate structure
specified in the franchise agreement reflects all costs of franchise fees
and so notifies the franchised MCS provider classified as a "cable
operator" in writing. For franchised MCS providers not classified as
"cable operators," such franchised MCS providers must petition and be
granted the authority to pass through any increase in a franchise fee.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
D. Franchised MCS providers shall, to the degree required by the
applicable rulings of the FCC and PSC, pass through to subscribers the
amount of any decrease in a franchise fee. [Amended 5-29-1996 by
L.L. No. 4-1996]
E. A franchised MCS provider shall file with the Council/franchising
authority, within forty-five (45) days after the expiration of each of the
franchised MCS provider's fiscal quarters a detailed financial and
revenue statement clearly showing the franchise fee due for the
preceding quarter, together with the bases of the calculations thereof.
§ 185-106 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-107
185:761
Such statement shall be certified by a certified public accountant or
officer of a franchised MCS provider attesting to the accuracy,
completeness and veracity of the revenue figures. Such statement shall
be in a form and format adequate to show the subject revenue and
fees due (subject to the reasonable review by the Council/franchising
authority) and shall include revenue from any pertinent source.
Revenue will be reported by service category, type and level showing
computations and using incremental billing rates for all sources, levels,
tiers, clusters, types of service and other revenue sources by kind
and type, subject to appropriate protections of proprietary information
and the confidentiality of subscriber information under federal law.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
F. Payment of the quarterly portion of the franchise fee shall be rendered
to the city at the time the financial and revenue statement is filed.
G. In the event that payment is not made by the due date or within sixty
(60) days thereafter upon proper demand, then such franchised MCS
provider may be declared in default of the franchise, and the franchise
may be revoked, terminated or canceled in the manner prescribed by
this chapter. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
H. The Council/franchising authority reserves the right to audit franchised
MCS provider's books if the Council/franchising authority deems it
necessary, subject to appropriate protections of the confidentiality of
subscriber information under federal law. If such audit discovers an
underpayment of franchise fees in any amount, then the affected
franchised MCS provider shall reimburse the city for the cost of such an
audit (unless such cost is waived by the Council/franchising authority)
in accordance with the provisions of § 185-31C of this chapter. It is
specifically understood that the right of audit and recomputation of any
and all amounts paid under a franchise fee shall always be accorded to
the Council/franchising authority. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
I. If an audit or other research discovers that franchise fees have been
either significantly underpaid or not paid for a period exceeding six (6)
months from the original due date, then the city may seek full recovery
of the underpaid or nonpaid fees, plus reasonable interest. [Amended
5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
J. All annual reports due and pertaining to the payment of franchise fees
will be certified by an officer of the franchised MCS provider and will be
provided in the form, format and detail applicable to quarterly reports
under Subsection F above; such provider shall maintain records used in
the preparation of said report to be produced in their originality and
totality upon request or demand by the Council/franchising authority,
subject to protection of the privacy of subscriber information under
federal law. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 185-107 RYE CODE § 185-107
185:762
K. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release of or an
accord or satisfaction of any claim that the city might have for further
or additional sums payable under the terms of this chapter or for any
other performance or obligation of a franchised MCS provider
hereunder.
L. Payments of compensation made by a franchised MCS provider to the
city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be considered to the
extent consistent with applicable federal and state law in addition to
and exclusive of, any and all authorized taxes, business license fees,
other fees, other levies or assessments presently in effect or
subsequently adopted. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
M. A franchise fee does not include any items excluded by Section
622(g)(2)(D) of the Cable Act [codified at 47 U.S.C. § 542(G)(2)(D)].
N. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the
Council/franchising authority to impose a tax, fee or other assessment
of any kind on any person (other than a franchised MCS provider) with
respect to multichannel service or other programming or
communications service provided by such person over a multichannel
system for which charges are assessed to subscribers but not received
by a franchised MCS provider. For purposes of illustration only, this
subsection shall include the situation(s) where a premium service
directly bills a subscriber or the franchised MCS provider acts as
collection agent for a premium service billing directly to a subscriber or
where a person leaves a channel for commercial use and sells
advertising or goods on that channel and receives the money directly or
through a third party.
O. For any twelve-month period, the fees paid by any person subject to
Subsection N who provides any such multichannel service shall not
exceed five percent (5%) of such person's gross revenue or such higher
percentage as may be authorized by the FCC, Congress or other
governmental entity derived in such period from the provision of such
service over the multichannel system. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
P. If at any time the highest court of the nation or the highest court of the
state invalidates, voids or rules as unconstitutional the concept of
franchise fees, then the Council/franchising authority may impose an
alternative user charge on the franchised MCS provider in the manner
set forth in this chapter and not inconsistent with the terms of an
applicable franchise agreement or the lawful rights of the franchisee.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
Q. In light of Subsection P of this section and recognizing that an
alternative user charge may affect a franchised MCS provider, please
note that the franchise agreement may contain express language which
details a different method or manner for collection of franchise fees
should the way they historically have been calculated (as a percentage
§ 185-107 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-107
185:763
§ 185-108. Assignment of franchise.
of gross revenue) be ruled unconstitutional or unenforceable so that
the city's source of revenue and compensation for the use of the public
right-of-way may be protected. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
A. There shall be no assignment of a franchised MCS provider's franchise
by the affected MCS provider, without the prior express written
approval by the Council/franchising authority. [Amended 5-29-1996
by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. Any assignment or transfer without such prior written consent shall
constitute a default of such franchise.
C. In the event of such a default, the Council/franchising authority shall
proceed according to the procedure set forth in this chapter and any
applicable state law (including any applicable rules or regulations of
the PSC). [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
D. At least ninety (90) days before such a proposed assignment of an MCS
provider's franchise is scheduled to become effective, such franchised
MCS provider shall petition, in writing, for the Council/franchising
authority's written consent for such a proposed assignment.
E. The Council/franchising authority will not unreasonably withhold its
consent to such an assignment nor disclose confidential information
considered in connection with such a petition, provided that such
nondisclosure complies with the state's Freedom of Information Law.
However, in making such a determination, the Council/franchising
authority may consider all relevant facts, including the following:
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
(1) Experience of proposed assignee or transferee or buyer.
(2) Qualifications of proposed assignee or transferee or buyer.
(3) Legal integrity of proposed assignee or transferee or buyer.
(4) Financial ability and stability of the proposed assignee before and
after the proposed assignment.
(5) If requested by the Council/franchising authority, submittals from
the proposed assignee or transferee or buyer on what, if any,
changes it intends to make in the operation and maintenance of the
multichannel system.
(6) The corporate connection, if any, between the franchised MCS
provider and proposed assignee or transferee or buyer.
(7) The economic viability or nonviability of the multichannel system
that may result from the proposed assignment in the future, based
§ 185-107 RYE CODE § 185-108
185:764
§ 185-109. Hypothecation.
upon certain factors, including the impact of the purchase price on
the city and/or the proposed assignee or transferee or buyer.
(8) Any claimed benefits which may accrue from the assignments.
(9) Any other legitimate aspect of the proposed assignee's or
transferee's or buyer's background which could affect the health,
safety and welfare of the citizenry of the city as it relates to the
operation of the multichannel system.
F. A copy of the completed sales agreement or a functionally equivalent
instrument between the franchised MCS provider and proposed
assignee or transferee or buyer shall be provided to the Council/
franchising authority so that the Council/franchising authority may
discover the assumption of obligations by the franchised MCS provider
and proposed assignee or transferee or buyer with respect to the
multichannel system. In lieu of the sales agreement, the Council/
franchising authority may, at its election, accept an attested summary
of obligations assumed by the above-referenced parties. The city may
request additional information other than that which is expressly
prohibited by law. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
G. Before an assignment is approved by the Council/franchising authority,
the proposed assignee shall execute an affidavit acknowledging that it
has read, understood and intends to abide by both this chapter and the
applicable franchise agreement.
H. In the event of any approved assignment, the assignee shall assume all
obligations and liabilities of the former franchised MCS provider,
except as noted in Subsection I. Any consent by the city, if granted, may
be absolute or conditional, e.g., with respect to assumption or
nonassumption of liability, including but not limited to assumption of all
obligations of the franchise and all moneys owed the city.
I. An assignment shall not relieve the former franchised MCS provider of
its financial liabilities and obligations to the city under the franchise
agreement unless specifically relieved by federal or state law (including
any applicable PSC rules and regulations) or unless specifically relieved
by the Council/franchising authority (or, where applicable, the PSC) at
the time an assignment is approved. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
A. Except as provided herein, an MCS provider may hypothecate its
multichannel system without prior formal approval of the Council/
franchising authority, provided that such hypothecation not include the
conveyance of any right of transfer assignment or acquisition of the
franchise without the further prior approval of the Council/franchising
authority. 70 [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
§ 185-108 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-109
185:765
§ 185-110. Default of franchise.
B. While the Council/franchising authority will not unreasonably withhold
its consent of such hypothecation, it may nonetheless withhold approval
and consent in those instances where the technical or financial integrity
of the multichannel system would be compromised to such an extent
that the subscribers' ability to receive multichannel services would be
jeopardized.
A. When any event, act or omission (on the part of the franchised MCS
provider) occurs which represents a violation of a material provision of
this chapter or compromises the corporate character or legal, financial
or technical integrity and/or stability of the multichannel system or the
franchised MCS provider to such a degree that the interests of the
customers are negatively affected, then such event, act or omission may
be considered a major breach of this chapter. Under such
circumstances, the Council/franchising authority shall notify the
affected MCS provider in writing of the specific breach and direct such
franchised MCS provider to comply with all such provisions of its
franchise agreement or this chapter. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
B. For illustrative purposes only, the events, acts and omissions include,
but are not limited to, bankruptcy, insolvency, failure to pay taxes or
franchise fees (including the alternative user charge if applicable),
failure to receive written Council/franchising authority approval for an
assignment or failure to abide by the material terms and conditions of
the franchise agreement or material provisions of this chapter such as
cooperating with the city in the conduct of a periodic ascertainment of
the adequacy of the MCS provider's record of reasonably meeting
identified community needs, including those involving matters of
customer service and consumer protection needs as expressed by
subscribers. For purposes of this section, "material" means a provision
which either: [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
(1) Affects the ability of the customer to receive multichannel service;
(2) Affects the ability of the Council/franchising authority to receive
compensation for the use of its right-of-ways; or
(3) Affects the ability of the Council/franchising authority to evaluate
an MCS provider's performance in the technical, financial and legal
aspects of the multichannel system.
C. Where a franchised MCS provider satisfactorily corrects any of the
enumerated conditions within sixty (60) days, then in no event shall the
enumerated condition be weighed against such franchised MCS
provider in any subsequent review of franchise performance.
70.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which immediately followed this subsection and dealt
with where funds were to be expended, was repealed 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996. This
local law also renumbered former Subsection C as Subsection B.
§ 185-109 RYE CODE § 185-110
185:766
D. A copy of such notice of material breach shall be mailed to the surety on
the performance bond unless otherwise directed by state law (including
any applicable rule or regulation of the PSC). [Amended 5-29-1996 by
L.L. No. 4-1996]
E. Within seventy-five (75) days after such written notice is mailed to a
franchised MCS provider, the Council/franchising authority shall
conduct a public hearing on the matter unless state law or PSC rule or
regulation requires a different procedure in which the state or PSC rule
or regulation procedure would control or unless the alleged breach has
been corrected to the city's satisfaction. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
F. The Council/franchising authority shall provide written notice to a
franchised MCS provider and to the surety of the time and place of said
public hearing in a manner consistent with either state law or approved
by the Council/franchising authority (including, where necessary, the
PSC). [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
G. At the time of the hearing, the affected franchised MCS provider may
present information on the current status of the alleged breach of the
franchise agreement. If the situation has been resolved or steps are
being taken to resolve the situation, then the franchised MCS provider
should present the information at the hearing.
H. If the affected franchised MCS provider fails to attend the hearing and
has not requested a continuance of the hearing, then such franchised
MCS provider shall be deemed to have waived its right to a further
continuation of the matter and may be declared in default of the
franchise agreement unless the alleged breach has been corrected to
the city's satisfaction.
I. After the public hearing, the Council/franchising authority may
determine the franchised MCS provider to be in compliance and dismiss
the matter or may determine that the MCS provider has cured any
noncompliance and thereby dismiss the matter. However, the Council/
franchising authority may determine that a chapter violation exists and
remains uncured. Consequently, upon a finding that the MCS provider
violated an integral chapter provision or failed to cure an outstanding
chapter violation, the Council/franchising authority may direct the
affected franchised MCS provider to take corrective action within a
specified period of time or may declare such franchised MCS provider
in default of the franchise agreement and thereafter may revoke,
terminate or cancel the franchise, unless the franchised MCS provider
presents sufficient mitigating circumstances.
J. If the Council/franchising authority directs corrective action to take
place within a specified time or declares such franchised MCS provider
in default of the franchise agreement, then that declaration shall be
reduced to writing, and the notice of corrective action or default shall
§ 185-110 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-110
185:767
§ 185-111. Performance evaluations.
The Council/franchising authority is authorized to design a performance
evaluation procedure which periodically monitors compliance of the
franchised MCS provider with the terms and conditions of both the
franchise and this chapter. Moreover, the Council/franchising authority may
periodically review and examine whether a franchised MCS provider's
financial, technical, legal and character qualifications and its record of
meeting community and subscriber needs as particularly relate to matters
of customer service practices and consumer protection issues continue to
meet required operational, maintenance and performance levels in order
to ensure the uninterrupted and acceptable provision of multichannel
services. Such performance evaluations may be conducted every three (3)
years during the franchise term and may be done as part of any annual
independent survey which may be required or conducted by the Council/
franchising authority.
§ 185-112. (Reserved)
§ 185-113. (Reserved)
§ 185-114. (Reserved)
§ 185-115. (Reserved)
§ 185-116. Cable operators or SMATV operators.
be mailed to such franchised MCS provider and surety within twentyone
(21) days of the Council/franchising authority's action.
K. If within sixty (60) days the affected franchised MCS provider or surety
does not take significant action to rectify the breach or submit a plan
detailing how the affected MCS provider will eliminate the breach, then
the Council/franchising authority shall revoke such MCS provider's
franchise and shall notify the affected franchised MCS provider and
surety forthwith, unless there are mitigating circumstances.
L. The Council/franchising authority reserves the right to assess any
charges incurred (including costs for consultants, witnesses and
hearing preparation) in a default and/or revocation proceeding to the
franchised MCS provider.
A. In addition to any requirements contained within this chapter, all MCS
providers that are classified as cable operators shall be expected to
abide by and comply with all applicable provisions of the Cable Act, as
amended. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
B. The specific provisions of the Cable Act include, but are not limited to,
the following:
§ 185-110 RYE CODE § 185-116
185:768
(1) Cable channels for public, educational or governmental use
(Section 611 of the Cable Act, codified at 47 U.S.C. § 531).
(2) Cable channels for commercial use (Section 612, 47 U.S.C. § 532).
(3) General franchise requirements (Section 621, 47 U.S.C. § 541).
(4) Franchise fees (Section 622, 47 U.S.C. § 542).
(5) Regulation of rates (Section 623, 47 U.S.C. § 543).71
(6) Modification of franchise obligations (Section 625, 47 U.S.C. § 545).
(7) Franchise renewal (Section 626, 47 U.S.C. § 546).
(8) Conditions of sale of a franchise (Section 627, 47 U.S.C. § 547).
(9) Subscriber privacy (Section 631, 47 U.S.C. § 551).
(10) Equal employment opportunity (Section 634, 47 U.S.C. § 554).
(11) All applicable safety and electrical codes. [Added 5-29-1996 by
L.L. No. 4-1996]
C. Further, as an additional requirement, before the third anniversary of
the effective date of this chapter, any MCS provider classified as a
"cable operator" and providing cable service within the city shall design
and activate a multichannel system with a minimum capability of
providing seventy-seven (77) full-time video programming services.
D. Further, the Council/franchising authority is committed that the goal of
the Cable Act, as set forth in Section 601(4) of the Act [codified at 47
USC § 521 (4)], is met at all times. As a result, the Council/franchising
authority expressly requires that upon the advent, implementation and
transmission of high definition television (HDTV), its functional
equivalent or any subsequently developed technological advancement
affecting channel capacity or needed bandwidth for any video
programming source or service, the MCS provider classified as a "cable
operator" shall not lessen, dilute or decrease the mix, level, quality or
quantity of programming services carried on the multichannel system
for reasons of lack of adequate channel capacity, except to the extent
permitted pursuant to the applicable provisions of federal law.
[Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
E. Notwithstanding the above subsections of this section and where
specifically included or referenced in the Cable Act or by FCC
interpretation of the Cable Act, all MCS providers classified as "SMATV
operators" shall be expected to abide by and comply with such included
or referenced sections of the Cable Act, as amended.
71.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), which immediately followed this subsection and
dealt with Section 624, 47 U.S.C. § 544, was repealed 5-29-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996. This
local law also renumbered former Subsections B(7) through B(11) as B(6) through B(10),
respectively.
§ 185-116 TELECOMMUNICATIONS § 185-117
185:769
§ 185-117. Public, educational and governmental use.
A. The Council/franchising authority recognizes that under Section 611 of
the Cable Act (codified at 47 U.S.C. § 531) the Council/franchising
authority has certain power with respect to certain aspects for public,
educational or governmental (PEG) use that is provided by MCS
providers classified as "cable operators."
B. To the extent permitted by law and in order to fulfill the Council/
franchising authority's desired goal of a public, educational and
governmental (PEG) access policy that will facilitate the long-range
needs of the city, the Council/franchising authority adopts the following:
(1) At the time of an initial or renewal application for an MCS franchise
for a cable system, an MCS provider classified as a "cable operator"
shall pledge to include the following guaranties:
(a) An MCS provider classified as a "cable operator" shall provide,
at its own expense, a dedicated public access channel.
(b) An MCS provider classified as a "cable operator" shall provide,
at its own expense, a dedicated educational access channel.
(c) An MCS provider classified as a "cable operator" shall provide,
at its own expense, a dedicated governmental channel.
(2) Both the Council/franchising authority and the affected franchisee
shall review use after every twenty-four (24) months, including the
percentage of use of every PEG channel. At the end of each twentyfour-
month period, the Council/franchising authority or its
designee shall evaluate the response and actual use of such
channels. If, after any twenty-four-month period, the percentage of
use for any required PEG channel drops below twenty-five percent
(25%) of the total time allocated, then the required number of
hours may be reduced to a number that most closely approximates
the average hours of use per day. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
(3) If a separate channel is not dedicated for either government or
educational use at any time and thereafter seventy-five percent
(75%) of the total time allocated for any combined required
government/educational channel is consistently used five (5) days a
week for a period of three (3) months, then the franchisee shall
provide an additional PEG channel. [Amended 5-29-1996 by L.L.
No. 4-1996]
(4) The franchisee may be required, pursuant to the provisions of the
negotiated franchise agreement which is in effect, to provide
mobile, portable and stationary equipment dedicated for PEG
access, together with the aid of technical and production assistance
provided by the franchisee. The provisions of such a franchise
agreement, to the extent consistent with applicable federal law,
§ 185-117 RYE CODE § 185-117
185:770
§ 185-118. (Reserved)72
Chapter 187
TREES
may also provide that a franchisee shall provide equipment that
can store programs for delayed cablecasting, that there will be
no cost for technical production assistance for city PEG access
users and that the cost of maintenance of such PEG access studio
and equipment required to run the studio and other PEG access
facilities shall be borne by the franchisee. [Amended 5-29-1996
by L.L. No. 4-1996]
(5) The franchisee shall be permitted to use such PEG access channel
capacity required by this chapter for the provision of other services
if such channel capacity has not been used for the purposes
designated for a period of ninety (90) days and if the Council/
franchising authority agrees in advance. Such agreement may not
be unreasonably withheld. However, such use by the franchisee
shall cease if required to accommodate the designated PEG
program uses, subject to reasonable arrangements to avoid
untimely disruption of current program services and to allow
reasonable notice to subscribers. [Added 5-29-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
72.Editor's Note: Former § 185-118, Broad categories objectives, was repealed 5-29-1996 by
L.L. No. 4-1996.
§ 185-117 TREES § 185-118
187:771

ARTICLE I
Findings and Purpose
§ 187-1. Findings and purpose.
The preservation and maintenance of trees is necessary to protect the
health, safety and general welfare of the City of Rye because trees provide
shade, impede soil erosion, aid water absorption, enhance air quality, yield
advantageous microclimate effects, offer a natural barrier to noise, provide
a natural habitat for wildlife and add to the aesthetic quality of the
community.
§ 187-1 TREES § 187-1
187:773

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 187-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY NATURALIST — The naturalist for the City of Rye or such
representative as designated by the City Manager with the consent of the
Conservation Commission.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The strip of land over which facilities such as roads are
built as identified on the official City Map.
SHRUB — Woody plants with many more or less erect stems.
TREE — All woody plants having one well-defined stem and a more or less
definitely formed crown and attaining a height of at least 15 feet and a
diameter of not less than two inches at maturity.
TREE FOREMAN — The labor foreman in charge of trees or such
representative designated by the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 187-2 TREES § 187-2
187:775

ARTICLE III
Trees on Public Property
[Amended 11-30-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
§ 187-3. Planting of trees.
No person shall plant any tree, shrub or other vegetation within the limits
of any public street, right-of-way, park or other public place without first
obtaining a permit from the Department of Public Works and complying
with the following requirements. Such a permit shall be granted only upon
the determination by the Tree Foreman, after consulting with the Police
Department, that such a planting will not create a traffic hazard and will
not interfere with the use of such street, right-of-way, park or other public
place by the public and that such planting will enhance the beauty and
appearance of the street, right-of-way, park or other public place and the
surrounding area.
§ 187-4. Injuries to public trees.
The following acts as to City trees are prohibited: namely, to injure trees
by chopping into them, scarring the trunks, driving nails into the trunks
or limbs, building fires near trunks or under branches and pouring or
depositing substances injurious to growth on soil near trees, including oil,
gasoline, tar, creosote, salt or other injurious substances.
§ 187-5. Fastening of animals or attaching of signs to trees or
shrubs.
No person shall fasten or tie any animal to or attach any sign, bill, card,
notice or advertisement to any tree or shrub in any public street, right-ofway,
park or public place or allow any animal under his control to injure any
such tree or shrub.
§ 187-6. Permit required for treating public trees.
No person shall prune, spray, treat cavities, fertilize, cable, brace or
otherwise treat or cause to be treated City trees without first having
A. Trees planted within the limits of any public street, right-of-way, park or
other public place shall be of a species and quality approved by the Tree
Foreman and shall be planted at least 30 feet apart unless otherwise
authorized by the Tree Foreman. Each tree shall measure not less than
2 1/2 inches nursery caliper.
B. Should any tree, shrub or plant planted within the limits of any public
street, right-of-way, park or other public place pursuant to any such
permit, in the opinion of the Tree Foreman, at any time constitute a
traffic hazard, interfere with the use of such street, right-of-way, park or
other public place by the public or detract from the beauty and
appearance of the street, right-of-way, park or other public place or the
surrounding area, such tree, shrub or plant will be removed.
§ 187-3 TREES § 187-6
187:777
obtained a permit from the Department of Public Works and approved by
the Tree Foreman. No City employee shall treat City trees without first
consulting the Tree Foreman.
§ 187-7. Deposit to guarantee proper work.
Before a permit shall be issued, the applicant must deposit with the
Department of Public Works a sum of money equal to the cost of such
treatment as a guaranty that said work will be properly done. The
Department of Public Works shall pay this money to the Comptroller. This
sum of money shall be returned after the work has been inspected by the
Tree Foreman, provided that he or she shall certify that said work is up to
standard. If it is not properly done, the Tree Foreman shall cause the work
to be completed to his or her satisfaction. After the completion of the work,
the Tree Foreman shall certify to the Comptroller the cost of completing the
work, and the surplus remaining after deducting such cost shall be returned
to the applicant.
§ 187-8. Use of spurs, insulated wires or guy wires.
Any person, including public utilities, their agents, servants and employees,
is prohibited from climbing trees with the aid of spurs. Any wires of public
utilities passing among the branches of City trees shall be properly
insulated so as to prevent damage to said trees. Guy wires shall not be
attached to trees in such a manner as to girdle or restrict growth. When
it is necessary to attach any guy wires or cables, such devices shall be
attached by means of lag hooks screwed into the trunks or by eyebolts
passing through the trunk.
§ 187-9. Removal of limbs.
When it is necessary to remove limbs to make clear passage for wires and
where the removal of such limbs might injure a tree or spoil its symmetry
or otherwise mar its appearance, it shall be necessary to obtain a permit
from the Department of Public Works before starting such work. It shall not
be necessary to secure a permit for the usual periodical removal of small
branches to allow the free passage of wires, but any such work will be
subject to inspection by the Tree Foreman, and where such work is not up
to standard, any expense incurred by the City in repairing the same will be
charged to the public utility responsible.
§ 187-6 RYE CODE § 187-9
187:778
ARTICLE IV
Trees on Private Property
[Amended 12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 18-2000; 11-30-2005 by L.L. No.
4-2005]
§ 187-10. Prohibited trees.
Property owners and other persons are prohibited from planting silver
maples and allied species, ailanthus and poplars of any variety within a
distance of 20 feet from any public street, right-of-way, sidewalk or other
public place.
§ 187-11. Removal of trees.
Any property owner applying for subdivision approval whose plans would
require the removal of any trees is subject to regulations outlined in
Chapter 170, Article IV, § 170-15D. In addition, no person shall remove a
tree greater than eight inches in diameter measured 54 inches from the
base of said tree in a required yard adjoining public property or any tree
in an historic district without first obtaining a tree removal permit from the
Department of Public Works. Dimensions for required yards are established
in Chapter 197, Article VIII, § 197-86. In cases pertaining to required side
yards, the one-side minimum yard dimension shall apply.
§ 187-12. Granting of permit; stop orders.
A. Application for permits must be made by the owner and other person,
firm or corporation, if any, actually performing the work, in writing, to
the Department of Public Works upon forms prescribed by the City
Naturalist, The City Naturalist may adopt rules for obtaining and
processing of permits subject to approval by the City Council. The fee
for each application shall be set annually by resolution of the City
Council before adoption of the budget for the following year, payable
upon submission of the application. Approval of permits shall be made
by the City Naturalist. Denial of permits by the City Naturalist may be
appealed to the Board of Architectural Review pursuant to the review
procedures under this Code. The Board of Architectural Review is
authorized and empowered to obtain the assistance, when necessary, of
persons especially qualified by reason of training or experience in tree
planting, preservation and landscaping.
B. Permits for the removal, cutting or destruction of trees may be granted
under the following circumstances:
(1) If the presence of the tree would cause hardship or endanger the
public or the person or the property of the owner or of an adjoining
owner.
(2) If a tree is diseased or threatens the health of other trees.
§ 187-10 TREES § 187-12
187:779
§ 187-13. Removal of branches overhanging highways.
Where privately owned trees encroach upon any street, right-of-way, park
or other public place, the Tree Foreman is authorized to remove branches
overhanging any public street, right-of-way, park or other public place, or if,
in his or her judgment, such trees are dangerous to the public, he or she is
authorized to remove them.
§ 187-14. Removal of dead trees.
Where any dead tree or trees located on private property adjacent to a
public street, right-of-way, park or other public place constitute a danger
or are potentially dangerous to the traveling public, the Tree Foreman may
serve personally or by mail upon the owner of said property a written notice
to remove the dead tree or trees, and upon failure to do so within 20 days
after the service of said notice, the City, through its contractors, agents or
employees, may remove the same and assess the cost thereof against the
property affected by said assessment, to be levied, collected and enforced in
the same manner as taxes upon said property for City purposes are levied,
collected and enforced.
§ 187-15. Prohibited use of City transfer station for trunks and
stumps.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or dump on the City's
transfer station any trunks, limbs or branches of trees in excess of six inches
in diameter, and, further, it shall be unlawful to use said transfer station for
the deposit of tree stumps.
(3) If a tree substantially interferes with a permitted use of the
property.
C. Stop order. If the City Naturalist or Tree Foreman determines the
removal, cutting or destruction of trees for which a permit has been
granted is not proceeding according to the permit, the City Naturalist
or Tree Foreman may issue a stop order. Work will not resume until
approved corrective measures are undertaken.
§ 187-12 RYE CODE § 187-15
187:780
ARTICLE V
Protected Trees
§ 187-16. Protected trees.
Trees designated as protected may not be removed unless the City
Naturalist determines, because of their condition, they are a danger to
persons or property or that they are diseased and cannot be saved. A tree
may be designated as protected by the Board of Architectural Review after
a public hearing. Such designation may be made because of the tree's age,
history, uniqueness or special beauty. No protected tree designation may be
made without the written consent of the tree's owner.
§ 187-16 TREES § 187-16
187:781

ARTICLE VI
Penalties for Offenses
§ 187-17. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter will be required to replace, in kind, each and every tree
removed, cut down or destroyed. If the tree was so large and mature
that it cannot be replaced, the City Naturalist may require the planting
of multiple trees. If multiple trees cannot be planted on the site of the
violation, other available planting spaces on public property will be
used to accommodate the balance of the penalty. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for any new construction on property on
which occurred any violation of this chapter unless and until the
provisions of this subsection have been complied with.
B. In addition to any other penalty, any person, firm or corporation or
individual hired by such firm or corporation violating any provision of
this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty enforceable and
collectible by the City in the amount of $250 for each and every tree
removed, cut down or destroyed in violation of this chapter.
C. In addition to the foregoing, any person, firm or corporation engaged in
the business of tree removal or care who or which shall aid, assist or
abet in the violation of this chapter may be denied the status of a
permittee under § 187-12 for a reasonable period of time to ensure
future compliance, in the discretion of the City Naturalist, subject to
appeal to the City Manager.
§ 187-17 TREES § 187-17
187:783

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 187-18. Enforcement.
The City Naturalist, tree foreman and Building Inspector, with the
assistance of the police, shall enforce this chapter.
§ 187-18 TREES § 187-18
187:785
Chapter 191
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 61.
§ 187-18 RYE CODE § 187-18
187:786
Part 1
[Adopted 2-4-1942G Aens eCrha.l 6R eOgfu Tlahtei oGnesneral Ordinances]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 191-1. Definitions. [Amended 7-17-2002]
The terms "motor vehicle," "parking space," "public highway," "safety zone,"
"street," and "U-turn," when used in this Part 1, unless otherwise expressly
stated or unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires, shall be
deemed to mean the same as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 191-2. Pavement markings. [Added 8-22-1945]
The pavement markings duly adopted for the state highways in the State of
New York, as the same now exist and/or as they may hereafter be amended,
are hereby adopted as and for pavement markings on all roads or streets in
the City of Rye, and the Police Department of said City is hereby authorized
and directed to cause said roads or streets to be similarly marked, and
the markings so made and designated shall have the same meaning, force
and effect as the markings upon the state highways, and violations of such
markings shall be subject to the same penalties as provided for violations
thereof upon state highways.
§ 191-3. Beacons.
Vehicles must keep to the right of all beacons unless otherwise directed by
a police officer.
§ 191-4. Interference with traffic.
No one shall operate any vehicle so as to interfere with or interrupt the
passage of other vehicles.
§ 191-1 TREES § 191-4
187:787

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 191-5. Through highways. [Amended 4-3-1968 by Ord. No.
1-1968]
The following streets are hereby designated as through highways, and stop
signs shall be erected at all of the street entrances thereto, except at such
intersections where traffic control signals are located:
Name of Street
Boston Post Road
Forest Avenue
Grace Church Street
Highland Road
Hillside Road
Maple Avenue
Midland Avenue
Milton Road
North Street
Oakland Beach Avenue
Purchase Street
Theodore Fremd Avenue
Wappanocca Avenue
§ 191-6. One-way streets.
A. The City Manager is hereby authorized to designate, subject to the
approval of the Council, public streets and private roads open to public
motor vehicle traffic in which vehicles shall pass in one direction only,
provided the streets and roads so designated are so marked at all
intersections by conspicuous signs which shall be visible during the
hours in which such designation is to be observed. [Amended
9-16-1970 by Ord. No. 8-1970]
B. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as oneway
streets in the directions indicated during the hours indicated:
[Added 2-4-1970 by Ord. No. 1-1970]
Name of Street Direction Hours Location
Clinton Avenue
[Added
7-18-1979]
North All From High Street
to Central Avenue
Elizabeth Street West
§ 191-5 TREES § 191-6
187:789
Name of Street Direction Hours Location
Evergreen
Avenue north
fork [Added
12-4-1996]
West All Entire length
First Street
[Added
12-2-1981]
North From Purdy
Avenue to Station
Plaza
Harbor Terrace
Drive [Added
5-27-1976 by
Ord. No.
6-1976]
South From West-bank
Road west to Hix
Avenue
Haviland Lane
[Added
12-2-81]
South From Locust
Avenue to
Purchase Street
Hewlett Avenue
[Amended
2-28-2001;
5-18-2005;
12-12-2007]
East When school is
in session,
from 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m.
and 2:15 p.m.
to 3:15 p.m.
From Forest
Avenue to Milton
Road
High Street
[Added
7-18-1979]
East All From Maple
Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
New Street
[Added
12-2-1981;
amended
2-16-1983;
12-15-1999]
South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
3:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.
From Cedar
Street to
Purchase Street
Old Post Road
[Added
2-1-1989]
West All Between Route 1
and North Street
Rectory Street
[Added
5-18-1994]
West All From Milton Road
to Boston Post
Road
School Street
[Added
10-4-1995]
North From Smith
Street to a point
94 feet southerly
of its intersection
with Purdy
Avenue
§ 191-6 RYE CODE § 191-6
187:790
§ 191-7. Speed limits. [Amended 9-16-1964 by Ord. No. 13-1964;
9-10-2014 by L.L. No. 3-201473]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle or
motorcycle in any street in the City at a speed in excess of 30 miles per hour,
except as indicated in Subsection A and where otherwise indicated by signs
erected by the Police Department of the City.
§ 191-8. Right turns on red signal. [Amended 1-19-1977 by Ord. No.
1-1977; 9-14-1988 by L.L. No. 12-1988]
§ 191-9. Left turns. [Added 4-4-1962; amended 7-16-2003 by L.L.
No. 5-2003; 9-3-2008; 6-10-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009; 7-17-2019 by
L.L. No. 5-2019]
Name of Street Direction Hours Location
Second Street
[Added
12-2-1981]
South From Station
Plaza to Purdy
Avenue
Smith Street
[Added
12-2-1981]
West From Post Road
to the southeast
corner of
driveway for
Municipal Parking
Lot No.3
A. The speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour for the block bordered by
Stuyvesant Avenue, Van Wagenen Avenue, Forest Avenue, Oakland
Beach Avenue and Milton Road. The twenty-five-miles-per-hour limit
shall be posted along each of the streets indicating what sections are
governed by the twenty-five-miles-per-hour speed limit.
A. The City Manager is hereby authorized to designate, subject to the
approval of the Council, the intersections where a right turn on a red
signal is prohibited, provided that a sign is in place prohibiting such
turn.
B. Right-hand turns on a red signal are prohibited at the following
locations: [Added 6-16-1999]
Location
Midland Avenue at its southbound intersection with Grace Church
Street
A. Left-hand turns are prohibited as described below during the hours
indicated:
73.Editor’s Note: Section 3 of this ordinance stated that it would take effect 11-1-2014 and
be effective for 12 months.
§ 191-6 TREES § 191-9
187:791
Location Hours
Apawamis Avenue and Milton
Road
7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m., Monday
through Friday
From Boston Post Road at the
intersection southbound with
Cross Street (rear of police
booth)
Boston Post Road northbound at
Liberty Lane (rear of flagpole)
At the intersection of Cedar
Street and the ramp leading to
the westbound side of Station
Plaza
7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.
From the Citibank exit onto
Cross Street
From the 2 driveways of the
Cowperwood-Osborn office
building (411 Theodore Fremd
Avenue) parking lot into Garver
Drive
From Cross Street at the
driveway into Citibank
Elm Place at Purchase Street
From Grandview Avenue into
the Rye Country Day School
driveway closest to Cedar Street
From Grandview Avenue into
the Rye Country Day School
driveway closest to Elizabeth
Street
At the high school parking lot
exit and Milton Road
7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m., Monday
through Friday
From Hillside Avenue onto
Boston Post Road
From the Oakland Beach
Avenue driveway exit of 520
Milton Road
At the driveway of Osborn
School leading onto Boston Post
Road
When school is in session, from
8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:30
p.m. to 3:30 p.m.
From Palisade Road at Milton
Road
§ 191-9 RYE CODE § 191-9
187:792
§ 191-9.1. Right turns. [Added 9-14-1988 by L.L. No. 12-1988;
amended 5-16-2001; 7-16-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003]
Right-hand turns are prohibited as described below during the hours and
days indicated:
Location Hours; Days
From the 2 driveways of the Cowperwood-Continental office building (511
Theodore Fremd Avenue) parking lot onto Garver Drive [Repealed
6-10-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
From the northeasterly driveway of the
Cowperwood-Osborn office building (411
Theodore Fremd Avenue) parking lot onto
Theall Road
7:30 a.m. to 7:30 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
Location Hours
From Rye Country Day School's
driveways closest to Hillside
Avenue onto the Boston Post
Road
Smith Street at Purchase Street
From northeastbound Theall
Road into the northeasterly
driveway of the Cowperwood-
Osborn office building (411
Theodore Fremd Avenue)
7:30 a.m. to 7:30 p.m., Monday
through Friday
From northeastbound Theall
Road onto Garver Drive
From the YMCA parking lot onto
Mead Place
B. In addition, any vehicle with a maximum gross weight of 10,000 pounds
(five tons) or more is prohibited at any time from making a left turn onto
the following streets, except that such vehicle may enter upon such
streets by left turns for the purpose of accepting or making deliveries of
material at some point on said streets. This turn prohibition for vehicles
of five tons or more does not apply to motor buses or school buses
operating regular service under the supervision of the Westchester
County Department of Transportation.
Location
Onto Peck Avenue from the Boston Post Road (U.S. Route 1)
southbound
Onto Peck Avenue from the Railroad Station Plaza exit
Onto Cross Street from the Boston Post Road (U.S. Route 1)
southbound
§ 191-9 TREES § 191-9.1
187:793
Location Hours; Days
From southeastbound Garver Drive onto Theall Road [Repealed
6-10-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
From Mead Place onto YMCA parking lot
From Rye Country Day School's driveway on
the easterly side of Grandview Avenue
closest to Elizabeth Street
§ 191-9.2. U-turns. [Added 7-17-2002]
§ 191-10. Trucks and trailers. [Added 6-16-1943; amended
1-20-1982 by L.L. No. 1-1982; 10-19-1983 by L.L. No. 8-1983;
8-15-1984 by L.L. No. 11-1984; 5-7-1986 by L.L. No. 6-1986;
4-17-1989 by L.L. No. 5-1989; 5-6-1992 by L.L. No. 6-1992]
A. U-turns are prohibited upon the following streets:
Name of Street Location
Boston Post Road Between Purchase Street and the
Metro North Railroad
Elm Place
First Street
Locust Avenue Between Purchase Street and the
Metro North Railroad
McCullough Place
Mead Place
Purchase Street Between Boston Post Road and
Cedar Street/Highland Road
Purdy Avenue
School Street
Second Street
Smith Street
Theodore Fremd Avenue Between Locust Avenue and
Purchase Street
B. U-turns made upon any street are prohibited unless such a turn is made
without interfering with the right-of-way of any motor vehicle, bicycle
or pedestrian.
A. The driving of any vehicle with a maximum gross weight of 5,000
pounds or more upon the streets designated below is prohibited, except
that such vehicle may enter upon said streets for the purpose of
accepting and/or making deliveries of material at some point on said
streets in said City of Rye. The penalties provided in Article VI of this
Part 1 shall apply to any violation or violations of this section. This
§ 191-9.1 RYE CODE § 191-10
187:794
§ 191-11. Bus stops. [Amended 7-18-1979 by Ord. No. 5-1979]
The following locations are designated for the stopping of buses only, and
such bus stops shall be so marked:
Name of Street Location
Cross Street Southwest corner of Cross Street and Boston
Post Road
Forest Avenue Northeast corner of Forest Avenue and Dearborn
Avenue
Forest Avenue Southeast corner of Forest Avenue and Playland
Parkway
Forest Avenue Southeast corner of Forest Avenue and Rye
Beach Avenue
Hewlett Avenue [Repealed 6-17-1992]
Hewlett Avenue
[Added 6-17-1992]
For a distance of 60 feet southerly of the
southerly entrance to the driveway which runs
along the easterly side of Milton School, when
the school is in session
Midland Avenue East side thereof, in front of the Midland School
Midland Avenue Southeast corner of Midland Avenue and
Manursing Avenue
provision does not apply to motor buses or school buses operating
regular service under the supervision of the Westchester County
Department of Transportation.
Name of Street Limits
Coolidge Avenue Entire length
Evergreen Avenue Entire length
Grace Church Street Entire length
Grandview Avenue Entire length
Highland Road Entire length
Hillside Road Entire length
Locust Avenue West of Theodore Fremd Avenue
Purchase Street North of Highland Road
Ridge Street Entire length
Theall Road Entire length
Wappanocca Avenue Entire length
B. Also, see left-hand turn prohibition for vehicles with a maximum gross
weight of 10,000 pounds or more in § 191-9 of this chapter. [Added
2-1-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
§ 191-10 TREES § 191-11
187:795
Name of Street Location
Milton Road Northwest corner of Milton Road and Ellsworth
Street
Milton Road Southwest corner of Milton Road and Park Lane,
adjacent to Milton Fire House
Milton Road West side thereof, near entrance of the Milton
Harbor House
Milton Road West side thereof, in front of the Resurrection
School
Purchase Street Northwest corner of Purchase Street and
Theodore Fremd Avenue
Purchase Street Southwest corner of Purchase Street and Elm
Place
Station Plaza Eastbound platform, adjacent to the taxi stalls
§ 191-12. Stop intersections. [Amended 1-20-1982 by L.L. No.
1-1982; 8-18-1982 by L.L. No. 7-1982; 10-19-1983 by L.L. No.
8-1983; 9-18-1985 by L.L. No. 11-1985; 11-6-1985 by L.L. No.
13-1985]
Pursuant to § 1603 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York, the City Manager is hereby authorized to designate, subject to the
approval of the City Council, full-stop locations. The following locations
are designated full-stop locations, and a stop sign shall be installed at the
designated location:
Name of Street Location
Anchor Drive [Added 6-21-2000] At Rye Road
Avon driveway [Added 2-19-1986
by L.L. No. 1-1986]
At Peck Avenue
Boulder Road [Added 4-10-2003] At Stoneycrest Road
Bradford Avenue [Added
3-14-2007]
At Florence Avenue
Brevoort Lane At Captains Lane
Brevoort Lane At Greenhaven Road
Brevoort Lane At Rye Road
Brown Avenue [Added
12-16-1998]
At Apawamis Avenue
Brown Avenue [Added 2-7-2001] At Orchard Lane
Captains Lane At Rye Road
Cedar Place [Added 12-16-1998] At Manursing Avenue
Cedar Place At Sylvan Place
§ 191-11 RYE CODE § 191-12
187:796
Name of Street Location
Central Avenue [Added 4-6-1994] At Maple Avenue
Central Avenue [Added 5-7-1986] At Summit Avenue
Centre Street [Added 5-4-1988] At Brown Avenue
Chester Drive At Harbor Lane
Chestnut Street [Added 5-7-1986] At Central Avenue
Claremont Avenue At Morehead Drive
Clinton Avenue At Central Avenue
Colby Avenue At Morehead Drive
Coolidge Avenue At Glen Oaks Drive
Coolidge Avenue [Added
3-18-1992]
At Harding Drive
Coolidge Avenue At Osborn Road
Coolidge Avenue At Park Avenue
Coolidge Avenue [Added 9-5-2001] At Wilson Drive
Cowles Avenue At Apawamis Avenue
Cowles Avenue [Added 5-7-1986] At Intervale Place
Dalphin Drive At Hix Avenue
Davis Avenue [Added 12-16-1998] At Manursing Avenue
Elizabeth Street At Grandview Avenue
Evergreen Avenue [Added
11-20-1996]
At Elizabeth Street
Evergreen Avenue [Added
12-4-1996]
Where the north fork meets the
south fork
Fairway Avenue [Added
12-16-1998]
At Green Avenue
Fairway Avenue [Added
2-28-2001]
At Hewlett Avenue
First Street At Purdy Avenue
First Street At Smith Street
Florence Avenue [Amended
3-14-2007]
At Bradford Avenue
Florence Avenue At Glen Oaks Drive
Florence Avenue At Harding Drive
Florence Avenue At Park Avenue
Fulton Avenue At Parkway Drive
Glendale Road At Locust Avenue
§ 191-12 TREES § 191-12
187:797
Name of Street Location
Glen Oaks Drive [Added
3-18-1992]
At Coolidge Avenue
Grandview Avenue [Repealed 5-16-2001]
Grandview Avenue [Added
5-16-2001]
At Cedar Street
Grapal Street At Palisade Road
Green Avenue At Fairway Avenue
Greenhaven Road At Rye Road
Halls Lane At Stuyvesant Avenue
Harbor Lane At Barlow Lane
Harding Drive At Coolidge Avenue
Hewlett Avenue crosswalk Opposite the southerly entrance of
the driveway which runs along the
easterly side of Milton School, when
school is in session (A portable stop
sign shall be maintained at that
location.)
Hillside Road [Added 11-20-1996] At Grandview Avenue, 4-way
Lake Road At Brevoort Lane
Lindbergh Avenue At Chamberlain Street
Lindbergh Avenue At Hix Avenue
Loewen Court [Added 5-7-1986] At Central Avenue
Lynden Street [Added 4-3-1991] At Brown Avenue
Macy Road At Sunnyside Avenue
Maple Avenue [Added 4-6-1994] At Central Avenue
Maple Avenue [Added 5-7-1986] At High Street
Maple Avenue At Locust Avenue
Milton Road [Added 5-3-1989 by
L.L. No. 6-1989]
At the driveway exit from 520 Milton
Road
Norman Drive At Rye Road
North Island Drive At Van Rensselaer Road
Oakland Beach Avenue [Added
5-3-1989 by L.L. No. 6-1989]
At the driveway exit from 520 Milton
Road
Old Post Road, at turnoff From Post Road
Old Post Road, eastbound At Triangle
Ormond Place [Added 5-7-1986] At Halstead Place
Ormond Place [Added 5-7-1986] At Overlook Place
Overdale Road At Greenhaven Road
§ 191-12 RYE CODE § 191-12
187:798
Name of Street Location
Playland Access Drive At Old Post Road
Redfield Street [Added 6-21-2000] Old Rye Beach Avenue
Reymont Avenue At Morehead Drive
Ridge Street [Added 10-6-1999] At High Street
Rye Country Day School exiting
driveways [Added 5-16-2001]
Rye Road At Captains Lane
Rye Road At Greenhaven Road
Rye Road At Norman Drive
Rye Road At Sound Road
Rye Road, westbound At Brevoort Lane
Station Plaza At Peck Avenue
Station Plaza [Added 10-4-1995] At Third Street
Stuyvesant Avenue At Milton Road
Stuyvesant Avenue [Added
8-17-1994]
At Van Wagenen Avenue
Summit Avenue [Added 5-7-1986] At Central Avenue
Summit Avenue At Locust Avenue
Sylvan Place At Davis Avenue
Theall Road At Osborn Road
Theall Road At Playland Access Drive
Third Street At Purdy Avenue
Thruway Access Drive At Old Post Road
Van Wagenen Avenue At Stuyvesant Avenue
Walden Lane At Brevoort Lane
Walnut Street [Added 5-7-1986] At Central Avenue
Wappanocca Avenue [Added
1-20-1993]
At Natoma Street
Wappanocca Avenue [Added
1-20-1993]
At Blind Brook Lane
Wilson Drive [Added 9-5-2001] At Coolidge Avenue
Woodland Drive At Rye Road
§ 191-12 TREES § 191-12
187:799

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 191-13. Seasonal parking restrictions. [Amended 4-10-2003]
§ 191-14. Powers of City Manager. [Amended 9-16-1970 by Ord. No.
8-1970]
The City Manager is hereby authorized to designate, subject to the approval
of the Council, parking spaces, safety zones and bus, cab or taxicab stands
in the public streets and private roads open to public motor vehicle traffic,
and to limit or prohibit parking in spaces and zones in such public streets
and private roads, provided such spaces, zones and stands are marked
and indicated by suitable signs, and all operators shall obey the rules and
regulations prescribed by the City Manager, subject to the approval of the
Council, for such spaces, zones and stands.
§ 191-15. Angle parking.
Upon those streets which have been marked for angle parking, vehicles
shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks.
§ 191-16. Parking backed to curb.
Vehicles parking on the northerly side of Library Lane and any other street
which is marked and indicated with suitable signs for parking backed to the
curb shall be parked with the wheels backed to the curb.
§ 191-17. All-night winter parking. [Added 12-19-1962; amended
9-15-1982 by Ord. No. 4-1982]
All-night winter parking shall be permitted in the Halsted Lane parking area
(during the months of November, December, January, February and March),
A. From May 1 to September 30 of each year, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle in any of the streets, except those within
control of the Westchester County Park Commission, within the area
bounded as follows: on the westerly side, by Blind Brook and Milton
Harbor; on the southerly side, by Milton Point; the easterly side, by
Long Island Sound; and on the northerly side, by the northerly side of
Apawamis Avenue as extended by imaginary lines easterly from its
point of intersection with Forest Avenue to Long Island Sound, and
westerly from its point of intersection with Milton Road to Blind
Brook.74
B. From April 1 to October 31 of each year, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park a vehicle on Thorne Place.
74.Editor's Note: An action was approved by the City Council of the City of Rye on 7-10-2013
to temporarily lift the ban on seasonal parking restrictions on Apawamis Avenue from
Midland Avenue to Milton Road to allow parking for the duration of the Rye City School
District construction.
§ 191-13 TREES § 191-17
187:801
and the City Clerk is hereby authorized to sell permits for such use on the
same basis as winter all-night parking use is permitted in the other City
parking areas.
§ 191-18. Public parking places.
A. For the purpose of this section, a "municipal parking place" shall mean
a lot or property leased or owned by the City and used for public
parking purposes, excluding parking places on the property of the New
York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad Company. [Amended
3-17-1982 by Ord. No. 1-1982; 9-15-1982 by Ord. No. 4-1982]
B. Lines or markers in a municipal parking place indicate parking stalls,
and only one motor vehicle shall be parked within such lines or markers
indicating such separate parking stalls respectively, and such vehicle
shall be parked parallel to the sidelines of any such stall and shall not
extend more than 18 feet from the front line of such stall.
C. In any municipal parking place in which parking stalls are not marked
out or indicated, all motor vehicles shall be parked with respect to any
indicated line of parking within such municipal parking place as is
designated on any sign therein and shall be parked so that there shall
be a space of at least two feet and not more than three feet from any
other motor vehicle already parked and shall not extend more than 18
feet from the said indicated line of parking.
D. All-night parking.
(1) No motor vehicle shall be parked in a commuter parking area
described by § 191-47 between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
except during the months of November, December, January,
February and March, when no motor vehicle shall be parked in
such commuter parking areas between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. The same parking rules shall apply in all other municipal
parking places except by special permit obtained from the Clerk.
[Amended 5-17-1961 by Ord. No. 4-1961; 3-17-1982 by Ord.
No. 1-1982]
(2) All-night parking prohibited. No parking shall be permitted on any
public street in the City of Rye between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. on any day during the months of November, December,
January, February and March, except that parking shall be allowed
on the westerly side of Theall Road, off the travel portion of said
road from a point approximately 400 feet north of its intersection
with Osborn Road and running north for a distance of 240 feet,
while such property is licensed for such use by the City of Rye.
Parking shall be allowed on the westerly side of Davis Avenue from
Manursing Avenue to Sylvan Place and on the southerly side of
Manursing Avenue from Davis Avenue to Cedar Place between the
hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any days during the months of
November, December, January, February and March except for a
§ 191-17 RYE CODE § 191-18
187:802
§ 191-18.1. Cemetery parking prohibition. [Added 10-17-1984 by
L.L. No. 16-1984]
No motor vehicle shall be parked in parking areas, on roads or on the
entranceways of the Greenwood Union Cemetery between hours of 6:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 191-19. No parking any time. [Added 5-15-1963 by Ord. No.
4-1963]
The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in all of the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
*Promulgated by City
Manager with approval
of City Council.
Apawamis Avenue
[Added 1-7-1976 by
Ord. No. 3-1976]
North From Milton Road to Midland
Avenue
Apawamis Avenue
[Added 2-16-1983]
South Extending 40 feet east and west of
Cowles Avenue
period beginning four hours after the National Weather Service
has issued a winter storm warning and continuing for 24 hours
thereafter or when the City Manager has provided notification
which is reasonable under the circumstances stating that parking
is prohibited. [Added 9-15-1982 by Ord. No. 5-1982; amended
12-21-1988 by L.L. No. 19-1988; 10-6-1999 by L.L. No.
6-1999]
(3) Limited all-night parking. Parking of any vehicle other than
registered noncommercial passenger vehicles on any public street
in a residentially zoned district in the City of Rye between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. is prohibited. [Added 9-18-1985 by
L.L. No. 10-1985]
E. No motor vehicle shall be parked in any space designated by a sign as a
no-parking area.
F. All lights on motor vehicles in municipal parking places shall be
extinguished except while such motor vehicles are in motion.
G. No repair work on any motor vehicle, except emergency repairs, shall
be done or performed in any municipal parking place.
H. No person shall injure, deface, displace, remove or destroy any sign,
inscription or marking placed or displayed in parking places, directing,
restricting or regulating parking therein or giving information or
direction to the public in relation thereto, except by proper authority.
§ 191-18 TREES § 191-19
187:803
Name of Street Side Location
Blind Brook Lane [Added
1-7-1976 by Ord. No.
3-1976]
South
Boston Post Road [Added
12-2-1981]
East From northeast corner of Parsons
Street to Mamaro-neck line
Boston Post Road East From Rectory Street to Port
Chester boundary line
*Boston Post Road
[Added 12-2-1982]
West From Port Chester line to
Mamoroneck line
Boston Post Road West From Rectory Street to Port
Chester boundary line
*Cedar Street [Added
12-2-1981]
North From Purchase Street to Post
Road
Central Avenue
[Added-7-18-1979]
Both From Clinton Avenue to Theodore
Fremd Avenue
Central Avenue [Added
7-18-1979]
North From Maple Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
Central Avenue [Added
12-2-1981; repealed
10-20-1982]
*Chestnut Street [Added
12-2-1981]
West From Orchard Avenue to Central
Avenue
*Clinton Avenue West From High Street to Central
Avenue
*Cottage Street [Added
9-21-1983]
Both From Midland Avenue to the Port
Chester line
Davis Avenue [Added
2-4-1970 by Ord. No.
1-1970]
East From Manursing Avenue to Sylvan
Place
Elizabeth Street [Added
2-4-1970 by Ord. No.
1-1970; amended
4-15-1970 by Ord. No.
4-1970]
South
Evergreen Avenue
[Added 12-4-1996]
All On all three sides of the triangle
abutting Grandview Avenue and
Evergreen Avenue
§ 191-19 RYE CODE § 191-19
187:804
Name of Street Side Location
*First Street Both,
except
within
desig-nated
parking
area
*First Street [Added
12-2-1981]
Both From Purdy Avenue to Station
Plaza
*First Street [Added
12-2-1981]
West From loading zone from Purdy
Avenue to Smith Street
*Forest Avenue [Added
12-2-1981]
East From Cornell Place to Playland
Parkway
Gramercy Avenue [Added
10-4-1989]
Both
Grandview Avenue East From High Street to Cedar Street
Grandview Avenue
[Amended 5-16-2001]
West From the northern property
boundary of Rye Country Day
School property on the west side
of Grandview Avenue to Cedar
Street
Grapal Street [Added
12-18-2002]
Both From Grace Church Street to a
point 30 feet southwest of its
intersection with Grace Church
Street
Hammond Road [Added
6-17-1969 by Ord. No.
3-1969]
Both
Harbor Terrace Drive
[Added 5-27-1976 by
Ord. No. 6-1976]
East To Westbank Road
Harbor Terrace Drive
[Added 5-27-1976 by
Ord. No. 6-1976]
South From Westbank Road to Hix
Avenue
*Haviland Lane [Added
12-2-1981]
Parking lot side of main
firehouse — "Firemen Only"
Hewlett Avenue East From the crosswalk opposite the
southerly entrance of the
driveway which runs along the
easterly side of Milton School for
a distance of 50 feet northerly
§ 191-19 TREES § 191-19
187:805
Name of Street Side Location
Hewlett Avenue [Added
10-5-2016]
East From Forest Avenue to a point 50
feet north of the southerly
crosswalk to Milton School at the
exit of their driveway
Hewlett Avenue
[Repealed 6-17-1992]
*Highland Road [Added
12-2-1981]
South From Mendota Avenue to
Purchase Street
*Highland Road [Added
12-2-1981]
West Harrison line to Club Road
*High Street North From Summit Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
Hillside Road [Added
6-21-1989]
Both From Purchase Street to Boston
Post Road
*LaSalle Avenue [Added
6-21-2000]
East At the terminus for a distance of
50 feet
*LaSalle Avenue [Added
6-21-2000]
West At the terminus for a distance of
35 feet
*Locust Avenue
[Amended 12-2-1981]
Both From Purchase Street to the
easterly corner of Mead Place
Locust Avenue Both From Theodore Fremd Avenue to
Harrison boundary line
Locust Avenue [Added
2-16-1994]
North From the easterly end of Mead
Place to Theodore Fremd Avenue
*Manursing Avenue
[Added 12-2-1981]
North From Davis Avenue to Midland
Avenue
*Manursing Avenue
[Added 10-20-1999]
South From Davis Avenue east to Forest
Avenue
*Maple Avenue [Added
12-2-1981]
East From North Street to Locust
Avenue
Maple Avenue West From North Street to Locust
Avenue
*Mead Place [Added
6-11-2014]
South
*Mead Place [Added
12-2-1981]
West Across from side of YMCA Locust
Avenue to curve in road
*Midland Avenue [Added
12-2-1981; repealed
8-16-1995]
§ 191-19 RYE CODE § 191-19
187:806
Name of Street Side Location
Midland Avenue [Added
8-16-1995; amended
1-20-2010 by L.L. No.
1-2010]
East Ellis Court to Grace Church Street
*Midland Avenue [Added
3-19-1997]
East From a point 20 feet north of
northerly entrance to Midland
School circle from 8:15 a.m. to
8:45 and from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30
p.m. Monday through Friday
Midland Avenue [Added
12-2-1981]
East From entrance ramp of New
England Thruway to Cottage
Street
*Midland Avenue [Added
12-2-1981]
West From Cottage Street to Peck
Avenue
*Milton Road [Added
12-2-1981]
East Palisade Road to Halstead Lane
then from Hewlett Avenue to
Stuyvesant Avenue
*Milton Road [Added
12-2-1981]
West Parsons Street to Brookdale Place
Natoma Street [Added
1-7-1976 by Ord. No.
3-1976]
South
*North Street [Added
12-2-1981]
Both From Old Post Road to Harrison
line
*Oakland Beach Avenue
[Added 12-2-1981]
Both From Post Road to Milton Road
*Orchard Avenue [Added
2-19-1964]
South Entire length
Osborn Road [Added
10-21-2015]
North Between Theall Road and the
Harrison line
Osborn Road [Added
10-21-2015]
South Between Boston Post Road and
the Harrison line
Osborn Road [Added
10-5-2016]
North From Boston Post Road to the
entrance driveway to the Osborn
School
*Palisade Road [Added
2-19-1964]
Both From a point 153 feet east of the
intersection with Richard Place to
a point 158 feet west of the
intersection with Midland Avenue
*Palisade Road [Added
12-2-1981]
North From a point 153 feet east of the
intersection with Richard Place to
a point 158 feet west of the
intersection with Midland Avenue
§ 191-19 TREES § 191-19
187:807
Name of Street Side Location
*Palisade Road [Added
12-2-1981]
South From a point 153 feet east of the
intersection with Richard Place to
Midland Avenue
Parsons Street [Added
12-2-1981]
North Milton Road to Post Road, except
Sundays
Pondview Road [Added
9-22-1977 by Ord. No.
5-1977]
Both From northerly driveway to
Theodore Fremd Avenue
Purdy Avenue Both From Purchase Street to First
Street
Purdy Avenue [Added
2-4-1970 by Ord. No.
1-1970]
North From Boston Post Road to east
side of post office property
Purdy Avenue [Added
2-4-1970 by Ord. No.
1-1970]
North From Third Street to a point 50
feet west thereof
Purdy Avenue [Added
2-4-1970 by Ord. No.
1-1970]
South From School Street to Boston Post
Road
*Rectory Street [Added
12-2-1981; amended
5-18-1994; 7-20-1994]
North Entire length, except Sundays
*Rye Beach Avenue
[Added 12-16-1998;
repealed 2-3-1999]
Rye Beach Avenue
[Added 4-5-2006]
South From Forest Avenue to Old Rye
Beach Avenue
School Street [Amended
11-17-1976 by Ord. No.
13-1976]
East
Second Street Both
Smith Street Both
*Summit Avenue East From High Street to Locust
Avenue
Theodore Fremd Avenue Both From Purchase Street to entrance
of Car Park No. 2
*Walnut Street [Added
12-2-1981]
West From Orchard Avenue to Central
Avenue
West Purdy Avenue Both
§ 191-19 RYE CODE § 191-19.1
187:808
§ 191-19.1. Parking prohibited certain hours. [Added 8-13-1997;
amended 2-28-2001; 7-15-2009 by L.L. No. 7-2009; 8-5-2013;
6-11-2014; 4-27-2016]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours listed upon any of the
following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Boston Post Road East When school is in
session, from 7:30
a.m. to 8:30 a.m.
and 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Along the frontage of
the Resurrection
Middle School
936-946 Boston Post
Road
Fairway Avenue
[Added
2-28-2001;
amended
10-5-2016]
West When school is in
session, from 8:00
a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m.
From Hewlett Avenue
to Green Avenue
Hewlett Avenue
[Added
2-28-2001]
West When school is in
session, from 8:00
a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m.
Between the
crosswalks extending
from Robert Crisfield
Place to the fire lane
driveway entrance to
the driveway exit
Parsons Street South When school is in
session, from 7:30
a.m. to 8:30 a.m.
and 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between the middle
school and high
school driveways
§ 191-20. Parking time limited. [Added 5-15-1963 by Ord. No.
4-1963; amended 2-4-1970 by Ord. No. 1-1970; 11-17-1976 by Ord.
No. 13-1976; 12-2-1981; 11-16-1983 by L.L. No. 12-1983; 5-2-1990;
4-7-1993; 5-18-1994; 7-20-1994; 1-21-1998; 10-7-1998; 12-16-1998;
5-3-2000; 10-15-2008; 4-15-2009 by L.L. No. 2-200975]
A. Two-hour limit. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the
following car park locations for a period longer than two hours between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Sundays:
Name of Car Park Exceptions
Car Park No. 1 Except for those cars that have all day/all night,
all night or merchant permits
Car Park No. 2 Except for those cars that have all day/all night,
all night or merchant permits
75.Editor's Note: This local law also provided that it become effective 7-1-2009.
§ 191-19.1 TREES § 191-20
187:809
Name of Car Park Exceptions
Car Park No. 4 Except for those cars that have all day/all night,
all night or merchant permits
Car Park No. 5 Except for those cars that have all day/all night,
all night or merchant permits
B. Two-hour limit. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the
following street locations for a period longer than two hours between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Sundays:
Name of Street Side Location
Blind Brook Lane Both
Central Avenue
[Amended
9-10-2014 by L.L.
No. 4-2014]
North From the west side of the bridge
over the Blind Brook to Walnut
Street
First Street East Parking area between Commuter
Parking Area and Purdy Avenue
Highland Road North From Purchase Street to Club Road
Milton Road West From Cross Street to Rectory Street
Natoma Street North
New Street (Except also on Saturday)
Orchard Avenue North From 300 feet from the intersection
of Boston Post Road west to
Theodore Fremd Avenue
Purchase Street Both From Natoma Street to Ridge
Street
Rectory Street South From Milton Road to Boston Post
Road
Theodore Fremd
Avenue
North First 4 parking spaces of the
parking area commencing at
intersection with Blind Brook
Theodore Fremd
Avenue
Southeast From its intersection with Central
Avenue northeasterly for 155 feet
Wappanocca
Avenue
Both
C. Three-hour limit. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the
following car park locations for a period longer than three hours
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Sundays:
Name of Car Park Exceptions
Car Park No. 3 Except for those cars that have all day/all night,
all night or merchant permits.
§ 191-20 RYE CODE § 191-20
187:810
D. One-hour limit. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the
following locations for a period longer than one hour between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Sundays: [Amended 12-16-2009
by L.L. No. 9-2009]
Name of Street Side Location
Cowles Avenue
Elm Place North Entire north side except 3 spaces
closest to Theodore Fremd Avenue
Elm Place South
Haviland Lane West
Hillcrest Lane Both
Locust Avenue Both From the easterly end of Mead
Place to Theodore Fremd Avenue
Mead Place Both Westerly portion off Locust Avenue
Mead Place East Easterly portion off Locust Avenue
Purchase Street Both From Boston Post Road to Natoma
Street
Purdy Avenue Both From Third Street to First Street
School Street West
Theodore Fremd
Avenue
South From Elm Place to the entrance to
Car Park No. 2
Third Street Both From the commuter parking area to
a point 100 feet north of Purdy
Avenue
E. Fifteen-minute limit. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the
following locations for a period longer than 15 minutes between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., except on Sundays: [Amended
12-16-2009 by L.L. No. 9-2009; 9-10-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014;
12-3-2014 by L.L. No. 11-2014; 4-27-2016]
Name of Street Side Location
Boston Post Road East From Central Avenue to Rectory
Street
Car Park 2 Parking spot Nos. 239, 240, 241,
and 242, along 14 to 16 Elm Place,
excluding handicap space
Elm Place North 3 spaces on the north side closest
to Theodore Fremd Avenue
First Street West 3 spaces along the west side of
First Street parallel to the building
and the curb
§ 191-20 TREES § 191-20
187:811
Name of Street Side Location
Forest Avenue West From the southwest driveway of
the service station to Elmwood
Avenue
Purchase Street East From Elizabeth Street southerly
for 140 feet
Purdy Avenue North From the east side of the post
office property to Third Street
Sylvan Road South 2 spaces on the south side closest
to Midland Avenue
Third Street East From Purdy Avenue to the post
office driveway
Third Street West From Purdy Avenue to a point 100
feet north thereof
F. Four-hour limit. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the
following locations for a period longer than four hours between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Saturdays and Sundays:
Name of Street Side Location
Cayuga Street
Coolidge Avenue
[Added 4-25-2018
by L.L. No. 4-2018]
East From Harding Drive to
Osborn Road
Mendota Avenue
Onondaga Street
Osborn Road [Added
4-25-2018 by L.L.
No. 4-2018]
North From the northernmost
access drive to Osborn
School to Theall Road
Seneca Street
Theall Road [Added
4-25-2018 by L.L.
No. 4-2018]
West From the southerly end of
the dedicated parking lane
to Osborn Road
Woods Lane
G. No-parking time limits. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in
the following locations between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m.:
Name of Street Side Location
Brevoort Lane From Greenhaven Road to Rye Road
Greenhaven
Road
From Post Road to Rye Road
Overdale Road From Post Road to Greenhaven Road
Rye Road From Post Road to Sound Road
§ 191-20 RYE CODE § 191-20
187:812
§ 191-21. Parking, standing or stopping. [Added 4-4-1962]
The parking, standing or stopping of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the
following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Billington Court [Added
8-16-1995]
North
Central Avenue [Added
10-20-1982; amended
9-10-2014 by L.L. No.
4-2014]
North From the Boston Post Road to the
west side of the Blind Brook
Central Avenue [Added
10-20-1982]
South From Loewen Court to the Boston
Post Road
Coolidge Avenue [Added
4-25-2018 by L.L. No.
4-2018]
West From Osborn Road to Harding
Drive
Cornell Place [Amended
1-7-1976 by Ord. No.
3-1976]
Both
Dearborn Avenue
[Added 1-7-1976 by
Ord. No. 3-1976]
Both East of Forest Avenue, including
the turnaround at the easterly end
thereof*
Forest Avenue [Added
12-2-1981]
East From Redfield Street to Playland
Parkway
Franklin Avenue [Added
11-19-2008]
Northeast
From a point approximately 30 feet
north of Sonn Drive
Hewlett Avenue [Added
2-28-2001]
East Between the crosswalks extending
from Robert Crisfield Place to the
fire lane driveway exit, when
school is in session, from 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30
p.m.
Kirby Lane [Added
5-2-1990]
Both From its westernmost intersectionwith
Mill Pond to Van
Rensselaer Road, from 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Locust Avenue Both From Purchase Street to the east
end of Mead Place
Locust Avenue [Added
12-2-1981]
South From main firehouse to Purchase
Street
Name of Street Side Location
Woodland Drive From Post Road to Rye Road
§ 191-20 TREES § 191-21
187:813
Name of Street Side Location
Midland Avenue [Added
12-2-1981]
Front of
No. 382
Midland Avenue [Added
8-16-1995; repealed
9-20-1995]
Midland Avenue [Added
9-20-1995; repealed
3-19-1997]
Midland Avenue [Added
9-20-1995]
West From Apawamis Avenue to
Goldwin Street from 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30
p.m., Monday through Friday
Milton Road [Added
12-2-1981]
West From Fairlawn Street to driveway
of marina
Platt Lane [Added
8-5-2013]
South Entire length, from 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:00
p.m. on school days
Purchase Street [Added
12-2-1981]
West From Elizabeth Street to driveway
of 231 Purchase Street
Purdy Avenue [Added
12-2-1981]
Both Purchase Street to First Street
Purdy Avenue [Added
12-2-1981]
South From School Street to Post Road
NOTE:
*Except that the parking, standing or stopping of vehicles on the northerly
side of the turnaround for discharging or loading of passengers only is
permitted.
§ 191-21.1. Handicapped parking zones. [Added 5-4-1988; amended
last 7-16-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003]
The following described areas are designated as handicapped parking
zones:
Name of Street Location
*Promulgated by City Manager
with approval of City Council
Orchard Avenue [Repealed
10-10-2012]
*51 Milton Road 1 space in the parking lot at 51
Milton Road
Haviland Lane Closest space to Purchase Street
Theodore Fremd Avenue North of Elm Place
§ 191-21 RYE CODE § 191-21.1
187:814
Name of Street Location
Third Street Easterly side
§ 191-21.1 TREES § 191-21.1
187:815

ARTICLE IV
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
[Amended 11-17-1948; 5-17-1961 by Ord. No. 3-1961; 8-21-1974 by
Ord. No. 3-1974]
§ 191-22. Removal of vehicles authorized. [Amended 9-18-1985 by
L.L. No. 10-1985; 4-2-1986 by L.L. No. 5-1986; 4-6-1988 by L.L. No.
5-1988]
When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within the City of
Rye during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency which affects
that portion of the highway upon which said vehicle is parked or when any
vehicle is found unattended on any highway within said City where such
vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic or when any vehicle is parked
or abandoned on any highway within said City where stopping, standing or
parking is prohibited or when any vehicle has been parked more than three
times within two weeks after the issuance of a parking violation appearance
ticket against such vehicle at that location or when any vehicle is illegally
parked or abandoned in any public place and has three or more outstanding
parking violations or has unpaid parking violation fines of at least $100,
said vehicle may be removed by the Police Department of the City of Rye or
its duly authorized agent. The term "snowstorm" shall include not only the
period of actual snowfall but such additional period thereafter as may be
necessary to remove the fallen snow.
§ 191-23. Storage and redemption.
After the removal of any vehicle as provided in this article, the Police
Department of the City of Rye or its duly authorized agent may store such
vehicle in a suitable place at the expense of the owner. Such owner or
person in charge of the vehicle may redeem the same upon payment to the
Police Department of the City of Rye or its duly authorized agent of the
amount of all expenses actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such
removal, together with any charges for storage. The cost of removal and
storage of any vehicle as herein authorized shall be a lien upon the vehicle
removed and may be collected by the public sale thereof.
§ 191-24. Notification of owner.
The Police Department of the City of Rye shall ascertain to the extent
reasonably possible the owner of the vehicle or person having charge of the
same and notify him of the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of
the amount which will be required to redeem the same. The removal and
storage charges shall be in addition to any penalty provided for violation of
the provisions of this chapter or the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 191-25. Parking during emergencies prohibited.
No vehicle shall be parked on any highway within the City of Rye during
a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency after the owner or
§ 191-22 TREES § 191-25
187:817
operator thereof shall have received notice by any duly authorized agent of
the City of Rye that parking in said highway is prohibited or to remove said
vehicle from said highway.
§ 191-25 RYE CODE § 191-25
187:818
ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 191-26. Loading and unloading.
(Reserved)
§ 191-27. Overloading of vehicles.
No person shall overload any vehicle so as to allow the contents thereof to
fall on the streets.
§ 191-28. Orders of Police Department.
No person shall willfully disregard or violate any traffic regulation
established by the Police Department of the City or disregard any order or
instruction of any member of the Police Department.
§ 191-29. Horses.
No horse shall be left unattended in any street unless securely fastened or
unless the wheels of the vehicle to which he is harnessed are securely tied,
fastened or chained and the vehicle is of sufficient weight to prevent its
being dragged at a dangerous speed with wheels so secured. No horse shall
be unbitted in any street unless secured by a halter. No one shall remove
a wheel, pole shaft, whiffletree, splinter bar or any part of a vehicle or any
part of harness, likely to cause an accident if the horse should start, without
first unhitching the horse attached to said vehicle.
§ 191-30. Advertising vehicles and material. [Amended 8-15-1962
by Ord. No. 8-1962]
No person shall operate or cause to be operated in or upon any street in the
City of Rye an advertising vehicle without the permission of the Common
Council of the City of Rye, provided that nothing herein shall prevent
advertising matter from being affixed to or installed in or on any vehicle not
used merely or mainly for advertising purposes if such advertising matter
is not affixed to or installed in or on the top of the vehicle nor elsewhere
on the vehicle where it might endanger the safety of others and if the total
area of such advertising matter on any side of the vehicle does not exceed
30% of that exterior side of the vehicle.
§ 191-26 TREES § 191-30
187:819

ARTICLE VI
Penalties for Offenses
[Amended 3-20-1963; 5-15-1963 by Ord. No. 4-1963; 1-7-1976 by
Ord. No. 3-1976]
§ 191-31. Penalties for speeding offenses.
Every person convicted of a violation of § 191-7 shall be punished by a fine
of not more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 191-32. Penalties for offenses against special parking provisions.
[Amended 9-19-1984 by L.L. No. 13-1984; 4-6-1988 by L.L. No.
5-1988; 12-16-1992 by L.L. No. 22-1992; 12-15-2010 by L.L. No.
11-201076]
Every person convicted of a violation of Article VII or Article VIII or any
order, rule, regulation or special direction made thereunder shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200 or by
imprisonment for not more than five days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Failure to pay such fine on or before the appearance date or
upon conviction shall result in an additional charge equal to the imposed
fine. Failure to pay the fine within 45 days of the appearance date or date
of conviction shall result in an additional charge equal to three times the
initial fine. Failure to pay the fine and additional charges within 75 days of
the appearance date or date of conviction will result in the assessment of an
additional administrative fee equal to 40% of the total of the fines and late
charges then due.
§ 191-33. Penalties for parking offenses in certain areas. [Amended
7-21-1976 by Ord. No. 11-1976; 4-6-1988 by L.L. No. 5-1988;
12-16-1992 by L.L. No. 22-1992; 12-15-2010 by L.L. No. 11-201077]
Every person convicted of a violation of Article III or any order, rule,
regulation or special direction made thereunder, occurring along Forest
Avenue between Cornell Place and Sanford Street and along the streets east
of Forest Avenue between Cornell Place and Sanford Street, inclusive, shall,
for the first conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $200. Failure to pay such fine on or before the appearance date
or upon conviction shall result in an additional charge equal to the imposed
fine. Failure to pay the fine within 45 days of the appearance date or date
of conviction shall result in an additional charge equal to three times the
initial fine. Failure to pay the fine and additional charges within 75 days of
the appearance date or date of conviction will result in the assessment of an
additional administrative fee equal to 40% of the total of the fines and late
charges then due.
76.This local law also provided that it would take effect 3-1-2011.
77.This local law also provided that it would take effect 3-1-2011.
§ 191-31 TREES § 191-34
187:821
§ 191-34. Penalties for parking offenses generally. [Amended
9-19-1984 by L.L. No. 13-1984; 4-6-1988 by L.L. No. 5-1988;
12-16-1992 by L.L. No. 22-1992; 12-15-1993 by L.L. No. 12-1993;
12-15-2010 by L.L. No. 11-201078]
Except as otherwise provided in §§ 191-32 and 191-33, every person
convicted of a violation of Article III or any order, rule, regulation or special
direction made thereunder shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $200. Failure to pay such fine on or before the appearance
date or upon conviction shall result in an additional charge equal to the
imposed fine. Failure to pay the fine within 45 days of the appearance date
or date of conviction shall result in an additional charge equal to three times
the initial fine. Failure to pay the fine and additional charges within 75 days
of the appearance date or date of conviction will result in the assessment of
an additional administrative fee equal to 40% of the total of the fines and
late charges then due.
§ 191-35. Penalties for offenses generally. [Amended 9-19-1984 by
L.L. No. 13-1984; 4-6-1988 by L.L. No. 5-1988; 12-16-1992 by L.L.
No. 22-1992]
Every person convicted of a violation of this chapter or any order, rule,
regulation or special direction thereunder for which another penalty is not
provided shall, for the first conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not
less than $25 nor more than $50. Failure to pay such fine on or before
the appearance date or upon conviction shall result in an additional charge
equal to the imposed fine. Failure to pay the fine within 45 days of the
appearance date or date of conviction shall result in an additional charge
equal to three times the initial fine. Failure to pay the fine and additional
charges within 75 days of the appearance date or date of conviction will
result in the assessment of an additional administrative fee equal to 40% of
the total of the fines and late charges then due.
78.This local law also provided that it would take effect 3-1-2011.
§ 191-34 RYE CODE § 191-35
187:822
Part 2
[AMdoepteterded 7 P-2a1r-k1i9n5g4]
ARTICLE VII
Off-Street Metered Parking
§ 191-36. Parking meter zones established. [Amended 4-6-1955;
5-2-1956; 4-6-1988 by L.L. No. 5-1988]
The following zones, to be known as "off-street parking meter zones," are
hereby established:
§ 191-37. Installation of meters. [Amended 12-15-2004 by L.L. No.
5-2004]
Parking meters shall be installed in all parking meter zones. The parking
meter fee and time limits of meter operation shall be posted on each meter
as prescribed in § 191-39.
A. Off-street public parking areas maintained by the City of Rye on Cityowned
lands known and designated as "Parcels 3 and 4" on the Map of
Property to be Conveyed to the City of Rye, surveyed in possession, May
12, 1952, Russell Munson, Surveyor, 11 William Street, White Plains,
New York, revised October 15, 1952, also including the area known and
designated as "that part of Parcel 5 which extends from Second Street
to Third Street on the northerly side of the police station and the Rye
Station Garage," including such part of leased area abutting and
adjoining the same to the north known and designated as "Parcel 5" on
a certain map entitled "Map of Property to be Conveyed to the City of
Rye, surveyed as in possession, May 12, 1952, Russell Munson,
Surveyor, 11 William Street, White Plains, New York, revised October
15, 1952," and also the leased area shown on a map entitled "Map of
Property to be Leased by the City of Rye, Westchester County, New
York, surveyed as in possession, June 16, 1952, Russell Munson,
Surveyor, 11 William Street, White Plains, New York, last revised March
31, 1953," copies of said maps being on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
B. Off-street parking areas maintained by the City of Rye on City-owned
lands known and designated as "Lot No. 4" on the Map of Village Lots
near Rye Station, the Property of Jas. Padgham," filed in the office of the
County Clerk of Westchester County, Division of Land Records, as Map
No. 616, said property being known and designated on the Tax Map of
the City of Rye as "Sheet 146.07, Block 1, Lot 15 and Lot 18," situated
on the easterly side of First Street, between Purdy Avenue and Depot
Plaza in said City of Rye.
C. Off-street parking areas maintained by the City of Rye on City-owned
lands known as Car Park No. 1, Car Park No. 2, Car Park No. 3, Car Park
No. 4 and Car Park No. 5. [Added 12-15-2004 by L.L. No. 5-2004]
§ 191-36 TREES § 191-38
187:823
§ 191-38. Parking in metered zones. [Amended 2-18-1970;
2-15-1984 by L.L. No. 5-198479; 12-15-2004 by L.L. No. 5-2004]
When any vehicle shall be parked in a space regulated by a parking meter,
the operator thereof shall, upon entering such space, park such vehicle
within the lines marked on the street, curb or parking area and, if the time
is between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or between the hours of
9:00 a.m. or 6:00 p.m. in the off-street parking areas maintained by the City
of Rye on City-owned lands known as Car Park No. 1, Car Park No. 2, Car
Park No. 3, Car Park No. 4 and Car Park No. 5 on any day except Sunday,
immediately deposit the parking meter fee in the parking meter regulating
such space and actuate the mechanism of such meter as required by the
directions thereon.
§ 191-38.1. Resident meter parking permit zone. [Added 4-4-1990
by L.L. No. 7-1990]
A. No person shall be permitted to park an automobile or other vehicle or
shall permit an automobile or other vehicle to remain in or upon the
public parking places on land owned and controlled by the City of Rye
and shown and designated on the Tax Map of the City of Rye as Sheet
146.07, Block 1, Lot 64, between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
each day, except Sundays and legal holidays, unless the owner of such
vehicle shall have a tag or license for resident meter parking and shall,
upon entering such space, park such vehicle within the lines marked
and immediately deposit the parking meter fee in the parking meter
regulating such space and activate the mechanism of such meter as
required by the directions therein. [Amended 12-15-2004 by L.L. No.
5-2004]
B. No parking shall be permitted from 3:00 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. in this
resident meter parking permit zone.
C. Any resident of the City of Rye desiring a resident meter parking permit
shall, upon application to the City Clerk and payment of an annual fee to
be set annually by the City Council before adoption of the budget for the
following year, receive a tag or license entitling that person to park an
automobile or other vehicle in the location and places specifically
designated for resident meter parking. [Amended 12-15-1993 by L.L.
No. 12-1993; 12-18-2002 by L.L. No. 13-2002]
79.Editor's Note: This local law also provided that former §§ 191-41 through 191-49 be
renumbered to become §§ 191-40 through 191-48, respectively.
§ 191-38 RYE CODE § 191-39
187:824
§ 191-39. Parking time limits and fee. [Amended 12-15-1965 by
Ord. No. 4-1965; 2-18-1970; 2-15-1984 by L.L. No. 5-198480;
12-15-1993 by L.L. No. 12-1993; 12-15-2004 by L.L. No. 5-2004;
10-20-2010 by L.L. No. 9-2010]
The permitted parking time and fees in all City parking meter zones shall
be set after public hearing by resolution by the City Council. Upon the
expiration of the permitted parking time with respect to any vehicle in such
designated parking space, the operator shall forthwith remove such vehicle
from such parking space.
§ 191-40. Presumption of unlawful parking.81 [Amended 12-15-2004
by L.L. No. 5-2004]
The fact that, at any time during any period in which the deposit of the
parking meter fee in any parking meter is required to permit parking in the
parking space regulated thereby, the timing device on such parking meter
indicates no unexpired time shall be presumptive evidence, as to a parked
vehicle then found in such parking space, that the operator of such vehicle
failed to deposit or to cause to be deposited the required parking meter
fee in such meter or failed to remove such vehicle from such parking space
upon the expiration of the lawful parking time with respect thereto.
§ 191-41. Misuse of meters.82 [Amended 12-15-2004 by L.L. No.
5-2004]
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to deface, injure, tamper with,
break, destroy or impair the usefulness of or open without lawful authority
any parking meter installed in any parking meter zone or deposit or cause
to be deposited in any such parking meter any slug, device or substitute for
the parking meter fee.
§ 191-42. Use of off-street parking area for storage.83
No person shall use any off-street public parking area maintained by the
City of Rye for the regular storage of an automobile or other vehicle at
night, legal holidays or on Sundays.
80.Editor's Note: This local law also provided that former §§ 191-41 through 191-49 be
renumbered to become §§ 191-40 through 191-48, respectively.
81.Editor's Note: Former § 191-40, Additional time limits, added 5-2-1956, was repealed
2-15-1984 by L.L. No. 5-1984. Said local law also provided that former §§ 191-41 through
191-49 be renumbered to become §§ 191-40 through 191-48, respectively.
82.Editor's Note: Former § 191-41, Presumption of unlawful parking, was renumbered to
become § 191-40 pursuant to L.L. No. 5-1984, adopted 2-15-1984.
83.Editor's Note: Former § 191-42, Misuse of meters, was renumbered to become § 191-41
pursuant to L.L. No. 5-1984, adopted 2-15-1984.
§ 191-39 TREES § 191-43
187:825
§ 191-43. Exceptions.84
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, any act or omission which
otherwise would be a violation of a provision of this chapter shall not be
such a violation if it was directed by a police officer or an officer of the Fire
Department.
§ 191-44. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 2-15-1984 by L.L. No.
5-198485; 12-15-2004 by L.L. No. 5-2004]
Violation of § 191-41 shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $300.
84.Editor's Note: Former § 191-43, Use of off-street parking area for storage, was
renumbered to become § 191-42 pursuant to L.L. No. 5-1984, adopted 2-15-1984.
85.Editor's Note: This local law also provided that former §§ 191-41 through 191-49 be
renumbered to become §§ 191-40 through 191-48, respectively.
§ 191-43 RYE CODE § 191-44
187:826
Part 3
[CAodmomptuetde 1r -P1a9r-k1i9n5g58]6
ARTICLE VIII
Commuter Parking Regulations
§ 191-45. Definitions.
Unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires, the following
words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this Part 3, have the following
meanings:
VEHICLES, PARK, PARKING or PARKED, OWNER and PERSON — As
defined in Article 1, Section 2, Subdivisions 7, 12, 15, 18, 20 and 21, of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law,87 except that the words "park," "parking," "parked"
or "parking space" shall also include parking in or upon or parking space
within any public parking place of the City of Rye, as the case requires.
§ 191-46. Commuter parking areas established. 88 [Amended
4-6-1988 by L.L. No. 5-1988]
No person shall be permitted to park an automobile or other vehicle or
shall permit an automobile or other vehicle to remain in or upon the public
parking places or areas described as follows between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. each day except Sundays and legal holidays, unless the owner
of such vehicle shall have a tag or license hereinafter described. Said public
parking places consist of those four parcels of land located:
§ 191-47. Parking application, fees and location. [Amended
6-15-1955; 4-18-1956; 10-5-1960; 12-5-1962 by Ord. No. 12-1962;
12-3-1969 by Ord. No. 6-1969; 3-19-1975 by Ord. No. 1-1975;
A. On property owned and controlled by the Metropolitan Transit
Authority, located on the southeasterly side of Purchase Street in the
City of Rye, County of Westchester and State of New York, substantially
as shown on the plan or map entitled "Map of Property to be Leased by
the City of Rye, Westchester County, New York, surveyed as in
possession, June 16, 1952, Russell Munson, Surveyor, 11 William
Street, White Plains, New York, last revised March 31, 1953," and
thereon designated as "Parcels A and B," a copy of said map or survey
having heretofore been filed in the office of the Clerk of the City of Rye.
B. Including also three parcels of land owned and controlled by the City of
Rye and shown and designated on the Tax Maps of the City of Rye as
"Sheet 146.07, Block 1, Lot 23"; "Sheet 146.07, Block 1, Lot 14"; and
"Sheet 139.19, Block 3, Lot 80."
86.Editor's Note: Former § 191-45, Penalties For Offenses, Was Renumbered To Become
§ 191-44 Pursuant To L.L. No. 5-1984, Adopted 2-15-1984.
87.Editor's Note: Currently, see the Vehicle and Traffic Law, §§ 128, 129, 131 and 159.
88.Editor's Note: Former § 191-46, Definitions, was renumbered to become § 191-45 pursuant
to L.L. No. 5-1984, adopted 2-15-1984.
§ 191-45 TREES § 191-47
187:827
1-21-1976 by Ord. No. 4-1976; 11-19-1980 by Ord. No. 5-1980;
2-15-1984 by L.L. No. 5-198489; 4-6-1988 by L.L. No. 5-1988;
11-2-1988 by L.L. No. 17-1988; 12-15-1993 by L.L. No. 12-1993;
3-1-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995; 12-18-1996 by L.L. No. 17-1996;
6-18-1997 by L.L. No. 6-1997; 12-20-2000 by L.L. No. 19-2000;
11-29-2006 by L.L. No. 11-2006]
A. A resident of the City of Rye, upon making application to the City Clerk
and upon furnishing said Clerk with satisfactory evidence that such
applicant is a resident of said City and upon paying an annual fee, shall
receive a tag or license permitting him/her to park his/her motor
vehicle in the places and locations described in § 191-46A and B if space
therein shall be available, provided that the proper parking tag or
license for that vehicle is displayed on the driver's side of the vehicle's
rear window.
B. A nonresident of the City of Rye, upon application and upon paying an
annual fee, may receive a tag or license permitting him/her to park his/
her motor vehicle in the places and locations described in § 191-46A if
space therein shall be available, provided that the proper parking tag or
license for that vehicle is displayed on the driver's side of the vehicle's
rear window.
C. Any merchant or other person employed within 1,000 feet of a
municipal parking place desiring to park all day shall, upon application
to the City Clerk and payment of the annual fee, receive a merchant tag
or license permitting him/her to park his/her motor vehicle in a
municipal parking place. The merchant tag or license for that vehicle
must be displayed on the driver's side of the vehicle's rear window. The
merchant permits will not be honored on public streets or in the
following parking spaces: [Amended 10-6-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010]
Car Park Space Numbers
1 1-2; 20-23; 43-46; 70-71
2 80-84; 158-160; 197-199; 200-202; 222-225; 233;
237-243
3 315-332
4 488-519; 530-531
5 550-557
D. Residents of the City of Rye desiring an all-day/all-night parking permit
shall, upon application to the City Clerk and payment of an annual fee,
receive a tag or license entitling him/her to park his/her motor vehicle.
The municipal parking place closest to the applicant's place of
residence will be assigned to the applicant. The proper parking tag or
89.Editor's Note: This local law also provided that former §§ 191-41 through 191-49 be
renumbered to become §§ 191-40 through 191-48, respectively.
§ 191-47 RYE CODE § 191-47
187:828
§ 191-48. Marina parking regulations. [Added 9-9-1998 by L.L. No.
8-199890]
No person is permitted to park a motor vehicle in the Boat Basin parking
lots located at the entrances at 650 Milton Road and Hewlett Avenue
without a valid parking permit. Such permit must be displayed on the
driver's side of the vehicle's front window. Failure to display a permit will be
a separate violation of this section.
license for that vehicle shall be displayed on the driver's side of the
vehicle's rear window. [Amended 10-6-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010]
E. Residents of the City of Rye desiring an all-night parking permit shall,
upon application to the City Clerk and payment of an annual fee,
receive a tag or license permitting him/her to park his/her automobile
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. [Amended 10-6-2010 by
L.L. No. 8-2010; 2-29-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
F. Said tag or license that is issued shall be displayed on the driver's side
of the vehicle's rear window. The payment of any of the aforesaid annual
fees shall not be construed to guarantee the applicant a reserved space,
and said tag or license shall not be transferable. Failure to properly
display the parking tag or license shall be a separate violation of this
section.
G. If a license or a tag, or both, is lost or destroyed or if another motor
vehicle is substituted for the vehicle for which the license had been
issued, a new license will be issued for the remainder of the period upon
payment set by City Council resolution; however, if the old sticker is not
returned, there shall be a replacement fee. The replacement fee shall
be set by City Council resolution.
H. The fees in Subsections A, B, C, D and E above shall be set annually by
resolution of the City Council. Such fees, upon their adoption, shall be
published twice in the official newspaper within two weeks of such
adoption and shall be posted at City Hall by the City Clerk. In addition,
copies of the rate schedule shall be made available to the public in the
office of the City Clerk.
A. The Boat Basin fee will include one original parking permit. A
replacement or additional permit is available for an additional fee. A
one-day parking permit is also available for a fee. The above fees should
be set by resolution of the City Council.
B. Vehicles must be parked front wheels to curb. Parking is not permitted
in the launch area.
90.Editor's Note: This local law also provided that former § 191-48, Enforcement, be
renumbered as § 191-49.
§ 191-47 TREES § 191-48
187:829
§ 191-49. Enforcement. [Amended 2-15-1984 by L.L. No. 5-198491]
The enforcement of this regulation shall be entrusted to the Police
Commissioner, who shall see that proper signs are prepared and posted in
the affected areas.
C. Boat trailers must be stored in an area authorized by the Boat Basin
Supervisor. All trailers must be registered vehicles. Any trailers left in
the Boat Basin parking lots will be subject to removal.
D. Overnight parking is prohibited in Parking Area No. 1, which is the
south parking lot at the 650 Milton Road entrance. This is the main
parking area. Overnight parking is permitted in Parking Area No. 2,
which is north of the main parking area.
E. This section is not subject to the requirements of § 191-47.
91.Editor's Note: This local law also provided that former §§ 191-41 through 191-49 be
renumbered to become §§ 191-40 through 191-48, respectively.
§ 191-48 RYE CODE § 191-49
187:830
Chapter 194
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers - See Ch. 161.
§ 191-49 TREES § 191-49
187:831

ARTICLE I
Water Supply Emergencies
[Adopted 2-15-2017 by L.L. No. 3-201792]
§ 194-1. Statement of purpose.
The City of Rye purchases water from the New York-American Water
Company (hereinafter referred to as "Suez") and from Westchester Joint
Water Works (hereinafter "WJWW") (Suez and WJWW are hereinafter
referred to collectively as the "water companies"). From time to time,
the levels of the reservoirs will require the declaration of a water supply
emergency. When a water supply emergency is declared, there are certain
water use restrictions that must be implemented. Accordingly, the purposes
of this article are:
§ 194-2. Drought Response Plan.
The Drought Response Plan of the Connecticut-American and Suez
Companies, which plan was established on July 13, 1995, and subsequent
modifications and/or supplements thereto published by the Connecticut-
American and Suez Companies (hereinafter collectively referred to as the
"Drought Response Plan") shall be incorporated by reference into this
article and become a part thereof. Similarly, any plan developed by WJWW
shall be incorporated by reference into this article and become a part
hereof.
§ 194-3. Applicability.
Any person, corporation or entity located within the territorial boundaries
of the City of Rye that receives, purchases, and/or uses water supplied by
the water companies shall be subject to the provisions of this article.
§ 194-4. Declaration of water supply emergency.
A. To codify and thereby enable the City of Rye to enforce water-use
restrictions imposed during a water supply emergency by the water
companies, acting in conjunction with the municipalities it services;
B. To restrict the wasteful, inefficient and/or nonessential use of water
during periods of drought; and
C. To establish penalties for violations and to provide for enforcement of
water conservation measures in the City of Rye for the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the City.
A. Based upon the levels of the reservoir(s) of the water companies, the
time of year, and the precipitation levels in the territories serviced by
the water companies, the water companies may request that the City
92.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Art. I, Water Conservation, adopted
10-21-1953.
§ 194-1 TREES § 194-4
187:833
§ 194-5. Variances.
Manager declare the existence of a water supply emergency in one of
three possible phases in accordance with the Drought Response Plan.
B. Prior to any emergency, the water companies shall inform the City
Manager as early as practicable that a shortage of water may occur so
that the City and its residents are on notice.
C. If a water company determines that an emergency does exist, the water
company shall inform the City Manager of the emergency and ask that a
water emergency be declared. The water company shall provide notice
of its emergency in the designated official newspaper of the City of Rye
and by transmittal to the radio and television media in the territorial
areas serviced by it.
D. When a water supply emergency is declared by the City Manager, the
water company shall inform the City Manager at least once every month
as to the extent and length of the emergency. When the water company
determines that the precipitation is back to a safe level, the City
Manager shall end the emergency and remove any water restrictions in
place.
A. Upon written application of any person, corporation or entity, the City
Manager may, in his or her discretion, grant an exemption and/or
variance relieving such person, corporation or entity from compliance
with the water use restrictions imposed on the basis of factors including
but not limited to any of the following:
(1) An undue hardship would otherwise result;
(2) No possible alternatives exist;
(3) The applicant has taken and will take all possible measures to
conserve water, with a complete description of such measures and
the water savings to be effected;
(4) Such exemption and/or variance is not inconsistent with the
purposes of this article; and/or
(5) The source and nature of the applicant's water supply.
B. In connection with any exemption and/or variance which may be
granted, the City Manager shall impose such terms and conditions as he
or she deems appropriate. Any variance and/or exemption granted shall
be fashioned to comport as strictly as possible with the intent of this
article.
C. The determination by the City Manager to grant or to deny an
exemption and/or variance from compliance with the water use
restrictions imposed may be appealed to the City Council. Upon receipt
of such an appeal, the City Council shall affirm, reverse or modify the
§ 194-4 RYE CODE § 194-5
187:834
§ 194-6. Enforcement.
The City Police Department and the City Building Inspector are hereby
designated enforcement officers with respect to water use restrictions set
forth above.
§ 194-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, corporation, or entity violating any water use restrictions
imposed pursuant to this article may, upon conviction, be punished for the
first offense by a fine of not more than $250; and for the second offense, by
a fine of not less than $250 but not more than $500, or by imprisonment
for not more than 15 days, or both. The third or any subsequent offense
within 12 months may be a punishable by a fine of not less than $500
nor more than $750 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation under this
article continues may be considered a separate offense for which a fine or
imprisonment may be imposed.
determination of the City Manager and impose such terms and
conditions as it deems appropriate.
§ 194-5 TREES § 194-7
187:835
Chapter 195
WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boats and harbors — See Ch. 64.
Coastal zone management waterfront
consistency review — See Ch. 73.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 87.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 100.
Surface water. erosion and sediment
control — See Ch. 173.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 174.
§ 195-1. Findings; intent; powers of Planning Commission.
A. Findings of fact.
(1) In their natural state, wetlands and watercourses serve multiple
functions, including:
(a) Protecting water resources by providing sources of surface
water, recharging groundwater and aquifers, serving as
chemical and biological oxidation basins and/or functioning as
settling basins for naturally occurring sedimentation.
(b) Controlling flooding and stormwater runoff by storing or
regulating natural flows.
(c) Providing nesting, migratory and wintering habitats for diverse
wildlife species, including many on the New York State and
federal endangered species lists.
(d) Supporting vegetative associations specifically adapted for
survival in low-oxygen environments and/or brackish water or
saltwater.
(e) Providing areas of unusually high plant productivity which
support significant wildlife diversity and abundance.
(f) Providing breeding and spawning grounds, nursery habitats
and food for various species of fish.
(g) Serving as nutrient traps for nitrogen and phosphorous and
filters for surface water pollutants.
(h) Helping to maintain biospheric stability by supporting
particularly efficient photosynthesizers capable of producing
significant amounts of oxygen and supporting bacteria which
process excess nitrates and nitrogenous pollutants and return
them to the atmosphere as inert nitrogen gas.
§ 194-7 RYE CODE § 195-1
187:836
(i) Providing open space and visual relief from intense
development in urbanized and growing areas and recreational
and aesthetic enjoyment for area residents.
(j) Serving as outdoor laboratories and living classrooms for the
study and appreciation of natural history, ecology and biology.
(2) Considerable acreage of these important natural resources has
been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating,
building, polluting and other acts inconsistent with the natural uses
of such areas. Remaining wetlands are in jeopardy of being lost,
despoiled or impaired by such acts contrary to the public safety and
welfare.
(3) It is therefore the policy of the City of Rye to protect its citizens,
including generations yet unborn, by preventing the despoilation
and destruction of wetlands and watercourses while taking into
account varying ecological, economic, recreational and aesthetic
values. Activities that may damage wetlands or watercourses
should be located on upland sites in such a manner as not to
degrade these systems.
B. Intent
(1) It is the intent of the City of Rye that activities in wetlands,
watercourses and wetland/watercourse buffers conform with all
applicable building codes, sediment control regulations and other
regulations and that such activities not threaten public safety, the
natural environment or cause nuisances by:
(a) Impeding stormwater and flood flows, reducing stormwater
and flood storage areas or destroying storm barriers, thereby
resulting in increased flood heights, frequencies or velocities
on other lands;
(b) Increasing water pollution through location of domestic waste
disposal systems in wet soils; inappropriate siting of
stormwater control facilities; unauthorized application of
fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides and algicides; disposal of
solid wastes at inappropriate sites; creation of unstabilized
fills; or the destruction of wetland soils and vegetation serving
pollution and sediment control functions;
(c) Increasing erosion;
(d) Decreasing breeding, nesting and feeding areas for many
species of waterfowl and shorebirds, including those rare and
endangered;
(e) Interfering with the exchange of nutrients needed by fish and
other forms of wildlife.
(f) Decreasing the habitat for fish and other forms of wildlife.
§ 195-1 TREES § 195-1
187:837
§ 195-2. Applicability to existing nonconforming uses.
(g) Adversely altering the recharge or discharge functions of
wetlands, thereby impacting groundwater or surface water
supplies;
(h) Significantly altering the wetland hydroperiod and thereby
causing either short or long-term changes in vegetational
composition, soils characteristics, nutrient cycling or water
chemistry;
(i) Destroying sites needed for education and scientific research,
such as outdoor biophysical laboratories, living classrooms and
training areas;
(j) Interfering with public rights in navigable waters and the
recreation opportunities provided by wetlands for fishing,
boating, hiking, bird watching, photography, camping and
other passive uses;
(k) Destroying or damaging aesthetic and property values,
including significant public viewsheds; or
(l) Allowing cumulative loss of wetlands or buffers through
incremental encroachment on wetland or buffer areas.
(2) The Planning Commission shall have the power to promulgate and
from time to time amend and repeal rules and regulations it deems
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter, after a public
hearing and subject to approval by the City Council. Copies of the
rules and regulations shall be filed with the City Clerk, the City
Conservation Commission/Advisory Council, the City Naturalist,
the City Planner and the City Building Inspector.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any land use,
improvement, development or activity legally existing on the effective
date of this chapter, including grounds maintenance and the application
of pesticides and fertilizers, subject to the following limitations:
(1) The land use, improvement, development or activity shall not be
expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in such a way that
increases its nonconformity without a permit.
(2) If destroyed, damaged or removed by any cause, water-dependent
and non-water-dependent land uses, improvements, developments
or activities legally existing on the effective date of this chapter
may be replaced, restored or reestablished in the same location
without a permit, provided that the replaced, restored or
reestablished uses, buildings, structures, features and other
development will not be closer to any wetland or watercourse or
result in a greater intensity of activity than before they were
§ 195-1 RYE CODE § 195-2
187:838
destroyed or damaged, and subject to the following additional
limitations:
(a) In a Membership Club District, as defined in Chapter 197,
Zoning, of this Code, club uses, buildings, structures, features
and other development will not be closer to a property line or
larger than before they were destroyed or damaged.
(b) Water-dependent uses and related structures not located in a
Membership Club District, as defined in Chapter 197, Zoning,
of this Code, may be replaced, restored or reestablished only if
permitted by the Rye City Board of Appeals pursuant to
§ 197-5A(6) of this Code.
(c) Non-water-dependent land uses, improvements, development
or activity may be replaced, restored or reestablished,
provided that there will be no greater coverage of land than
before they were damaged or destroyed.
B. This chapter shall not apply to any land use, improvement, development
or activity granted a final approval and not completed prior to the
effective date of this chapter, subject to the following limitations:
(1) The land use, improvement, development or activity has
substantially commenced within one year of the effective date of
this chapter.
(2) The land use, improvement, development or activity shall not be
expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in such a way that
increases its nonconformity without a permit.
(3) For the purposes of this chapter, such land use, improvement,
development or activity, upon completion in accordance with its
final approval, shall thereafter be considered as existing on the
effective date of this chapter, and if destroyed, damaged or
removed by any cause, may not be reestablished, restored or used
except in accordance with the requirements of § 195-2A.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to dams, floodgates and
sluices as were in existence on the effective date of this chapter or are
hereafter approved pursuant to the procedures provided for in this
chapter.
D. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to cemetery grave plots in
use or designated for future use as cemetery grave plots as of the
effective date of this chapter.
E. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the repair or
maintenance of existing utility facilities in existence on the effective
date of this chapter or hereafter approved pursuant to the procedures
provided for in this chapter.
§ 195-2 TREES § 195-3
187:839
§ 195-3. Definitions.
Words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted as defined below,
and where ambiguity exists words or phrases shall be interpreted so as
to give this chapter its most reasonable application in carrying out the
regulatory goals stated in § 195-1:
ADJACENT AREA — See "wetland/watercourse buffer."
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of the landowner in making
reasonable use of water resources for agricultural purposes, harvesting the
natural products of wetlands, excluding peat mining and timber harvesting,
and selective cutting of trees. "Agricultural activity" does not mean clearcutting
of trees; filling or deposition of dredged soil or draining for growing
agricultural products or for other purposes.
APPLICANT — A person or entity who files an application for a permit under
this chapter and who is either the owner of the land on which the proposed
regulated activity would be located, a contract vendee, a lessee of the land,
the person who would actually control and direct the proposed activity or
the authorized agent of such person.
AQUACULTURE — Cultivating and harvesting products, including fish and
vegetation, that are produced naturally in wetlands and installing cribs,
racks and other in-water structures for cultivating these products, but does
not include filling, dredging, peat mining, clear-cutting or the construction
of any buildings or any water-regulating structures such as dams.
BOUNDARY OF A WETLAND — The approximate outer limit of the soils
and/or vegetation as defined under "wetland" and shown on the City of Rye
Wetlands and Watercourses Map.
CITY BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector for the City of Rye
or such representative as designated by the City Manager.
CITY NATURALIST — The Naturalist for the City of Rye or such qualified
representative as designated by the City Manager.
CITY PLANNER — The City Planner for the City of Rye or such
representative as designated by the City Manager.
CLEAR-CUTTING — Any cutting of more than 30% of trees four inches or
more in diameter at approximately 4 1/2 feet above the ground over any
ten-year cutting cycle as determined on the basis of wetland area per lot or
group of lots under single ownership, including any cutting of trees which
results in the total removal of one or more species, whether or not the cut
meets or exceeds the thirty-percent threshold.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the Department of Environmental
Conservation of the State of New York.
DAMS AND WATER-CONTROL MEASURES — Barriers used or intended to
or which, even though not so intended in fact do, obstruct the flow of water
or raise, lower or maintain the level of water.
§ 195-3 RYE CODE § 195-3
187:840
GRADING — To adjust the degree of inclination of the natural contours of
the land, including leveling, smoothing and other modification of the natural
land surface.
GROWING SEASON — That portion of the year when soil temperatures are
above biologic zero (5º C.); the growing season for the City of Rye is March
through October.
HYDRIC SOIL — A soil that is saturated, flooded or ponded long enough
during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper
part, and as further defined under "wetland."
HYDROPERIOD — The seasonal pattern of the water level of a wetland,
which defines the rise and fall of the wetland surface and subsurface water.
HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION — Macrophytic plant life growing in water or
on soils that are at least periodically anaerobic as a result of excessive water
content, and as further defined under "wetland."
MACROPHYTIC — Referring to any plant species that can be readily
observed with the naked eye.
MATERIAL — Liquid, solid or gaseous substances, including but not limited
to soil, silt, gravel, rock, sand, clay, peat, mud, debris and refuse; any
organic or inorganic compound, chemical agent or matter; sewage sludge
or effluent; or industrial or municipal solid waste.
OFFICIAL SUBMITTAL DATE — The date on which an application is
officially submitted to the Planning Commission is the date of the first
regular meeting of the Planning Commission following the filing of the
application and supporting plans pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
PERMIT — That form of written approval required by this chapter for the
conduct of a regulated activity within a wetland, watercourse or wetland/
watercourse buffer.
PERSON — See "applicant."
POLLUTION — Any harmful thermal effect or the contamination or
rendering unclean or impure of any wetland or waters by reason of erosion
or by any waste or other materials discharged or deposited therein.
PROJECT — Any proposed or ongoing action which may result in direct or
indirect physical or chemical impact on a wetland, including but not limited
to any regulated activity.
REMOVE — To dig, dredge, suck, bulldoze, dragline, blast or otherwise
excavate or grade or the act thereof.
RENDERING UNCLEAN OR IMPURE — Any alteration of the physical,
chemical or biological properties of any wetland or waters, including but
not limited to change in odor, color, turbidity or taste.
SELECTIVE CUTTING — Any cutting of trees within the boundaries of a
wetland or wetland/watercourse buffer that is not "clear-cutting" as defined
in this section.
§ 195-3 TREES § 195-3
187:841
STATE ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW ACT (SEQRA) — The law
pursuant to Article 8 of the New York State Environmental Conservation
Law providing for environmental quality review of actions which may have
a significant adverse effect on the environment.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on or in the ground or attachment to something having location
on the ground, including but not limited to buildings, tennis courts and
swimming pools.
SUBDIVISION — See Chapter 170, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the
City of Rye.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial, permanent or intermittent,
public or private water body or water segment, such as ponds, lakes,
reservoirs, brooks and waterways, that is contained within, flows through
or borders on the City of Rye.
WETLAND — Any area which meets one or more of the following criteria:
WETLAND HYDROLOGY — The sum total of wetness characteristics in
areas that are inundated or have saturated soils for a sufficient duration to
support hydrophytic vegetation.
WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES MAP — The City of Rye Wetlands and
Watercourses Map, adopted by the Council of the City of Rye pursuant to
this chapter or such map as has been amended or adjusted and on which are
Lands and waters of the state that meet the definition provided in
§ 24-0107, Subdivision 1, of the New York State Freshwater Wetlands
Act (see Article 24 and Title 23 of Article 71 of the Environmental
Conservation Law) and have an area of at least 12.4 acres or, if smaller,
have unusual local importance as determined by the Commissioner
pursuant to § 24-0301, Subdivision 1, of the Act. The approximate
boundaries of such lands and waters are indicated on the official
freshwater wetlands map promulgated by the Commissioner pursuant
to § 24-0301, Subdivision 5, of the Act or such a map that has been
amended or adjusted pursuant to § 24-0301, Subdivision 6, of said Act.
A.
Lands and waters of the state that meet the definition provided in
§ 25-0103, Subdivision 1, of the New York State Tidal Wetlands Act (see
Article 25 of the Environmental Conservation Law). The approximate
boundaries of such lands and waters are indicated on the official tidal
wetlands inventory promulgated by the Commissioner pursuant to
§ 25-0201 of the Act or such an inventory that has been amended or
adjusted pursuant to § 25-0201, Subdivision 6, of said Act.
B.
All other areas that comprise hydric soils or are inundated or saturated
by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence
of hydrophytic vegetation, all as defined by the Federal Manual for
Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands (1989), which
manual shall be available for inspection in the City Naturalist's office
and in the City Planner's office.
C.
§ 195-3 RYE CODE § 195-3
187:842
indicated the approximate boundaries of the known wetlands, watercourses
and wetland/watercourse buffers defined pursuant to this chapter. The map
shall be available for inspection in the City Naturalist's office and in the
City Planner's office. Areas not indicated as being a wetland, watercourse
or wetland/watercourse buffer may contain wetlands, watercourses and
wetland/watercourse buffers defined and regulated by this chapter. General
Note: The City of Rye Wetlands and Watercourses Map is intended to
provide general guidance in locating and determining those areas which
constitute wetlands and watercourses and their related buffers, as defined
in this chapter. The boundaries of wetlands and watercourses and related
buffers shall be delineated by the Planning Commission or its consultant in
the field.
WETLAND/WATERCOURSE BUFFER — A specific area surrounding a
wetland/watercourse extending 100 feet horizontally away from and
paralleling the wetland/ watercourse boundary.
§ 195-4. Permit requirements; regulated activities; determining
wetland boundaries.
No regulated activity shall be conducted in a wetland, watercourse or
wetland/watercourse buffer without a written permit from the Planning
Commission and full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. All activities that are not permitted as of right
or by permit shall be prohibited. The City Planner, City Engineer and
City Building Inspector shall, in the course of reviewing any application
before them, advise the applicant of the existence of this chapter and refer
information regarding such applications to the City Naturalist.
A. Wetlands and watercourses map — purpose and applicability.
(1) Purpose. Wetlands, watercourses and wetland/watercourse buffers
are defined in § 195-3 of this chapter and are generally indicated on
the Rye City Wetlands and Watercourses Map. The City of Rye
Wetlands and Watercourses Map is intended to provide general
guidance in locating and determining those areas which constitute
wetlands and watercourses, their boundaries and their related
buffers. Areas indicated as being wetlands, watercourses or
wetland/watercourse buffers may not actually be a wetland,
watercourse or wetland/ watercourse buffer and areas not
indicated as being a wetland, watercourse or wetland/watercourse
buffer may contain wetlands, watercourses and wetland/
watercourse buffers. The boundaries of wetlands and watercourses
and related buffers shall be delineated by the Planning Commission
or their consultant in the field.
(2) Applicability to activities requiring other city approvals. Areas
indicated as being wetlands, watercourses or wetland/watercourse
buffers may not actually be a wetland, watercourse or wetland/
watercourse buffer and areas not indicated as being a wetland,
watercourse or wetland/watercourse buffer may contain wetlands,
§ 195-3 TREES § 195-4
187:843
watercourses and wetland/watercourse buffers. Potential
applicants for permits required by this chapter and other city
approvals shall attach a copy of the determination from the City
Naturalist to their application. The granting of an approval by a
city agency or official pursuant to any other chapter of the Code
of the City of Rye or the granting of an approval by any state or
federal agency shall in no way excuse or exempt any person from
the requirements of this chapter even if the property is not shown
as being a wetland, watercourse or wetland/watercourse buffer on
the map. In the case of city official and agency approvals, such
officials and agencies shall, upon notification by the City Naturalist
that an activity also requires a permit pursuant to this chapter,
take such action as is necessary to stop any part of the work being
undertaken that is subject to regulation pursuant to this chapter
until a permit has been granted.
(3) Applicability to activities not requiring other city approvals. Areas
not indicated as being a wetland, watercourse or wetland/
watercourse buffer may contain wetlands, watercourses and
wetland/watercourse buffers subject to this chapter, but a permit
under this chapter can only be required upon a finding by the
Planning Commission that the area is a wetland, watercourse or
wetland/watercourse buffer. Such finding shall be in writing and
shall also authorize the City Naturalist to issue a stop-work order if
the Planning Commission finds that the activity has not been
substantially completed. Said finding must be approved by an
affirmative vote of at least five members of the Planning
Commission, and thereafter the Planning Commission shall
delineate the boundary of the wetland, watercourse and wetland/
watercourse buffer at the cost of the city and recommend an
amendment to the map for the purpose of future regulation. In the
event that the Planning Commission makes a finding that a
wetland, watercourse or wetland/watercourse buffer does exist but
does not authorize the City Naturalist to issue a stop-work order,
said activity shall be deemed to have been permitted as if a permit
had been issued. However, the Planning Commission, City
Naturalist and their agents or employees may thereafter, with the
owner's permission, enter upon said land to delineate the boundary
and seek an appropriate amendment to the map. If the owner of the
property bars such entry, the City Naturalist, Planning Commission
and their agents or employees are empowered to apply to the City
Court for an administrative search warrant permitting entry onto
said land to delineate the boundary and seek an appropriate
amendment to the map.
B. City Naturalist determination and appeals. [Amended 5-6-1992 by
L.L. No. 5-1992]
(1) City Naturalist's determination. The City Naturalist, in consultation
with the Conservation Commission/Advisory Council and the City
§ 195-4 RYE CODE § 195-4
187:844
Planner, shall, within five business days of receiving a written
request for a determination, determine if the proposed activity is
in an area that may be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
The written request for such determination must be accompanied
by a payment of a fee to the City of Rye. Such fee shall be set
annually by resolution of the City Council. The City Naturalist
shall make one of two possible determinations: that the area may
be subject to the requirements of this chapter or that the area
is not subject to the requirements of this chapter. In performing
this evaluation, the City Naturalist should consult the Rye City
Wetlands and Watercourses Map. In addition, the City Naturalist
may also consult the Westchester County Soil Survey Maps,
prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service, revised in 1986 and as further revised from
time to time, which show the approximate location of hydric soils
that indicate the potential presence of a wetland as defined in this
chapter, and may also consult the National List of Plant Species
That Occur in Wetlands: Northeast (Region 1), the list of upland
wetland plant species developed by the United States Department
of the Interior Fish and Wildlife Service in cooperation with the
National and Regional Interagency Review Panels, as amended and
updated from time to time. The maps and list shall be available for
inspection in the City Naturalist's office and in the City Planner's
office. [Amended 12-17-1997 by L.L. No. 19-1997]
(2) Appeal of City Naturalist's determination that a property is not
subject to the requirements of this chapter. In the case of a
subdivision or site development plan application, a resident or
property owner in the City of Rye may petition the Planning
Commission to reverse a determination of the City Naturalist that a
property is not subject to the requirements of this chapter. The
petitioner shall have the burden of demonstrating that the City
Naturalist's determination should be reversed. Such petition must
be filed within 15 business days of the City Naturalist's
determination. Said petition shall be in the form set forth in the
Planning Commission's rules and regulations adopted pursuant to
this chapter.
(3) Appeal of City Naturalist's determination that a property may be
subject to the requirements of this chapter. If the City Naturalist
determines that an area may be subject to the requirements of this
chapter, the property owner may petition the Planning Commission
to determine that the area is not subject to the requirements of this
chapter. Said petition shall be in the form of the permit application
as set forth in § 195-5B, but the application need only provide the
data required under § 195-5B(2)(b) for a waiver. If additional
information is needed by the Planning Commission to decide the
petition, the petitioner shall provide said additional information.
The petitioner shall have the burden of demonstrating that the City
Naturalist's determination was incorrect. Such petition must be
§ 195-4 TREES § 195-4
187:845
filed within 15 business days of the City Naturalist's determination.
If the Planning Commission determines that the decision of the
City Naturalist was correct, the property owner may complete the
application by paying the permit application fee and submitting all
other required permit information or withdraw the application.
C. Regulated activities. Except as specified in § 195-4D, the following are
regulated activities when within a wetland, watercourse or wetland/
watercourse buffer and may be granted a permit upon written
application to the Planning Commission:
(1) Placement or construction of any structure.
(2) Any form of draining, dredging, excavation or removal of material
either directly or indirectly.
(3) Any form of dumping, filling or depositing of material either
directly or indirectly.
(4) Installation of any service lines or cable conduits.
(5) Introduction of any form of pollution, including but not limited to
the installation of a septic tank, the running of a sewer outfall or
the discharging of sewage treatment effluent or other liquid waste
into or so as to drain into a wetland.
(6) Alteration or modification of natural features and contours.
(7) Alteration or modification of natural drainage patterns.
(8) Construction of dams, docks or other water-control devices, pilings
or bridges, whether or not they change the natural drainage
characteristics.
(9) Installation of any pipes or wells.
(10) Clear-cutting any area of trees.
(11) Removal or cutting of any vegetation, except selective cutting as
permitted in § 195-4D(2).
(12) Deposition or introduction of organic or inorganic chemicals,
including pesticides and fertilizers.
(13) Any agricultural activity which involves the draining or excavation
of a wetland, except as permitted in § 195-4D(7).
(14) Any other activity that may impair the natural function(s) of a
wetland as described in § 195-1 of this chapter.
D. Uses as of right — no permit required. The following uses shall be
allowed as of right within a wetland, watercourse or wetland/
watercourse buffer without a permit to the extent that they are not
prohibited by any other chapter and to the extent that they do not
§ 195-4 RYE CODE § 195-4
187:846
§ 195-5. Permit standards and procedures.
constitute a pollution or erosion hazard or interfere with proper
drainage:
(1) Normal ground maintenance, including mowing, trimming of
vegetation and removal of dead or diseased vegetation.
(2) Selective cutting as defined in § 195-3.
(3) Repair of existing structures, including interior renovations,
walkways, walls and docks.
(4) Decorative landscaping and planting in wetland/watercourse
buffers, excluding those activities regulated in § 195-4C(11) and
(12).
(5) Public health activities, orders and regulations of the Westchester
County Department of Health and/or the New York State
Department of Health for emergencies only.
(6) Deposition or removal of natural products of wetlands in the
process of recreational or commercial fishing, shellfishing,
aquaculture, hunting or trapping, but excluding excavation and
removal of peat or timber, except as provided in § 195-4C(2).
(7) Agricultural activities as defined in § 195-3.
(8) Normal beach maintenance, including restoration of an eroded
shoreline to its original state.
E. Rules for determining boundaries. The Planning Commission shall
determine the boundaries of a wetland or watercourse. The boundaries
of a wetland ordinarily shall be determined by field investigation. In so
doing the Planning Commission may consult and/or may require the
applicant to consult with qualified biologists, hydrologists, soil
scientists, ecologists/botanists/zoologists or other experts as necessary
to make this determination. After the boundary has been determined by
the Planning Commission, it may require, at the expense of the
applicant, a survey to be drawn up by a licensed land surveyor.
A. Procedures for permits.
(1) No regulated activity shall be conducted without issuance of a
written permit from the Planning Commission.
(2) All permits shall expire on completion of the acts specified and,
unless otherwise indicated, shall be valid for a period of one year
from the date of issue. A one-year extension of an original permit
may be granted upon written request to the Planning Commission
by the original permit holder or his/her legal agent at least 90 days
prior to the expiration date of the original permit. The Planning
Commission may require new hearings if, in its judgment, the
§ 195-4 TREES § 195-5
187:847
original scope of the permit is altered or extended by the renewal
or if the applicant has failed to abide by the terms of the original
permit in any way. The request for renewal of a permit shall follow
the same form and procedure as the original application, except
that the Planning Commission shall have the option of not holding a
hearing if the original scope of the permit is not altered or extended
in any significant way.
B. Permit applications.
(1) Application for a permit shall be made to the Planning Commission
on forms furnished by the City Planner pursuant to the Planning
Commission's rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this
chapter.
(2) An application for a permit shall not be deemed complete if it does
not include all of the information required by the Planning
Commission's rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this
chapter and the following:
(a) The application fee.
(b) Complete plans and estimates as set forth in the Planning
Commission's rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this
chapter. In the case of applications for projects where the total
amount of disturbed area is less than one-fourth acre or
projects whose total cost does not exceed $10,000 or projects
which propose encroachment into the wetland/watercourse
buffer only, the Planning Commission may waive the
requirements for complete plans and estimates set forth in its
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter,
provided that a plan clearly showing the extent and details of
the project has been submitted with the application.
(c) Evidence that the applicant has complied fully with the
procedures of the State Environmental Quality Review Act
(Article 8 of the New York State Environmental Conservation
Law) and has submitted a full environmental assessment form,
except that a short environmental assessment form may be
submitted at the discretion of the Planning Commission.
(3) The Planning Commission may require additional information as
needed, such as the study of flood, erosion or other hazards at the
site and the effect of any protective measures that might be taken
to reduce such hazards and other information deemed necessary to
evaluate the proposed use in terms of the goals and standards of
this chapter.
(4) By filing an application, the applicant thereby consents to the entry
onto his land by the City Naturalist, City Planner or other agents
designated by the Planning Commission for the purpose of
undertaking any investigation, examination, survey or other
§ 195-5 RYE CODE § 195-5
187:848
activity necessary for the purposes of this chapter. If the owner
of the property bars such entry, the City Naturalist, Planning
Commission and their agents or employees are empowered to apply
to the City Court for an administrative search warrant permitting
such inspection.
C. Public hearings and public notification by applicant. [Amended
3-10-2010 by L.L. No. 4-201093]
(1) When an activity subject to regulation under this chapter also
requires Planning Commission approval pursuant to another
chapter of the Code of the City of Rye, the requirements for public
hearings and public notification by the applicant shall be the same
as required for the other approval. When the only other approval
involves Chapter 73, Coastal Zone Management Waterfront
Consistency Review, the requirements below shall apply. When an
activity subject to regulation under this chapter does not also
require Planning Commission approval pursuant to another
chapter of the Code of the City of Rye and, in the case of Chapter
73, Coastal Zone Management Waterfront Consistency Review,
before the Planning Commission acts on the application, it shall
hold a public hearing. The applicant shall provide additional public
notification in accordance with the public notification requirements
set forth in the Planning Commission's rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to this chapter. All public notifications must be
mailed via certified mail with a certificate of mailing. At least five
days prior to the public hearing, all certificates of mailing must be
turned into the Planning Commission.
(2) Insofar as possible, any public hearing on the application shall be
integrated with any public hearing required or otherwise held
pursuant to any other law, including the State Environmental
Quality Review Act, and only one public notice need be prepared,
provided that the notice contains all of the information required for
each hearing.
(3) Any party may present evidence and testimony at the hearing. At
the hearing, the applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating
that the proposed activity will be in accord with the goals and
policies of this chapter and the standards set forth in § 195-5D.
D. Standards for permit decisions.
(1) In granting, denying or conditioning any permit, the Planning
Commission shall evaluate wetland functions and the role of the
wetland in the hydrologic and ecological system and shall
determine the impact of the proposed activity upon public health
and safety, rare and endangered species, water quality and
additional wetland functions listed in § 195-1 of this chapter.
93.Editor's Note: This local law provided that it shall take effect 5-1-2010.
§ 195-5 TREES § 195-5
187:849
Impacts and losses shall be avoided to the maximum extent
practicable or, if they cannot be avoided, they shall be minimized
to the maximum extent practicable. In this determination, it shall
consider the following factors and shall issue written findings with
respect to those factors which are applicable:
(a) The impact of the proposed activity and existing and
reasonably anticipated similar activities upon neighboring land
uses and wetland functions as set forth in § 195-1 of this
chapter, including but not limited to the following:
[1] The filling in of a wetland or other modification of natural
topographic contours.
[2] Disturbance or destruction of natural flora and fauna.
[3] Influx of sediments or other materials causing increased
water turbidity and/or substrate aggradation.
[4] Removal or disturbance of wetland soils.
[5] Reductions in wetland water supply.
[6] Interference with wetland water circulation.
[7] Damaging reduction or increases in wetland nutrients.
[8] Influx of toxic chemicals and/or heavy metals.
[9] Damaging thermal changes in the wetland water supply.
[10] Destruction of natural aesthetic values.
(b) Any existing wetland impacts and the cumulative effect of
reasonably anticipated future wetland activities in the wetland
subject to the application.
(c) The impact of the proposed activity and reasonably anticipated
similar activities upon flood flows, flood storage, storm barriers
and water quality.
(d) The safety of the proposed activity from flooding, erosion,
hurricane winds, soil limitations and other hazards and
possible losses to the applicant and subsequent purchasers of
the land.
(e) The adequacy of water supply and waste disposal for the
proposed uses.
(f) Consistency with federal, state, county and local
comprehensive land use plans and regulations.
(g) The availability of preferable alternative locations on the
subject parcel or, in the case of activity which cannot be
§ 195-5 RYE CODE § 195-5
187:850
undertaken on the property without disturbance to wetlands,
the availability of other reasonable locations for the activity.
(2) The Planning Commission shall deny a permit if:
(a) It finds that it will threaten public health and safety, result in
fraud, cause nuisances, impair public rights to the enjoyment
and use of public waters, threaten a rare or endangered plant
or animal species, violate pollution control standards or violate
other federal, state or local regulations; or
(b) It finds that both the affected landowner and the City of Rye
have been notified by a duly filed notice, in writing, that the
state or any agency or political subdivision of the state is in the
process of acquiring the wetland by negotiation or
condemnation with the following provisions:
[1] The written notice must include an indication that the
acquisition process has commenced, such as that an
appraisal of the property has been prepared or is in the
process of being prepared.
[2] If the landowner receives no offer for the property within
one year of the permit denial, this ban to the permit lapses.
If its negotiations with the applicant are broken off, the
state or any agency or the City of Rye must, within six
months of the end of negotiation, either issue its findings
and determination to acquire the property pursuant to
§ 204 of the Eminent Domain Procedure Law or issue a
determination to acquire the property without public
hearing pursuant to § 206 of the Eminent Domain
Procedure Law or this ban to permit lapses.
(3) Special consideration will be given to activities that must have a
shoreline or wetland location in order to function and that will have
as little impact as possible upon the wetland, watercourse and
wetland/watercourse buffer. In general, permission will not be
granted for dredging or ditching solely for the purpose of draining
wetlands, controlling mosquitoes, lagooning, constructing
factories, providing spoil and dump sites or building roadways that
may be located elsewhere.
E. Replacement/compensation plan requirements.
(1) Where losses of wetlands or impacts on wetlands are deemed
unavoidable by the Planning Commission, the Commission may
require the applicant to develop a replacement/compensation plan
which shall specify measures that provide for replacement
wetlands that re-create as nearly as possible the original wetlands
in terms of type, function, geographic location and setting. On-site
replacement/compensation shall be the preferred approach; off-site
replacement/compensation shall be permitted only in cases where
§ 195-5 TREES § 195-5
187:851
an on-site alternative is not possible. In the case of applications
for projects where the total amount of wetland or buffer area is
disturbed is less than 2,000 square feet, the Planning Commission
may waive or modify the requirements outlined in this subsection.
(2) Replacement/compensation plans developed to compensate for the
loss of wetlands shall include the baseline data set forth in the
Planning Commission's rules and regulations adopted pursuant to
this chapter, as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.
(3) The Planning Commission shall monitor or shall cause to have
monitored projects, according to the specifications set forth in the
permit, to determine whether the elements of the plan and permit
conditions have been met and whether the wetland acreage
created replaces the wetland acreage lost. To this end, the Planning
Commission may contract with an academic institution, an
independent research group or other qualified professionals, at the
expense of the applicant, or may use its own staff expertise. The
requirements for monitoring shall be specified in the plan and shall
include but not be limited to the requirements set forth in the
Planning Commission's rules and regulations adopted pursuant to
this chapter.
(4) Any plan prepared pursuant to this section and accepted by the
Planning Commission shall become part of the permit for the
application.
F. Permit conditions.
(1) Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be issued with
conditions. Such conditions may be attached as the Planning
Commission deems necessary and pursuant to § 195-5D to assure
the preservation and protection of affected wetlands and to assure
compliance with the policy and provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of the Planning Commission's rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to this chapter.
(2) Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be in written
form and shall contain the standard conditions and may contain the
optional conditions set forth in the Planning Commission's rules
and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.
G. Performance bond. A bond shall be posted with the Planning
Commission by the applicant, prior to the issuance of a permit, to
secure to the city the satisfactory installation and maintenance of
structures and devices necessary to ensure protection of the wetland,
watercourse and wetland/watercourse buffer during construction and
satisfactory installation of permanent structures and devices necessary
to ensure protection of the wetland, watercourse and wetland/
watercourse buffer, which shall be in an amount equal to the cost to
install and maintain said structures and devices during construction
and the cost to install said permanent structures and devices, except as
§ 195-5 RYE CODE § 195-5
187:852
waived or reduced by the Planning Commission. The bond shall be
released by the Planning Commission upon completion of the work
permitted by said permit, provided that said work is found to be in
accordance with the provisions of the permit and such other ordinances
as may apply and is completed to the satisfaction of the City Naturalist
or other city officials responsible for the enforcement of such city
ordinances. If the city finds that said installation and maintenance is not
being done by the applicant or is not satisfactory and the applicant fails
to correct the situation in the time period specified by the city, the city
may proceed against the bond in order to correct for any deficiencies.
Not less than 10% of the bond shall be in cash.
H. Other laws and regulations. No permit or waiver granted pursuant to
this chapter shall remove an applicant's obligation to comply in all
respects with the applicable provisions of any other federal, state or
local law or regulation, including but not limited to the acquisition of
any other required permit or approval, including but not limited to the
New York State Tidal Wetlands Regulations, New York State
Freshwater Wetlands Regulations and New York State Coastal Erosion
Management Regulations.94
I. Stop-work order.
(1) A stop-work order may be issued if the applicant or permittee has
not complied with any or all of the terms of such permit, has
exceeded the authority granted in the permit or has failed to
undertake the project in the manner set forth in the approved
application.
(2) If a stop-work order is issued it shall be set forth in writing, a copy
of which shall be filed with the Planning Commission, and shall
contain the finding and reasons for issuing the stop-work order
pursuant to this section.
(3) A stop-work order shall be issued when authorized by the Planning
Commission pursuant to § 195-4A(3).
J. Consultants and related fees. [Added 10-8-1997 by L.L. No.
14-1997]
(1) The Planning Commission in the review of any application may
refer such application to such engineering, planning, legal,
technical or environmental consultant or other professionals,
hereinafter referred to as "consultant or consultants," as it deems
reasonably necessary to enable it to review such application as
required by law, provided that the required expertise is not
available from city staff, and subject to the following:
94.Editor's Note: See the Environmental Conservation Law, §§ 25-0101 et seq., 24-0101 et
seq. and 34-0101 et seq., respectively.
§ 195-5 TREES § 195-5
187:853
§ 195-6. Referral to Conservation Commission/Advisory Council.
[Amended 6-16-1993 by L.L. No. 8-1993]
The City Planner shall refer all applications and proposed replacement/
compensation plans prepared pursuant to § 195-5E to the Conservation
Commission/Advisory Council for review and report. The Conservation
Commission/Advisory Council shall report back to the Planning Commission
within 30 days of the date of the referral by the City Planner when an
(a) The detailed statement of the consulting services to be
provided by the consultant shall include the consultant's fees
for said services and a statement by the consultant that the
applicant, not the city, shall be ultimately responsible to the
consultant for the services provided. The detailed statement
shall be sent to the applicant by the City Planner via certified
mail, return receipt requested.
(b) If the applicant wishes to review the services and the costs
with the Planning Commission, the request for a review shall
be in writing and mailed to the City Planner via certified mail,
return receipt requested, within seven days of the applicant's
receipt of the service and cost statement provided by the City
Planner. The Planning Commission shall review the services
and costs with the applicant at its next regular meeting
following receipt of the request.
(c) The City Planner shall authorize the consultant to proceed if
he/she has not received a written request for a review of the
consultant's services and costs from the applicant within seven
days of the applicant's receipt of the City Planner's transmittal.
The receipt date is the date shown as received on the return
receipt card returned by the post office.
(d) The applicant shall pay the consultant's fee upon receipt of the
consultant's detailed statement for the services provided. The
statement will be forwarded to the applicant by the City
Planner.
(e) Payment of the consultant's fees shall be required in addition
to any and all other fees required by this or any other section of
this chapter or any other city law or regulation.
(f) The Planning Commission document taking final action on the
application shall not be issued until all consultant's fees
charged in connection with the review of the applicant's
project have been paid. Payment of the consultant's fees shall
be by check made payable to the consultant and shall be
submitted to the City Planner for transmittal to the consultant.
(g) This Subsection J shall expire two years after the date of its
adoption, unless specifically reenacted by the City Council.
§ 195-5 RYE CODE § 195-6
187:854
activity subject to regulation under this chapter also requires Planning
Commission approval pursuant to another chapter of the Code of the City
of Rye. When the only other approval involves Chapter 73, Coastal Zone
Management Waterfront Consistency Review, the requirements described
below shall apply. When an activity subject to regulation under this chapter
does not also require Planning Commission approval pursuant to another
chapter of the Code of the City of Rye and in the case of an activity
regulated under this chapter and only Chapter 73, Coastal Zone
Management Waterfront Consistency Review, the Conservation
Commission/Advisory Council shall report back to the Planning Commission
within 20 days of the date of the referral by the City Planner. Failure to reply
within the specified time period may be deemed as indicating no objections
to the application. In cases where Planning Commission determinations
under this chapter are not consistent with the Conservation Commission/
Advisory Council report, the Planning Commission shall issue written
findings detailing the basis for their determination in variance with the
Conservation Commission/Advisory Council report. The City Planner shall
provide a copy of the proposed permit decisions and conditions to the
Chairman of the Conservation Commission/Advisory Council concurrent
with distribution of such proposed permit decisions and conditions to the
Planning Commission.
§ 195-7. Penalties for offenses.
§ 195-8. Enforcement.
The City Naturalist shall be the enforcement officer for this chapter. No
work or activity subject to review under this chapter shall be commenced
A. Civil sanctions. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than $3,000 for
every such violation. Each consecutive day of violation will be
considered a separate offense. Such civil penalty may be released or
compromised by the Planning Commission. In addition, the Planning
Commission shall have power, following a hearing, to direct the violator
to restore the affected wetland to its condition prior to the violation,
insofar as that is possible.
B. Criminal sanctions. Any person, firm or corporation who willfully
violates any of the provisions of this chapter or permits promulgated
thereunder, excluding provisions set forth in the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder, upon conviction thereof of the first offense,
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not less than $500
and not more than $1,000 and for a second offense and each
subsequent offense, shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of
not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,000 or a term of imprisonment of
not more than 15 days, or both. In addition to these punishments, any
offender may be ordered by the court to restore the affected wetland to
its condition prior to the offense, insofar as that is possible. Each
consecutive day of violation will be considered a separate offense.
§ 195-6 TREES § 195-8
187:855
or undertaken until the City Naturalist has been presented with a wetland
permit approved by the Planning Commission. The City of Rye is specifically
empowered to seek injunctive relief restraining any violation or threatened
violation of any provisions of this chapter and/or compel the restoration
of the affected wetland, watercourse or wetland/watercourse buffer to its
condition prior to the violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 195-9. Judicial review.
Any determination, decision or order of the Planning Commission may be
judicially reviewed pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules in the Supreme Court for the county in which the wetlands affected
are located within 30 days after the date of filing of the determination,
decision or order of such Planning Commission with the City Clerk of the
City of Rye.
§ 195-10. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be adjudged by any
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such order or judgment shall
be confined in its operation to the controversy in which it was rendered and
shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any part thereof to any other
person or circumstances, and to this end the provisions of each section of
this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 195-11. Action on permit application.
A. When an activity subject to regulation under this chapter also requires
Planning Commission approval pursuant to another chapter of the Code
of the City of Rye, the time limit for taking action on the application
shall be the same as required for the other approval. When the only
other approval involves Chapter 73, Coastal Zone Management
Waterfront Consistency Review, the time limit for taking action is
described in Subsection B of this section. The Planning Commission
shall, within said time limit, approve, modify and approve or disapprove
the permit. If the permit is disapproved, the reasons for such action
shall be stated on the records of the Planning Commission and a copy of
such reasons will be sent to the applicant. If the permit is approved, it
shall not be signed by the approved officers of the Planning Commission
until the applicant has met all the conditions of the action granting
approval of such permit.
B. When an activity subject to regulation under this chapter does not also
require Planning Commission approval pursuant to another chapter of
the Code of the City of Rye and in the case of Chapter 73, Coastal Zone
Management Waterfront Consistency Review, the Planning Commission
shall, within 30 days from the official submittal date of the application
or at the meeting following the meeting at which the Conservation
Commission/Advisory Council's report was received, whichever occurs
§ 195-8 RYE CODE § 195-11
187:856
Chapter 196
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 170.
Telecommunications — See Ch. 185.
Zoning — See Ch. 197.
§ 196-1. Purpose and legislative intent.
last, approve, modify and approve or disapprove the permit. If the
permit is disapproved, the reasons for such action shall be stated on
the records of the Planning Commission and a copy of such reasons
will be sent to the applicant. If the permit is approved, it shall not be
signed by the approved officers of the Planning Commission until the
applicant has met all the conditions of the action granting approval of
such permit.
A. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the City of Rye's
authority concerning the placement, construction and modification of
wireless telecommunications facilities. The City Council finds that
wireless telecommunications facilities and related equipment may pose
a unique hazard to the health, safety, public welfare and environment of
the City and its inhabitants, and may also have adverse visual and sonic
impacts on the community, its character and thus the quality of life in
the City.
B. By enacting this chapter, the City intends to:
(1) Ensure that the placement, construction or modification of wireless
telecommunications facilities and related equipment is consistent
with the City's land use policies and Zoning Code95;
(2) Minimize the negative and adverse visual and aesthetic impacts of
wireless telecommunications facilities to the maximum extent
practicable through careful design, siting, landscaping, screening
and innovative camouflaging techniques;
(3) Assure a comprehensive review of environmental impacts of such
facilities;
(4) Protect the health, safety and welfare of the City of Rye;
(5) Account for when shared use of wireless telecommunication
facilities is the more aesthetically sensitive alternative;
95.Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Zoning.
§ 195-11 TREES § 196-1
187:857
§ 196-2. Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the "Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities Siting and Special Use Permit Law for the City of Rye," or may
otherwise be known as the "Wireless Facilities Law."
§ 196-3. Definitions; word usage.
For purposes of this chapter, and where not inconsistent with the context
of a particular section, the defined terms, phrases, words, abbreviations
and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section. When
not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the
future tense, words used in the plural number include words in the singular
number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ACCESSORY FACILITY OR STRUCTURE — An accessory facility or
structure serving or being used in conjunction with a base station and
located in proximity to the base station, whether or not owned by the person
who owns or controls the base station, including but not limited to utility
or transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets; electric meters; and
fencing or shielding.
ANTENNA — A device, dish, array, or similar device used for sending and/
or receiving electromagnetic waves for any wireless telecommunications.
APPLICANT — Includes any individual, corporation, estate, trust
partnership, joint-stock company, association of two or more persons,
limited liability company or entity submitting an application to the City of
Rye for a special use permit for a wireless telecommunications facility.
(6) Establish fair and efficient processes for review and approval of
applications;
(7) Protect City residents and businesses from potential adverse
impacts of wireless telecommunication facilities, to the extent
permitted under law, and to attempt to preserve the visual
character of established communities and the natural beauty of the
landscape;
(8) Protect property values;
(9) Minimize the impact of wireless telecommunications facilities on
residential properties;
(10) Encourage the siting of wireless telecommunications facilities on
properties and areas which are not used exclusively for residential
purposes.
C. The City finds that minimization of clutter and structures in the rightsof-
way is important to the welfare of the community, and that placement
near residential structures and in historical areas should be restricted
where not critical to the provision of services.
§ 196-1 RYE CODE § 196-3
187:858
APPLICATION — The form as may be amended from time to time, together
with all necessary and appropriate documentation that an applicant must
submit in order to receive a special use permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility.
BASE STATION — A facility or equipment at a fixed location that enables
any wireless telecommunications between user equipment and a
telecommunications network. The term does not encompass a tower as
defined herein or accessory facility or structure associated with a tower.
The term base station includes, without limitation:
BREAK POINT — The location on a tower which, in the event of a failure
of the tower, would result in the tower falling or collapsing within the
boundaries of the property on which the tower is placed.
CARRIER ON WHEELS or CELL ON WHEELS ("COW") — A portable selfcontained
temporary facility that can be moved to a location and set up
to provide personal wireless services. A COW is normally vehicle-mounted
and contains a telescoping boom to support the antenna. A COW shall only
be in place in connection with an emergency or event, but no longer than
Equipment associated with wireless telecommunications services such
as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed
wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave
backhaul.
A.
Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and
backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems
("DAS") and small-cell networks or micro-wireless facilities); provided
that, wireline connections in the rights-of-way linking antennas to other
elements of a small cell, DAS or similar network will not be treated
as part of the wireless telecommunications facility and instead their
placement shall be subject to review consistent with applicable
provisions of the Rye City Code, the applicable franchise; and New York
law.
B.
Any supporting structure, other than a tower, that at the time the
relevant application is filed with the City under this section, supports
or houses equipment described in Subsections A and B that has been
reviewed and approved for placement of such equipment under this
chapter, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even
if the supporting structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose
of providing that support. For supporting structures that support
equipment described in Subsections A and B, including but not limited
to the sides of buildings, water towers, or utility poles, the term
includes only that portion of a supporting structure specifically
approved to support the wireless equipment described in Subsections A
and B, and only relates to activities necessary to permit the installation,
maintenance, replacement or collocation of wireless equipment
described in the preceding paragraph. The exemption of a supporting
structure from review is not an approval.
C.
§ 196-3 TREES § 196-3
187:859
required for the emergency or event, provided the installation does not
involve excavation, movement or removal of existing facilities.
CITY — The City of Rye, New York.
CITY MANAGER — The chief administrative officer of the City of Rye, or its
designee.
COLLOCATION — The use of an existing tower or base station to install
additional transmission equipment or antennas for the provision of wireless
telecommunications services.
COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY or COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE
— The meaning in this chapter and any special use permit granted
hereunder as is defined and applied under the United States Uniform
Commercial Code (UCC).
COMPLETED APPLICATION — An application that contains all information
and/or data required by the City on application forms, by ordinance or by
written practice and such additional information as the City may reasonably
require specific to any application.
CONCEALMENT ELEMENT — Any design feature, including but not limited
to painting, landscaping, shielding requirements and restrictions on
location, proportions, or physical dimensions in relation to the surrounding
area or supporting structures that are intended to and do make a wireless
telecommunications facility or any supporting structure supporting it
substantially less visible to the casual observer.
COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Rye, which is the officially
designated agency or body of the community to whom applications for a
special use permit for a wireless telecommunications facility must be made,
and that is authorized to review, analyze, evaluate and make decisions
with respect to granting or revoking special use permits for wireless
telecommunications facilities. The Council may, at its discretion, delegate
or designate other official agencies of the City to accept, review, analyze,
evaluate and make recommendations to the Council with respect to the
granting or not granting, recertifying or not recertifying or revoking special
use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNAE SYSTEM (DAS) — Network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless telecommunications service within a geographic area or structure.
EAF — The environmental assessment form approved by the New York
Department of Environmental Conservation.
ELIGIBLE FACILITY PERMIT — The official document or permit by which
an applicant meets the criteria for administrative review of a wireless
telecommunications facility as granted by the City Engineer and
Corporation Counsel.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA ("ESA") — An area that is a
residential zone or an area that has an exceptional or unique character with
respect to one or more of the following: a) a benefit (or threat) to human
§ 196-3 RYE CODE § 196-3
187:860
health or quality of life; b) a benefit (or threat) to wildlife; c) a natural
setting (e.g., fish/wildlife habitat open space, area of important aesthetics
of scenic quality); d) agricultural, social cultural, archeological, recreational
or educational values. The City Council shall determine what areas qualify
as an ESA.
EXISTING — In place as of the date an application is received for
installation or modification of a wireless telecommunications facility.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration or its duly designated and
authorized successor agency.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission or its duly designated and
authorized successor agency.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or supporting structure, the distance
measured from the preexisting grade level to the highest point on the tower
or supporting structure, even if said highest point is an antenna.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure in the City of Rye that is:
MICRO-WIRELESS FACILITY — A small wireless facility strung between
two utility poles having dimensions no larger than 24 inches in length, 15
inches in width and 12 inches in height and an exterior antenna, if any, no
longer than 11 inches, and which antenna may be enclosed in an imaginary
cylinder no larger than one inch in diameter. The reference to height in
this definition is not intended to permit any person to install a facility that
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in New York;
or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in Rye with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
Designated as a protected site or structure under the City of Rye City
Code, Chapter 117 "Landmarks Preservation."
E.
Is located in a National Historic District or within a City of Rye
designated Preservation District and/or Historic District.
F.
§ 196-3 TREES § 196-3
187:861
violates, or causes the strand to which it is attached to violate, clearance
or other requirements under the applicable safety codes. A micro-wireless
facility does not create any noise greater than 10 db(A) as measured at the
source.
NIER — Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, jointstock
company, association of two or more persons having a joint common
interest or governmental entity.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES — Shall have the same meaning as
defined and used in the 1996 Federal Telecommunications Act and
associated regulations.
RESIDENTIAL RIGHT-OF-WAY — The right-of-way in a residential zone.
RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — A structure located in a residential zone
with its principal use being residential.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT or A DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with
provision for living, cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for
the use of one family, as defined in Rye City Code, Chapter 197, "Zoning."
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — Those zones designated as "Residence Districts"
under the City of Rye City Code, Chapter 197, "Zoning."
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The strip of land over which facilities such as roads are
built as identified on the official City Map.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT — The official document or permit by which an
applicant is allowed to construct and use a wireless telecommunications
facility, as granted by the City.
STEALTH FACILITY — Any wireless telecommunications facility that is
integrated as an architectural feature of an existing supporting structure
or any new wireless telecommunications facility that is camouflaged or
concealed so that the presence of the wireless telecommunications facility is
either: (1) virtually imperceptible to the casual observer, such as an antenna
behind louvers on a building, or inside a steeple or similar structure; or (2)
camouflaged, through stealth design, so as to blend in with its surroundings
to such an extent that it is indistinguishable by the casual observer from
the structure on which it is placed or the surrounding in which it is located.
Examples of stealth facilities include wireless telecommunications facilities
which are disguised as flagpoles, as indigenous trees, as rocks, or as
architectural elements such as dormers, steeples and chimneys. To qualify
as "stealth" design, the item in question must match the character of its
surroundings and the type of item that it is mimicking in size, scale, shape,
dimensions, color, materials, function, and other attributes as closely as
possible. The elements that make a facility a stealth facility are concealment
elements.
SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — Substantial change has the same meaning as
the term "substantial change" as defined by Federal Communications
Commission regulations, 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(7).
§ 196-3 RYE CODE § 196-3
187:862
SUPPORTING STRUCTURE — Any building, mast, pole, utility pole or other
facility capable of supporting or housing a base station. Except as used in
the definition of the term "tower," the term "supporting structure" does not
include and is not used to refer to a tower.
TALL STRUCTURE — A tall structure includes, but is not limited to, existing
towers, nonresidential building rooftops at least four stories in height or
greater, and domes, belfries, lanterns, spires, steeples or other architectural
features on top of the roof of a building that is at least 45 feet high.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission and reception of audio,
video, data and other information by wire, radio frequency, light and other
electronic or electromagnetic systems.
TEMPORARY — In relation to all aspects and components of this chapter
fewer than 90 days.
TOWER — Any supporting structure built for the sole or primary purpose of
supporting any antennas (and related base station and accessory facilities
or structures), including supporting structures that are constructed for
wireless telecommunications including, but not limited to, private,
broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless
services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the
associated site. This definition does not include utility poles.
UNDERGROUND AREAS — Those areas where there are no electrical
facilities or facilities of the incumbent local exchange carrier in the rightof-
way; or where the wires associated with the same are or are required
to be located underground; or where the same are scheduled, at the time
of determination to be converted from overhead to underground. If any
area that currently has electrical facilities aboveground is later converted
to an area with all such facilities underground, then such an area will
be considered an "underground areas" and the responsible party for
aboveground wireless telecommunications facilities and accessory facilities
must comply with all regulations for underground areas within one year
of such conversion. For the purposes of this chapter, any residential area
outside the FEMA-designated fifty-year floodplain as depicted on the most
recently approved FEMA flood maps is considered an underground area.
An "electrical facility" is a distribution facility owned by an electric utility
and does not include transmission facilities used or intended to be used to
transmit electricity at nominal voltages in excess of 35,000 volts.
UTILITY POLE — A supporting structure owned and/or operated by a public
utility, and regulated by the New York State Department of Public Service,
which is primarily built to support lines, cables, or wires for telephone,
cable television, or electricity, or to provide lighting.
WIRELESS REGULATIONS — Those regulations, adopted by majority vote
of City Council pursuant to this chapter and implementing the provisions
set forth herein.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — All elements of a facility
or proximate to a common location used in connection with the provision
of any wireless telecommunications, including the antenna, base station
§ 196-3 TREES § 196-3
187:863
(but excluding any existing supporting structure to which the base station
is attached or within which it is enclosed), tower, if any, and accessory
facilities or structures serving that base station.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER — A wireless
telecommunications infrastructure provider or a wireless
telecommunications services provider under 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7).
§ 196-4. Policy and goals for special use permits and special
exception permits.
In order to ensure that the placement, construction and modification of
wireless telecommunications facilities conforms to the City's purpose and
intent of this chapter, the Council creates a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities for the purpose of achieving the following
goals:
§ 196-5. Special use permit, special exception permits and eligible
facility permits.
A. Implementing an application process for person(s) seeking a special use
permit or special exception permit for a wireless telecommunications
facility.
B. Establishing a policy for examining an application for and issuing
special use permits and special exception permits for wireless
telecommunications facilities that is both fair and consistent.
C. Establishing timeframes for granting or not granting a special use
permits and special exception permits for wireless telecommunications
facilities, or recertifying or revoking the special use permit or special
exception permit granted under this chapter.
D. Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, but only where it will
result in the least overall visual and sonic impact for residential
dwelling units, the collocation of wireless telecommunications facilities.
E. Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the placement of a
wireless telecommunications facility in such a manner as to cause
minimal disruption to the land, property, buildings and other facilities
adjacent to, surrounding and in generally the same area as the
requested location of such a wireless telecommunications facility and to
minimize adverse visual, sonic, and aesthetic impacts to the community
and risk of adverse impacts to community character and property value.
A. All wireless telecommunications facilities within the City must comply
with this chapter and all other applicable law and regulations. A person
who installs wireless telecommunications facilities pursuant to this
section must comply with all safety codes; comply with requirements
for RF emissions; and must utilize concealment elements and maintain
facilities to minimize visibility of the wireless telecommunications
facilities. All wireless telecommunications facilities are subject to the
§ 196-3 RYE CODE § 196-5
187:864
registration requirements of Section 167.72, if applicable, regardless of
their status under, or the applicability of, this chapter.
B. This chapter does not apply to any device designed for end-user overthe-
air reception, not transmission, of television broadcast signals,
multichannel multipoint distribution service, or direct broadcast
satellite service; or for end user reception of signals from an Internet
service provider and end user transmission of signals to an Internet
service provider.
C. All wireless telecommunications facilities (including modifications), or
construction, modification or replacement of support structures in
connection with the installation of wireless telecommunications
facilities must be permitted by a special use permit, special exception
permit or eligible facility permit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
following wireless telecommunications facilities do not require a special
use permit, except where the same are on, substantially contiguous to,
or affect a historic structure, or an environmentally sensitive area.
Requirements that may apply to the underlying supporting structure to
which a base station is to be attached, as well as all other applicable
laws and regulations continue to apply. Such wireless
telecommunications facilities that do not require a special use permit
shall require a special exception permit and pay the associated fee to
the City Manager or his/her designee. Such wireless
telecommunications facilities shall be authorized to be installed on
condition that any and all other required permits or approvals have
been received.
(1) Wireless telecommunications facilities that are less than one cubic
feet in size create no measurable sound and are placed on existing
supporting structures without increasing the physical dimensions
of the existing supporting structures. The "cubic footage" takes into
account all the elements of the wireless telecommunications facility
(including accessory facilities or structures).
(2) Wireless telecommunications facilities placed on the rooftop of
nonresidential structures; that make no measurable sound beyond
the rooftop; that are at least 40 feet from any residential unit; and
that include some concealment elements so that the wireless
telecommunications facilities are not visible from the street.
(3) Wireless telecommunications facilities within existing supporting
structures (other than historical structures) that are not visible
from and that do not create any sound greater than 10 db(A)
measured at the source from outside the supporting structure and
do not change the physical dimensions or appearance of the
supporting structure within which they are placed.
(4) Carriers on wheels where the placement is permitted, and complies
with, applicable FCC regulations for temporary placement of
wireless telecommunications facilities.
§ 196-5 TREES § 196-5
187:865
(5) Routine maintenance, or replacement of elements of a wireless
telecommunications facility or supporting structure that do not
change the dimensions, visibility, or audibility of a wireless
telecommunications facility or supporting structure.
(6) Micro wireless facilities.
D. The City Manager or his/her designee shall prepare application forms
that must be used by persons seeking to place wireless
telecommunications facilities in the City and which shall require
additional submission of at least the information required by the City
Code, and may require information that the City may consider in acting
upon an application.
(1) Franchise required. In addition to the special use permit, special
exception permit and eligible facilities permit required herein, the
placement of a wireless telecommunications facility in the public
rights-of-way requires the persons who will own or control those
facilities to obtain a franchise or permit to be located within the
City's right-of-way, unless that person holds a franchise from the
state which authorizes it to use the right-of-way for that purpose,
without further permission of the City. Pursuant to Chapter 167,
"Streets and Sidewalks," such franchise or permit may be approved
by the City.
E. As part of the administration of this article, the City Council may adopt
by simple majority vote regulations governing the placement and
modification of wireless telecommunications facilities consistent with
the requirements of this article, including regulations governing
collocation and resolution of conflicting applications for placement of
wireless telecommunications facilities, and guidelines for placement of
wireless telecommunications facilities on City-owned or controlled
structures in the rights-of-way.
(1) Develop acceptable designs for wireless telecommunications
facilities in particular corridors, taking into account the zoning
districts bounding the rights-of-way;
(2) The City Manager shall issue any notices of incompleteness,
requests for information, or conduct or commission such studies as
may be required to determine whether a permit should be issued. If
the City Manager issues a notice of incompleteness, any applicable
timeframes to review the application shall be reinitiated upon the
delivery of the missing material as if the application was received
anew as described in § 196-6C.
(3) The City Manager shall develop forms and procedures for
submission of applications for placement or modification of
wireless telecommunication facilities, and proposed changes to any
support structure consistent with this article.
§ 196-5 RYE CODE § 196-5
187:866
F. For eligible facilities requests, as defined in the Federal
Communications regulation 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(3), implementing
federal law, 47 U.S.C. § 1455, an eligible facility permit is required prior
to installation (including modifications) of wireless telecommunications
facilities or modification of existing support structures in connection
with the installation of wireless telecommunications facilities.
(1) An eligible facility permit may be issued administratively by the
City Engineer and Corporation Counsel jointly after all applicable
safety and fire code regulations have been complied with. The
eligible facility permit shall specifically provide that it is being
issued at the direction of the federal government and without the
consent of the City and shall be of no further force and effect when
the permit for the underlying facility expires, or the federal law
changes so that the permit as issued is no longer required.
(2) The application for any eligible facility permit must contain at least
the information required to permit the City Manager and
Corporation Counsel to determine that the application is an eligible
facilities request, including (i) the underlying approval for the
existing tower and base station; (ii) any approved modifications to
the same where the modifications were approved prior to February
22, 2012; and (iii) detailed information about the physical
dimensions of tower and base station as the same exist on the date
of the application, and as proposed to be modified.
(3) The application shall be denied if it is not an eligible facilities
request or if all the information required under § 196-6V is not
submitted. If an application is denied because it is determined that
it is not an eligible facilities request, the applicant may request that
the application be treated as a request for special permit by
submitting all the information required for a special permit within
10 days of the denial of application. The applicant has the burden of
proof in all aspects of its permit request by providing clear and
convincing evidence.
G. All other wireless telecommunications facility installations (including
modifications), or construction, modification or replacement of support
structures in connection with the installation of wireless
telecommunications facilities require a special use permit or special
exception permit.
(1) Special use permits and special exception permits may be granted
where applicant shows by clear and convincing evidence:
(a) The wireless telecommunications facility proposed is not being
built speculatively (that is, there is a customer for the wireless
telecommunications facility), and it will be built and used
promptly upon approval.
(b) The applicant is a utility under New York law or a provider
described in Subsection G(1)(e) below or a governmental
§ 196-5 TREES § 196-5
187:867
entity. The applicant and any entity whose equipment would be
included in the installations has all the authorizations required
to place the wireless telecommunications facilities from the
state, or the City (other than the special use permit requested),
or the owner of the property, and to modify, replace or attach
to a supporting structure, and the placement, construction
and operation of the wireless telecommunications facilities
(including supporting structures) will be in compliance with all
applicable laws.
(c) The wireless telecommunications facility is designed and
placed to minimize the visual and sonic impact on the
community.
(d) The wireless telecommunications facility does not significantly
impact the site upon which it will be located or the properties
that will be disturbed as a result of its installation.
(e) If applicant is confirmed to be a utility under New York law or
is confirmed to be a provider, as described below, it must
demonstrate that the wireless telecommunications facility is
necessary for the provision of services. All applicants must
show that the proposed installation is the least intrusive
alternative for providing service. If the applicant is a provider
of wireless services or facilities under 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7), it
must show that absent approval, there will be a prohibition in
the provision of wireless services within the meaning of federal
law.
(2) City may approve a special use permit or special exception permit
without the showing required by Subsection G(1)(e) where the
facility is not located in or does not affect historic structures or
environmentally sensitive areas and the wireless
telecommunications facility:
(a) Is a stealth facility that otherwise satisfies the provisions of
this chapter.
(b) Contains concealment elements, and is to be placed or shielded
on an existing supporting structure in such a way such that the
wireless telecommunications facility produces no measureable
sound greater than 10 db(A) and is not readily visible to,
surrounding properties, and is not subject to modification
except at the discretion of the City.
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing, City may require the showing
under Subsection G(1)(e) where the City determines installation or
modification of the wireless telecommunications facility
substantially alters the size, proportions or dimensions of an
existing supporting structure.
§ 196-5 RYE CODE § 196-5
187:868
(4) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the City
Council may for reasonable cause and based on substantial
evidence exempt any applicant from any requirement of this
chapter or require the location or character of a wireless
telecommunications facility to be other than that which this
chapter might otherwise mandate.
(5) Prohibited on certain structures. No wireless telecommunications
facility shall be located on single-family detached residences,
single-family attached residences, two-family residences, or any
residential accessory structure.
H. General standards for wireless telecommunications facilities in the
rights-of-way.
(1) Generally. All wireless telecommunications facilities in the rightsof-
way shall: first, be located in accordance with the location
priorities in Subsection I below; and second, be the most
aesthetically pleasing alternative for the type of location. In
addition, such facilities must meet the minimum requirements set
forth in this chapter, the wireless regulations, and the
requirements of any other applicable law. An applicant must
establish that it is installing stealth facilities to the extent possible
and must:
(a) Show that it is installing facilities in the highest priority
locations that are available and necessary to the provision of
service or to avoid a prohibition. As part of its application, an
applicant must describe in detail its efforts to place a wireless
telecommunications facility at each higher priority location,
including what properties were contacted, and the reasons
why applicant claims the wireless telecommunications facility
cannot be placed at a higher priority location.
(b) Submit RF engineering data signed by an engineer for the
relevant wireless provider, including propagation maps and
supporting information identifying areas where a wireless
telecommunications facility could be placed that would serve
the areas where applicant believes that service is required, and
describing the wireless telecommunications facility required to
provide such services;
(c) Submit a written explanation as to why it claims its proposed
wireless telecommunications facility is the least intrusive
alternative, considered individually, and as part of any project
of which it is a part that involves installation of more than one
wireless telecommunications facility; and taking into account
all potential alternatives, whether or not raised by the City or
its citizens, including all those that a diligent applicant acting
in good faith would raise.
§ 196-5 TREES § 196-5
187:869
(2) Waiver of requirements. Subject to § 196-5G(4), the wireless
regulations and decisions on applications for placement of wireless
telecommunications facilities in the rights-of-way shall, at a
minimum, ensure that the requirements of this chapter are
satisfied, unless, in the case only of an applicant who has the
requisite status protected by federal laws, it is determined that
applicant has established that denial of an application would,
within the meaning of federal law, prohibit or effectively prohibit
the provision of personal wireless services, or otherwise violate
applicable laws or regulations, under circumstances such that
deployment of the facilities must be authorized. If that
determination is made, the requirements of this chapter, including
any regulations and forms to implement this chapter, may be
waived, but only to the minimum extent required to avoid conflict
with federal law.
(3) Standards. Wireless telecommunications facilities in the rights-ofway
shall be installed and modified in a manner that minimizes
risks to public safety, avoids placement of aboveground facilities in
underground areas, avoids installation of new support structures or
equipment cabinets in the public rights-of-way, complies in the
rights-of-way with the City's prioritization list in Subsection I(2)
below and otherwise maintains the integrity and character of the
neighborhoods and corridors in which the facilities are located;
ensures that installations are subject to periodic review to
minimize the intrusion on the rights-of-way and compliance with
health and safety codes; and ensures that the City bears no risk or
liability as a result of the installations, and that such use does not
inconvenience the public, interfere with the primary uses of the
rights-of-way, or hinder the ability of the City or other government
agencies to improve, modify, relocate, abandon or vacate the
rights-of-way or any portion thereof, or the ability of the City or
other government agencies to cause the improvement,
modification, relocation, vacation or abandonment of facilities in
the rights-of-way.
(4) Concealment. The special use permits for wireless
telecommunications facilities in the rights-of-way shall incorporate
specific concealment elements to minimize visual impacts
consistent with the wireless regulations, and shall incorporate
design requirements ensuring compliance with all standards for
noise emissions and in accordance with Chapter 133 of the Rye City
Code. In general, all equipment shall be the smallest and least
visibly and sonically intrusive equipment feasible. Unless it is
determined that another design is less intrusive or placement is
required under applicable law:
(a) Antennas located at the top of support structures shall be
incorporated into the structure, or placed within shrouds of a
§ 196-5 RYE CODE § 196-5
187:870
size such that the antenna appears to be part of the support
structure;
(b) Antennas placed elsewhere on a support structure shall be
integrated into the structure, or be designed and placed to
minimize visual impacts.
(c) Radio units or equipment cabinets holding radio units and
mounted on a utility pole shall be placed as high as possible on
the utility pole, placed to avoid interfering or creating any
hazard to any other use of the public rights-of-way, and located
on one side of the utility pole. Unless the radio units or
equipment cabinets can be concealed by appropriate traffic
signage, radio units or equipment cabinets mounted below the
communications space on utility poles shall be designed so that
visibility is limited to the fewest number of people, the largest
dimension is vertical, and the width is such that the radio units
or equipment cabinets are minimally visible from the opposite
side of the support structure on which they are placed. In
underground areas, the equipment cabinets shall be located
underground with any above ground intrusion minimized. If an
equipment cabinet must be located aboveground, then the
cabinet shall be a stealth facility and shall substantially
incorporate all other concealment elements. If an equipment
box must be placed on a pole, the box shall be placed on the
pole in such a fashion as to have it front facing the closing
boundary of the right-of-way.
(d) Wiring and cabling shall be neat and concealed within, or
within conduit, flush to the support structure, ensuring
concealment of these components to the greatest extent
possible.
(e) Ground-mounted or pole-mounted (other than antennas)
equipment associated with a wireless telecommunications
facility is prohibited in underground areas and shall be
permitted only where consistent with the portion of the
corridor in which it is to be placed, and may be required to be
undergrounded, located in alleys or otherwise shielded.
Ground-mounted equipment shall not interfere with pedestrian
or vehicular traffic.
(f) Wireless telecommunications facilities shall comply with FCC
regulations governing radio frequency ("RF") emissions. At all
times, every wireless telecommunications facility shall comply
with applicable FCC regulations governing RF emissions, and
failure to comply shall be treated as a material violation of the
terms of any permit or lease. No special use permit shall be
issued or effective unless it is shown that the wireless
telecommunications facility will comply with those regulations;
any areas where occupational or general public exposures will
§ 196-5 TREES § 196-5
187:871
exceed FCC limits are identified, and there is a clear plan
addressing safety for any areas where exposures may exceed
those limits.
(g) No towers greater than 80 feet shall be permitted in the public
rights-of-way, and no wireless telecommunications facilities
shall be permitted aboveground in underground areas; towers
less than or equal to 80 feet may be placed in the public rightsof-
way only on major roads in the Membership Club zoning
district or on golf courses provided that the City Council
determines that such towers in the public right-of-way or on
the golf course would be the most aesthetically pleasing means
to serve an area with low residential density. Any tower design
must be as consistent as possible with the corridor in which the
facility is placed, and minimize the obtrusiveness of the facility
considered individually and as part of a network of wireless
telecommunications facilities. For towers proposed to be
located in the right-of-way, all other restrictions including, but
not limited to equipment type and placement, setback
requirements, safety concerns and aesthetics shall still apply.
(5) No electric meters shall be placed on a utility pole or any other
supporting structure.
(6) Underground installations will have no protrusions above preexisting
grade.
(7) Any graffiti on any wireless telecommunications facility support
structure or any accessory equipment shall be removed within 30
days upon notification of the owner.
I. Demonstration of compliance with wireless regulations. As part of
showing that the proposed location and structure meets the criteria in
this law and the wireless regulations, an applicant is required to show
how it has complied with the priority lists below unless the applicant
can show that compliance is prohibitory:
(1) The highest priority locations for all installations are:
(a) On existing tall structures or telecommunications towers.
(b) Collocation on a site with existing telecommunications towers
or tall structures.
(c) In commercially zoned areas along Interstate 95, Interstate
287 or railroad tracks.
(d) In nonresidential areas or on a golf course.
(e) On other property in the City.
§ 196-5 RYE CODE § 196-5
187:872
(2) The priority of locations for installations in the residential right-ofway
are (assuming, first, compliance with Subsection I(1) above), in
order of priority:
(a) Located on a major road, at least 60 feet or more from the
nearest residential unit;
(b) Located on other roads but only when required to be
nonprohibitory, and at least 60 feet or more from the nearest
residential unit;
(c) Located on a major road, at least 40 feet from the nearest
residential unit;
(3) Municipal property in Subsection I(1) and (2) above shall be a
higher priority than other locations in the same category.
(4) Installations in the residential right-of-way shall be micro-wireless
facilities only unless this requirement would be prohibitory.
(5) An applicant is further required to show that its proposed
installation or modification:
(a) Minimizes the visual impact of the wireless
telecommunications facilities and associated supporting
structures upon the community, and in particular upon
residential units, as proposed and under any modification that
could be made to that installation as of right; and
(b) Is designed to be consistent with the overall characteristics of
the area where the facilities are located; and
(c) Has minimized the new supporting structures proposed, and
the impact of those supporting structures.
(d) In considering the visibility of wireless telecommunications
facilities, City may consider separately and in conjunction with
any nearby or similar facilities, or any other facilities then
proposed, the mass and size of the facilities, the scale of the
facilities (or the effect of the placement on the mass, size and
scale of supporting structures to which or within which the
wireless telecommunications facilities may be attached or
concealed), and any other factor that may affect the impact on
the community. It may consider the elements of a wireless
telecommunications facility separately and collectively, and
may require a showing the visibility of each element of the
wireless telecommunications facility, and the effect on any
supporting structure to which the wireless telecommunications
facility will be attached, has been minimized.
(e) It has proposed facilities using universal antennae, each
having and utilizing multicarrier capacity to the fullest extent
technologically possible.
§ 196-5 TREES § 196-5
187:873
§ 196-6. Special use permit, special exception permit, and eligible
facility permit application requirements.
(6) The City may approve or require placement in a location that is not
the highest priority where the record shows a proposed installation
at a different location will result in less impact on the community,
considering the specific installation that is proposed and any
project of which it is a part that involves installation of more than
one wireless telecommunications facility.
(7) In considering whether a proposal meets the general requirements
of this law and the wireless regulations, the City will consider the
impact of a planned project as a whole, taking into account the
factors specified above.
A. All applicants for a special use permit or a special exception permit (in
the case of a special exception permit only to the extent set forth in
Subsection U and in the case of an eligible facility permit only to the
extent set forth in Subsection V for a wireless telecommunications
facility or any modification of such facility shall comply with the
requirements set forth in this section. In addition to the information
required by § 196-5E, an applicant for a special use permit must comply
with the requirements of this section, as applicable.
B. An application shall be signed on behalf of the applicant by the person
preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and
representations made therein and attesting to the truth and
completeness of the information. The landowner, if different than the
applicant, shall also sign the application. At the discretion of the
Council, any false or misleading statement in the application may
subject the applicant to denial of the application without further
consideration or opportunity for correction, or to revocation of the
permit if the permit is issued. No application shall be accepted and no
special use permit, special exception permit or eligible facility permit
application shall be issued for a property where the building inspector
has found, or there exists, a violation of the City Code and where such
violation has not been corrected.
C. Applications not meeting the requirements stated herein or which are
otherwise incomplete may be rejected by the Council. Upon notice of
incompleteness by the City, the applicable shot clock will reset to zero
and the City shall have the original applicable time period permitted by
law to act on the completed application. The shot clock shall remain
tolled until the applicant submits the required supplemental
information. If the application for a wireless telecommunications permit
is incomplete, all other permits requested by the same applicant that
must be acted upon by the same date as that application will also be
deemed incomplete or denied. If any other permit that must be acted
upon by the same date as the wireless telecommunications application
is incomplete, both it and the wireless telecommunications application
shall be declared incomplete or denied.
§ 196-5 RYE CODE § 196-6
187:874
D. The applicant shall include a statement in writing that:
(1) The applicant's proposed wireless telecommunications facility will
be maintained in a safe manner and in compliance with all
conditions of the special use permit, special exception permit or an
eligible facility permit, without exception, unless specifically
granted relief by the Council in writing, as well as all applicable
and permissible local codes, ordinances and regulations, including
any and all applicable county, state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
(2) The construction of the wireless telecommunications facility is
legally permissible, including but not limited to the fact that the
applicant is authorized to do business in New York state.
E. Each application for a special use permit or special exception permit
shall include a complete plan for the site proposed, and if the
application is submitted as part of a larger project that will include
multiple sites, a description of that project, and the number and type of
installations required, and complete application materials for each site
proposed, so that the Council has the ability to and shall review and
make a determination with respect to each individually and as part of
any larger project. For special use permits or special exception permits,
the site plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Council prior to
issuance of the special use permit or special exception permit by the
City Council. Where a certification is required, the certification shall be
in the form of a report containing the information hereinafter set forth,
signed by a licensed professional engineer registered in the state and
acceptable to the City, unless otherwise noted. The application shall
include, to the extent applicable, the following information:
(1) Documentation that shows applicant satisfies the requirements of
§ 196-5E through H, as applicable.
(2) Name and address of the engineer or engineers submitting any
certifications, and to whom questions regarding the certification
should be submitted.
(3) Name and address of the property owner, operator and applicant,
to include the legal form of the applicant. Name and address of any
person who will own equipment associated with the wireless
telecommunications facility.
(4) Postal address and tax map parcel number of the property.
(5) Zoning district or designation in which the property is situated.
(6) Size of the property stated both in square feet and lot line
dimensions and a diagram showing the location of all lot lines
where the facility is proposed to be located outside of the right-ofway,
and within the rights-of-way, the location of the proposed
facility in relation to the right-of-way, pedestrian and nonmotorized
§ 196-6 TREES § 196-6
187:875
vehicle pathways and crosswalks, and the location in relation to
driveways on the same right-of-way and within 750 feet.
(7) Location of all residential structures within 750 feet.
(8) Location of all habitable structures within 750 feet.
(9) Location of all structures on the property which is the subject of the
application, or for the right-of-way, within 250 feet of the proposed
facility.
(10) Location, size and height of all proposed and existing wireless
telecommunications facilities and supporting structures at the
proposed site.
(11) Type, size and location of all proposed and existing landscaping.
(12) The number, type and design of the wireless telecommunications
facility(s) proposed and the basis, if any, for the calculations of the
wireless telecommunications facility's capacity to accommodate
multiple users.
(13) The make, model and manufacturer of each of the elements of the
wireless telecommunications facility.
(14) A detailed description of each element of the proposed wireless
telecommunications facility and any existing support structure
which will be utilized, which description shall include, but not be
limited to, a description of the supporting structures,
appurtenances and apparatus, including height above preexisting
grade, materials, color and lighting. For a modification to a facility,
applicant must describe precisely any change in physical
dimensions to any portion of the wireless telecommunications
facility or and describe in detail any additional equipment installed
as part of the modification and any modifications required to the
supporting structure (including, but not limited to, modifications to
meters, powers supplies, cabling, and guys).
(15) The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other
transmitting equipment.
(16) Transmission and maximum effective radiated power of the
antenna(s).
(17) Direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation of the
antenna(s).
(18) Certification by a qualified RF engineer that NIER levels at the
proposed site are within the threshold levels adopted by the FCC.
(19) The applicant's proposed wireless telecommunications facility
maintenance and inspection procedures and related system of
records.
§ 196-6 RYE CODE § 196-6
187:876
(20) A copy of the FCC license applicable for the use of the wireless
telecommunications facility, if any, and a copy of any certificate
issued by the State of New York for the facility; and proof that
applicant and any person who will own facilities associated with the
proposed wireless telecommunications facility are authorized to
place the facilities at the location proposed.
(21) For a tower, certification that a topographic and geomorphologic
study and analysis has been conducted and that taking into account
the subsurface and substrata, and the proposed drainage plan, that
the site is adequate to assure the stability of the proposed tower on
the proposed site. The certifying engineer need not be approved by
the City.
(22) Propagation studies of the proposed site and all adjoining proposed
or in-service or existing sites signed by a suitable engineer and the
provider(s) that will utilize the proposed installation.
(23) The applicant shall disclose, in writing, any agreement in existence
prior to submission of the application that would limit or preclude
the ability of the applicant to share any new wireless
telecommunications facility that it constructs.
(24) The applicant shall provide a notarized affidavit that either the
proposed installation meets all laws, codes and ordinances or that
it meets the same except as specifically listed on said affidavit.
(25) Information relating to the expected useful life of the proposed
wireless telecommunications facility.
F. In the case of a new wireless telecommunications facility, the applicant
shall be required to submit a report demonstrating its efforts to secure
shared use of existing wireless telecommunications facility(s). Copies of
written requests and responses for shared use shall be provided to the
Council.
G. Certification that the wireless telecommunications facility and, if
applicable, the existing supporting structure both are designed and
constructed ("as built") to meet all county, state and federal structural
requirements for loads, including wind and ice loads.
H. After construction and prior to receiving a certificate of compliance,
certification that the wireless telecommunications facility and related
facilities are grounded and bonded so as to protect persons and
property and installed with appropriate surge protectors.
I. The applicant shall submit a completed long form EAF and a completed
visual EAF addendum. The Council may require submission of a more
detailed visual analysis based on the results of the visual EAF
addendum. Applicants are encouraged to seek preapplication meetings
with the City Council to address the scope of the required visual
assessment.
§ 196-6 TREES § 196-6
187:877
J. A visual impact assessment shall be provided with each application
which shall include:
(1) A zone of visibility map, which shall be provided in order to
determine locations where the facility may be seen.
(2) Pictorial representations of before and after views from key
viewpoints, including but not limited to state highways and other
major roads; state and local parks; other public lands; historic
districts; environmentally sensitive areas; preserves and historic
structures normally open to the public; and from any other location
where the site is visible to a large number of visitors or travelers.
The City will provide guidance concerning the appropriate key sites
at a preapplication meeting.
(3) An assessment of the visual impact of the facility base, guy wires
and accessory buildings from abutting and adjacent properties and
streets.
(4) Scaled and dimensioned photo simulations of the before and after
images of the project and project site from at least three different
angles and showing the maximum silhouette, viewshed analysis,
color and finish palette and proposed screening for the wireless
telecommunications facility.
K. The applicant shall identify any concealment elements proposed for the
wireless telecommunications facility, and for a stealth facility, shall
specifically show that the proposed wireless telecommunications
facility qualifies as a stealth facility and effectively screen from view its
proposed wireless telecommunications facilities and structures, subject
to Council approval.
L. All utilities serving any wireless telecommunications facility shall be
installed underground, embedded in existing construction or otherwise
shielded from view and in compliance with all laws, rules and
regulations of the City, including specifically, but not limited to, the
National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, where
appropriate. The Council may waive or vary the requirements of
undergrounding installation of utilities whenever, in the opinion of the
Council, such variance or waiver shall not be detrimental to the health,
safety, general welfare or environment, including the visual and scenic
characteristics of the area. Where possible, for wireless
telecommunications facilities located outside of the rights-of-way
wiring and other components shall be located within buildings. Wireless
telecommunications facilities installed on the exterior of existing
buildings/supporting structures shall be integrated into the design of
such buildings/supporting structures. The intent of this provision is to
make the installation invisible or indistinguishable from other existing
architectural features. Both the wireless telecommunications facility
and all accessory or associated facilities shall maximize the use of
building materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the
§ 196-6 RYE CODE § 196-6
187:878
existing supporting structure to which it may be affixed and with the
natural surroundings. Where possible, for facilities in the rights-ofway,
when existing utility poles are replaced, the wireless
telecommunications facility will be placed within a pole approved by the
City and the utility.
M. An access road and parking to assure adequate emergency and service
access shall be provided, should such be deemed necessary by the
Council. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private,
shall be made to the extent practicable. Road construction shall at all
times minimize ground disturbance and vegetation cutting. Road
grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual
disturbance and reduce soil erosion potential.
N. Every wireless telecommunications facility, and the existing support
structures to which wireless telecommunications facilities are attached
shall be constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified or
restored in strict compliance with the then-current version of all
technical, safety and safety-related codes adopted by the City, county,
state or United States, including but not limited to the most recent
editions of the National Electrical Safety Code and the National
Electrical Code, as well as accepted and responsibly workmanlike
industry practices and recommended practices of the National
Association of Tower Erectors. The codes referred to are codes that
include, but are not limited to, construction, building, electrical, fire,
safety, health and land use codes. The applicant is responsible for
ensuring compliance with the foregoing for the wireless
telecommunications facility and any portion of an existing supporting
structure affected by the wireless telecommunications facility. In the
event of a conflict between or among any of the preceding, the more
stringent shall apply.
O. Every person constructing or owning a wireless telecommunications
facility shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses
required by applicable law, rule, regulation or law and must maintain
the same, in full force and effect, for as long as required by the City or
other governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction over the
applicant.
P. The Council intends to be the lead agency, pursuant to SEQRA. The
Council shall conduct a review of the proposed project in combination
with its review of the application under this chapter.
Q. An applicant shall submit to the City Engineer the number of completed
applications determined to be needed at the preapplication meeting. A
copy of the notification of application shall be provided to the legislative
body of all adjacent municipalities and to the Westchester County
Planning Board.
R. If the applicant is proposing the construction of a tower or installation
on an existing tower or building, the applicant shall examine the
§ 196-6 TREES § 196-6
187:879
feasibility of designing a multicarrier use to extent practicable and
consistent with other requirements of this chapter. This requirement
may be waived, provided that the applicant, in writing, demonstrates
that the provisions of future shared usage of the wireless
telecommunications facility is not technologically feasible, or is
commercially impracticable and creates an unnecessary and
unreasonable burden, based upon:
(1) The number of FCC licenses foreseeably available for the area.
(2) The kind of wireless telecommunications facility proposed, or
existing supporting structure that would be utilized.
(3) Available space on existing and approved towers.
S. Unless waived by the Council, there shall be a preapplication meeting
required for every special use permit. The purpose of the preapplication
meeting will be to address issues which will help to expedite the review
and permitting process. Where the application is for the shared use of
an existing tower or supporting structure, the applicant can seek to
waive any application requirements that may not be applicable. At the
preapplication meeting, the waiver requests, if appropriate, will be
decided by the City. Costs of the City's consultants to prepare for and
attend the preapplication meeting will be borne by the applicant.
T. Without limiting the foregoing, except where it is demonstrated that
denial would result in a prohibition of the provision of wireless services
within the meaning of federal law:
(1) In the rights-of-way, no Towers are permitted except as permitted
in § 196-5H(4)(g).
(2) No wireless telecommunications facilities are permitted within
underground areas except those that are located underground.
(3) A new or replacement supporting structure, other than a stealth
facility or one permitted in § 196-5H(4)(g), street lighting or traffic
control structure may not be approved that is greater in height
from ground level than the average height of existing distribution
utility poles in the same area. No extension of an existing
supporting structure (other than street lighting or traffic control
structures) to permit installation of a wireless telecommunications
facility may be approved that unless the addition complies with
Subsection T(5) and increases the height of the supporting
structure by no more than the lesser of 20% or six feet.
(4) Except for cabling within a conduit, the lowest edge of any
component of the wireless telecommunications facility on a utility
pole must be at least 12 feet above the ground unless concealed
within the pole.
§ 196-6 RYE CODE § 196-6
187:880
(5) All wireless telecommunications facilities mounted to the side of a
supporting structure in the right-of-way, other than in the
communications space, must be flush-mounted, sized and painted
so that the facility to the extent possible the facility is concealed;
(6) All wireless telecommunications facilities mounted to the top of a
utility pole must be designed so that the facilities form a continuous
and uninterrupted line with the pole, and as a concealment
element, are no more than 10% greater in diameter than the pole
itself; provided that dipole antennas comprised of a single metal
rod not more than 40 inches as measured from the top of the pole
long fastened straight upright on, and flush to, the top of the pole,
are also acceptable.
(7) Any indicator lights should be recessed or otherwise designed so
that they present no hazard to traffic or interfere with enjoyment of
properties from which the lights may be visible.
(8) In addition to any more restrictive provisions of this chapter, in
placing wireless telecommunications facilities, the following rules
apply:
(a) Wireless telecommunications facilities should be at least 40
feet from any residential unit, and located so that the facilities
are not directly in front of any front window or door of a
residential structure.
(b) Locations that are less visible from a residential structure are
preferred over locations that are more visible.
(c) With the exception of those facilities that qualify for a special
exception permit, locations of wireless telecommunications
facilities in the rights-of-way shall be located no closer than
1,000 feet measured in all directions to another wireless
telecommunications facility of the same carrier. Wireless
telecommunications facilities in the rights-of-way for different
carriers shall be located no closer than 600 feet measured in
all directions from each other.
[1] For wireless telecommunications facilities that qualify for
a special exception permit in the right-of-way, such
facilities shall be located no closer than 400 feet measured
in all directions to another wireless telecommunications
facility of the same carrier and shall be located no closer
than 200 feet measured in all directions to another
wireless telecommunications facility for different carriers.
(d) All wireless telecommunications facilities shall make maximum
use of universal antennas capable of serving multiple carriers.
(e) Stealth and concealment shall have priority over collocation.
§ 196-6 TREES § 196-6
187:881
§ 196-7. Failure to pursue an application.
Applicants shall respond to all requests or notices from the City with
respect to an application promptly, so that City may meet any applicable
deadlines for action on an application. Where an applicant fails to promptly
respond, the Corporation Counsel is authorized to notify an applicant that
its application is denied for failure to pursue that application, without
prejudice to resubmittal of an application. Without limiting the foregoing, if
an applicant is notified that its application is incomplete, and there is fails
to complete the application within 60 days of the date of the notice, the
Corporation Counsel is authorized to notify an applicant that its application
is denied for failure to pursue that application, without prejudice to
resubmittal of an application even if there is no deadline applicable to action
on the application.
§ 196-8. Height of wireless telecommunications facilities.
§ 196-9. Visibility of facilities.
(f) Subject to Subsection T(d) and (e), towers shall have
provisions to allow for multiple carriers.
U. To the extent applicable, every applicant for a special exception permit
shall comply with § 196A through D, E(1) through (8), (10), (12) through
(20), (22), (24), F through H, K, N, O, Q, S, and T.
V. To the extent applicable, every applicant for an eligible facility permit
shall comply with § 196A through D, E(1) through (8), (10), (11) through
(14), (18) through (21), (24), (25), G through J, N, O, Q, and R.
A. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be no higher than the
minimum height necessary. Unless an area variance for height is
granted by the Board of Appeals, the maximum height of wireless
telecommunications facilities approved pursuant to § 196-5H(4)(g) shall
be 80 feet and the maximum height of wireless telecommunications
facilities located outside the rights-of-way shall be 90 feet, based on
three collocated antenna arrays and ambient tree height of 70 feet.
Height shall be measured from ground level, to the highest point on the
wireless telecommunications facility, or if higher, the highest point on
any extension to an existing supporting structure required to support
the wireless telecommunications facility. In towers, universal antennas
allowing multicarrier use will be utilized to the extent technologically
possible and maximum height shall be reduced accordingly.
B. The maximum height of any wireless telecommunications facility
constructed after the effective date of this chapter shall not exceed that
which shall permit operation without artificial lighting of any kind in
accordance with municipal, county, state and/or any federal law and/or
regulation.
§ 196-6 RYE CODE § 196-9
187:882
§ 196-10. Security of facilities.
All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be secured in a manner
which prevents unauthorized access to hazardous components. Specifically:
§ 196-11. Signage.
For towers, unless the City determines that the signage required under
this section would be inconsistent with minimizing visual impact, wireless
telecommunications facilities shall contain a sign no larger than four square
feet to provide adequate notification to persons in the immediate area of
the presence of an antenna that has transmission capabilities. The sign shall
contain the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the antenna(s) as
well as emergency phone number(s). The sign shall be located so as to
be visible from the access point of the site. No other signage, including
advertising, shall be permitted on any wireless telecommunications
facilities, unless required by law, or unless the signage is part of a
concealment element. Signs shall be approved by the Board of Architectural
Review. Nothing in this section affects rules with respect to signage that
may apply to existing support structures.
A. Excluding indicator lights satisfying the requirements of § 196-6,
wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be artificially lighted or
marked, except as required by law.
B. Except where inconsistent with concealment elements, towers shall be
of a galvanized finish, or painted with a rust-preventive paint of an
appropriate color to harmonize with the surroundings as approved by
the Council and the Board of Architectural Review, and shall be
maintained in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
C. Excluding indicator lights satisfying the requirements of § 196-6, if
lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a detailed plan for
sufficient lighting of as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is
permissible under state and federal regulations, and an artist's
rendering or other visual representation showing the effect of light
emanating from the site on neighboring habitable structures within
1,500 feet of all property lines of the parcel on which the wireless
telecommunications facility is located.
A. Where possible, wireless telecommunications facilities and
modifications to existing supporting structures, including guy wires,
shall be made inaccessible to individuals and constructed or shielded in
such a manner that they cannot be climbed or run into; towers will be
fenced and shielded to prevent unauthorized access to the structure
unless the tower is a stealth facility or the fencing or shielding is
inconsistent with required concealment elements; and
B. To the extent possible, wireless telecommunications facilities shall be
installed so that powered elements are readily accessible only to
persons authorized to operate or service them.
§ 196-9 TREES § 196-12
187:883
§ 196-12. Lot size and setbacks.
With the exception for towers approved pursuant to § 196-5H(4)(g):
§ 196-13. Retention of expert assistance and reimbursement by
applicant.
A. All proposed towers shall be set back from abutting parcels, recorded
rights-of-way and road and street lines a distance sufficient to
substantially contain on site all ice-fall or debris from a tower or tower
failure and to preserve the privacy and sanctity of any adjoining
properties.
B. Towers, other than towers placed on an existing supporting structure,
shall be set back from any property line at least a distance equal to the
height of the facility plus 10 feet, or the existing setback requirement of
the underlying zoning district, whichever is greater. Further, any
accessory facility or structure shall be located so as to comply with the
minimum zoning setback requirements for the principal building on the
property on which it is situated.
C. Where a wireless telecommunications facility involves an attachment to
an existing building or supporting structure other than a supporting
structure in the rights-of-way, the facility, including but not limited to
antennas, accessory supporting structures, and/or other
appurtenances, shall be set back from any property line the distance of
the setback requirement of the underlying zoning district and shall
comply with the setbacks set forth in § 196-5I.
A. The Council may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist
the Council in reviewing and evaluating the application and any
requests for recertification.
B. An applicant shall deposit with the City funds sufficient to reimburse
the City for all reasonable costs of consultant and expert evaluation and
consultation to the Council in connection with the review of any
application. The necessary application fee(s) shall be set annually by
the City Council and the consultant and expert deposit shall be
established on an application by application basis.
C. The total amount of the funds set forth in Subsection B of this section
may vary with the scope and complexity of the project, the
completeness of the application and other information as may be
needed by the Council or its consultant/expert to complete the
necessary review and analysis. Additional funds, as required, shall be
paid by the applicant. The initial amount of the escrow deposit shall be
established at a preapplication meeting with the City. Notice of the
hiring of a consultant/expert shall be given to the applicant at or before
this meeting.
§ 196-12 RYE CODE § 196-14
187:884
§ 196-14. Existing facilities.
All wireless telecommunications facilities existing on or before the original
effective date of this chapter shall be allowed to continue as they presently
exist; provided, however, any owner of such existing facility must submit the
inventory report form and provide the City information set forth in § 196-17
to the extent it applies and any modification to existing facilities must
comply with this chapter. All other wireless telecommunications facilities
existing prior to January 14, 2019 must apply for a special use permit,
special exception permit or eligible facility permit and otherwise come into
compliance with this chapter.
§ 196-15. Public hearing required for special use permit and special
exception permit.
A. Public hearing and public notification by applicant. Before the City
Council acts on any application for a special use permit or special
exception permit, it shall hold a public hearing thereon in accordance
with the General City Law. To facilitate notification of the public, a
public notification list shall be prepared by the applicant, using the
most current City of Rye tax maps and tax assessment roll, showing the
tax map sheet, block and lot number, the owner's name and owner's
mailing address for each property located wholly or partially within 300
feet of the perimeter of the property in any direction. If a property on
the public notification list is also listed as a cooperative or an apartment
on a list entitled "Apartment List City of Rye," maintained by the City
Assessor's office, the notice shall only be mailed to the property owner
of record. When the public hearing is required by the City Council, the
applicant shall deliver a copy of the public notice provided by the City
Planner to all of the property owners contained on the public
notification list by certified mail with certificate of mailing. The above
mailing and posting notice requirements must be performed in
accordance with the following requirements:
(1) The delivery of mailing shall be limited solely to the public notice
provided by the City Planner.
(2) The public notice shall be mailed to all property owners with a
certificate of mailing (no return receipt necessary) at a post office
or official depository of the Postal Service, at least 14 calendar days
prior to the date of the public hearing.
(3) At least five business days prior to the public hearing, the applicant
shall provide to the City Planner all certificates of mailing.
(4) For all application for a special use permit and special exception
permit, at least one week preceding the date of the public hearing,
at least one sign, a minimum of two feet by three feet in size and
carrying a legend prescribed by the City Council announcing the
public hearing, shall be posted on the property. The height of the
lettering on the sign shall be no less than two inches, except that
§ 196-14 TREES § 196-15
187:885
§ 196-16. Action on application for special use permits and special
exception permits.
the words "PUBLIC NOTICE" appearing at the top of the sign shall
have no less than five-inch-high lettering. The sign shall be in full
public view from the street and not more than 30 feet therefrom.
The sign shall be removed from the property within two days after
the public hearing.
B. The Council shall schedule the public hearing referred to in Subsection
A of this section once it finds the application is complete. The Council,
at any stage prior to issuing a special use permit or special exception
permit, may require such additional information as it deems necessary.
C. Council may waive any requirement hereof and of § 196-16 as required
to comply with state or federal law.
A. Subject to the requirements of any effective state and federal law or
FCC order, the Council will undertake a review of an application
pursuant to this chapter in a timely fashion and shall act within a
reasonable period of time given the relative complexity of the
application and the circumstances, with due regard for the public's
interest and need to be involved, and the applicant's desire for a timely
resolution.
B. The Council shall refer any application or part thereof to the Board of
Architectural Review (BAR) and may refer any application or part
thereof to the Planning Commission for their advisory review and
comment prior to the public hearing. This referral shall not preclude
any final approvals of these or other City boards or departments
required by this chapter or other law.
C. After the public hearing and after formally considering the application,
the Council may approve and issue or deny a special use permit or
special exception permit. Its decision shall be in writing and shall be
based on substantial evidence in the record. The burden of proof for the
grant of the permit shall always be upon the applicant.
D. If the Council approves the special use permit or special exception
permit for a wireless telecommunications facility, then the applicant
shall be notified of such approval, in writing, within 10 calendar days of
the Council's action, and the special use permit shall be issued within
30 days after such approval.
E. If the Council denies the special use permit or special exception permit
for a wireless telecommunications facility, then the applicant shall be
notified of such denial, in writing, within 10 calendar days of the
Council's action.
F. The City's decision on an application for a special use permit or special
exception permit for a wireless telecommunications facility shall be
supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.
§ 196-15 RYE CODE § 196-17
187:886
§ 196-17. Recertification of special use permits, special exception
permits, and eligible facility permit.
A. At any time between 12 months and six months prior to the five-year
anniversary date after the effective date of the permit and all
subsequent fifth anniversaries of the original special use permit, special
exception permit, or eligible facility permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility, the holder of such permit shall submit a
written request for recertification. In the written request for
recertification, the holder of such special use permit or special
exception permit shall note the following:
(1) The name of the holder of the special use permit, special exception
permit or eligible facility permit for the wireless
telecommunications facility.
(2) If applicable, the number or title of the special use permit, special
exception permit, or eligible facility permit.
(3) The date of the original granting of the special use permit, special
exception permit, or eligible facility permit.
(4) Whether the wireless telecommunications facility has been moved,
relocated, rebuilt, repaired or otherwise modified since the
issuance of the special use permit, special exception permit, or
eligible facility permit.
(5) If the wireless telecommunications facility has been moved,
relocated, rebuilt, repaired or otherwise modified, then whether
the Council approved such action, and under what terms and
conditions, and whether those terms and conditions were complied
with and abided by.
(6) Any requests for waivers or relief of any kind whatsoever from the
requirements of this chapter and any requirements for a special
use permit, special exception permit, or eligible facility permit.
(7) That the wireless telecommunications facility is in compliance with
the special use permit, special exception permit, or eligible facility
permit and compliance with all applicable codes, laws, rules and
regulations.
(8) Whether the facility is still being used; and whether it is the least
intrusive means of providing service, including whether it can be
reduced in size, combined with or replaced by other facilities or
otherwise altered to make it less visible or less audible.
(9) Whether it complies with then applicable requirements of the City
Code for placement of wireless telecommunications facilities.
(10) Whether there have been any changes in the legal status of the
applicant or any entity whose facilities are part of the wireless
§ 196-17 TREES § 196-17
187:887
telecommunications facility; and whether all required
authorizations and consents are still in full force and effect.
B. If, after such review, the Council determines that the permitted wireless
telecommunications facility is in compliance with the special use
permit, special exception permit, or eligible facility permit and all
applicable codes, laws and rules; that it continues to be used in the
provision of wireless services; that all relevant entities continue to have
all necessary authorizations; and that the facility cannot be modified or
replaced so that it is less visible or less audible, or has a lesser adverse
impact on aesthetics, community character or property values, then the
Council shall issue a recertification special use permit, special
exception permit, or eligible facility permit for the wireless
telecommunications facility, which may include any new provisions or
conditions that may be lawfully imposed, or that are required by codes,
law or regulation.
C. If the Council does not complete its review, as noted in Subsection B of
this section, prior to the five-year anniversary date of the original
permit, or subsequent fifth anniversaries, then the applicant for the
permitted wireless telecommunications facility shall receive an
extension of the special use permit, special exception permit, or eligible
facility permit for up to six months, in order for the Council to complete
its review.
D. If the holder of a special use permit, special exception permit or eligible
facility permit for a wireless telecommunications facility does not
submit a request for recertification of such permit within the time
frame noted in Subsection A of this section, or if the Council finds that
the wireless telecommunications facility has been moved, relocated,
rebuilt, or otherwise modified without approval of such having been
granted by the Council under this chapter, or that the conditions for
recertification have not been met, then such special use permit, special
exception permit, or eligible facility permit and any authorizations
granted thereunder shall cease to exist on the date of the fifth
anniversary of the original granting of the special use permit, special
exception permit, or eligible facility permit or subsequent fifth
anniversaries, unless the holder of the special use permit, special
exception permit, or eligible facility permit adequately demonstrates to
the Council that extenuating circumstances prevented a timely
recertification request. If the Council agrees that there were
legitimately extenuating circumstances, then the holder of the permit
may submit a late recertification request. Council may also recertify
subject to additional conditions that it establishes, and contingent on
satisfaction of those conditions.
§ 196-17 RYE CODE § 196-18
187:888
§ 196-18. Extent and parameters of special use permit, special
exception permit and eligible facility permit.
The extent and parameters of a special use permit, special exception permit
or an eligible facility permit for a wireless telecommunications facility shall
be as follows:
§ 196-19. Application fee.
§ 196-20. Performance security.
The applicant and the owner of record of any portion of a wireless
telecommunications facility, and the owner of real property on which the
wireless telecommunications facility is located (unless the property is
publicly owned) shall be jointly required to execute and file with the City a
bond, or other form of security acceptable to the City as to type of security
and the form and manner of execution, in an amount and with such sureties
as are deemed sufficient by the Council to assure the faithful performance
A. Such permit shall be nonexclusive.
B. Such permit shall not be assignable or transferable without the express
written consent of the Council.
C. Such permit may be revoked, canceled or terminated for a violation of
the conditions and provisions of the special use permit or special
exception permit for a wireless telecommunications facility, or for a
material violation of this chapter or applicable law.
D. Such permit shall be valid for a period of five years, or such longer
period as is required by state law, but the permit may be recertified
upon application, which application must demonstrate:
(1) The wireless telecommunications facility is still in use; and for
facilities where a demonstration of need or effective prohibition
was required, that the facility remains necessary or that
recertification is required to avoid an effective prohibition; and
(2) The impact of the wireless telecommunications facility cannot
reasonably be further minimized.
A. At the time that a person submits an application for a special use permit
or special exception permit for a new wireless telecommunications
facility, such person shall pay an application fee to the City of Rye as set
annually by the City Council set forth in the fee schedule. If the
application is for a special use permit for collocating on an existing
wireless telecommunications facility, the applicant shall also pay a fee
as set forth in the fee schedule.
B. Applicants for recertification of a special use permit or special
exception permit for a wireless telecommunications facility shall also
pay a fee as set forth in the fee schedule.
§ 196-18 TREES § 196-20
187:889
of the terms and conditions of this chapter and conditions of any special
use permit or special exception permit issued pursuant to this chapter. The
full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect
throughout the term of the special use permit or special exception permit
and/or until the removal of the wireless telecommunications facility and
any necessary site restoration is completed. The failure to pay any annual
premium for the renewal of any such security shall be a violation of the
provisions of the special use permit or special exception permit and shall
entitle the Council to revoke the special use permit or special exception
permit after prior written notice to the applicant and holder of the permit.
§ 196-21. Reservation of authority to inspect wireless
telecommunications facilities.
§ 196-22. NIER certification.
A. In order to verify that the holder of a special use permit, special
exception permit, or eligible facility permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility and any and all lessees, renters and/or
licensees of a wireless telecommunications facility place and construct
such facilities, including towers and antennas, in accordance with all
applicable technical, safety, fire, building and zoning codes, laws,
ordinances and regulations and other applicable requirements, the City
may inspect all facets of said permit holder's, renter's, lessee's or
licensee's placement, construction, modification and maintenance of
such facilities, including but not limited to towers, antennas and
buildings or other supporting structures constructed or located on the
permitted site. The applicant shall pay for costs associated with such an
inspection.
B. Payment of such costs shall be made to the City within 30 days from the
date of the invoice or other demand for reimbursement. In the event
that the finding(s) of violation is (are) appealed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this chapter, said reimbursement payment must
still be paid to the City, and the reimbursement shall be placed in an
escrow account established by the City specifically for this purpose,
pending the final decision on appeal.
A. Every wireless telecommunications facility must meet FCC RF emission
standards as the same may be amended from time to time.
B. Except as prohibited by law, City may require any person controlling a
wireless telecommunications facility to provide proof that the wireless
telecommunications facility satisfies FCC RF emission standards.
C. An applicant for a special use permit, special exception permit, or
eligible facility permit, shall:
(1) At the time of an application provide information sufficient to show
that the facility will comply with FCC RF standards; and
§ 196-20 RYE CODE § 196-22
187:890
§ 196-23. Liability insurance.
§ 196-24. Indemnification.
Any special use permit or special exception permit issued pursuant to this
chapter shall contain a provision with respect to indemnification. Such
(2) Immediately after installation, submit field test measurements
sufficient to show compliance with FCC RF standards at full
operational power. Measurements should be cumulative, and not
just based on facilities that a particular person may own or install
at a location.
D. All special use permit, special exception permit, and eligible facility
permit holders shall submit an annual recertification showing that the
wireless telecommunications facility satisfies FCC RF emission
standards.
A. A holder of a special use permit or special exception permit for a
wireless telecommunications facility shall secure and at all times
maintain public liability insurance, property damage insurance and
umbrella insurance coverage for the duration of the special use permit
in amounts as set forth below:
(1) Special use permits: commercial general liability: $5,000,000 per
occurrence, $10,000,000 aggregate.
(2) Automobile coverage: $1,000,000 per occurrence, $2,000,000
aggregate.
B. The commercial general liability insurance policy shall specifically
include the City and its officials, employees and agents as additional
insureds.
C. The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative of
an insurance company licensed to do business in the state.
D. The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the
insurance company to furnish the City with at least 30 days' written
notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance.
E. Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the
City at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance which such
policies are to renew or replace.
F. Before construction of a permitted wireless telecommunications facility
is initiated, but in no case later than 15 days after the grant of the
special use permit or special exception permit, the holder of the special
use permit or special exception permit shall deliver to the City a copy of
each of the policies or certificates representing the insurance in the
required amounts. All insurance carriers must have an A.M. Best rating
of at least A and be authorized to do business in New York.
§ 196-22 TREES § 196-24
187:891
provision shall require the holder of the special use permit, special
exception permit, or eligible facilities permit, to the extent permitted by
the law, to at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless
and exempt the City, officials of the City, its officers, agents, servants, and
employees from any and all penalties, damage or charges arising out of
any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages,
whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at
law or in equity, which might arise out of, or are caused by, the construction,
erection, modification, location, products performance, operation,
maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal or restoration of
a wireless telecommunications facility within the City (including, by way
of example and not limitation, the same resulting from modification to an
existing supporting structure). With respect to the penalties, damages or
charges referenced herein, reasonable attorneys' fees, consultants' fees,
and expert witness fees are included in those costs that are recoverable by
the City.
§ 196-25. Penalties for offenses.
§ 196-26. Default and/or revocation.
A. Civil sanctions. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than $5,000 for
every such violation. Each consecutive day of violation will be
considered a separate offense. Such civil penalty may be released or
compromised by the City Council. In addition, the City Council shall
have power, following a hearing, to direct the violator to comply with
the provisions of this chapter.
B. Criminal sanctions. Any person, firm or corporation who or which
willfully violates any of the provisions of this chapter or permits
promulgated thereunder, excluding provisions set forth in the rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder, upon conviction thereof of the
first offense, shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not less
than $5,000 and not more than $10,000 and, for a second offense and
each subsequent offense, shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a
fine of not less than $10,000 nor more than $20,000 or a term of
imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both. Each consecutive day
of violation will be considered a separate offense.
C. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter, the holder of the special use
permit, special exception permit, or eligible facility permit for a
wireless telecommunications facility may not use the payment of fines,
liquidated damages or other penalties to evade or avoid compliance
with this chapter or any section of this chapter. An attempt to do so
shall subject the holder of the special use permit, special exception
permit, or eligible facility permit to termination and revocation of such
permit. The City may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the
continued violation of this chapter.
§ 196-24 RYE CODE § 196-26
187:892
§ 196-27. Removal of wireless telecommunications facilities.
A. If a wireless telecommunications facility is repaired, rebuilt, placed,
moved, relocated, modified or maintained in a way that is inconsistent
or not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or of the special
use permit, special exception permit, or eligible facility permit, then the
Council shall notify the holder of the special use permit, special
exception permit, or eligible facility permit, in writing, of such violation.
Such notice shall specify the nature of the violation or noncompliance
and that the violations must be corrected within seven days of the date
of the postmark of the notice, or of the date of personal service of the
notice, whichever is earlier. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
in this subsection or any other section of this chapter, if the violation
causes, creates or presents an imminent danger or threat to the health
or safety of lives or property, the Council may, at its sole discretion,
order the violation remedied within 24 hours.
B. If within the period set forth in Subsection A above the wireless
telecommunications facility is not brought into compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, or of the special use permit, special exception
permit, or eligible facility permit or substantial steps are not taken in
order to bring the affected wireless telecommunications facility into
compliance, then the Council may revoke such special use permit or
special exception permit for a wireless telecommunications facility and
shall notify the holder of the special use permit or special exception
permit within 48 hours of such action.
C. Without limiting the foregoing, if a supporting structure, accessory
facility or structure, or tower no longer complies with applicable codes,
and may no longer be safely used to support other elements of a
wireless telecommunications facility, the City may require removal of
those elements, in addition to taking any action against the owner of the
supporting structure or tower.
A. Under the following circumstances, the Council may determine that the
health, safety and welfare interests of the City warrant and require the
removal of a wireless telecommunications facility:
(1) A wireless telecommunications facility with a permit has been
abandoned (i.e., not used as a wireless telecommunications facility)
for a period exceeding 90 days or a total of 180 days in any 365-day
period, except for periods caused by force majeure or acts of God.
(2) A permitted wireless telecommunications facility falls into such a
state of disrepair that it creates a health or safety hazard.
(3) A wireless telecommunications facility has been located,
constructed or modified without first obtaining the required special
use permit, or any other necessary authorization.
§ 196-26 TREES § 196-27
187:893
(4) A wireless telecommunications facility that has allowed its special
use permit or special exception permit to lapse or has otherwise
failed to timely comply with providing the City with the required
inspection reports, NIER certifications or other information in
order to confirm such facility's compliance with this chapter.
B. If the Council makes such a determination as noted in Subsection A of
this section, then the Council shall notify the holder of the special use
permit or special exception permit for the wireless telecommunications
facility within 48 hours that said wireless telecommunications facility is
to be removed. The Council may approve an interim temporary use
agreement/permit, such as to enable the sale of the wireless
telecommunications facility.
C. The holder of the special use permit or special exception permit, or its
successors or assigns, shall dismantle and remove such wireless
telecommunications facility, and all associated supporting structures or
portions of supporting structures and accessory facilities and
structures used solely by it, from the site and restore the site to as close
to its original condition as is possible, such restoration being limited
only by physical or commercial impracticability, within 90 days of
receipt of written notice from the Council. However, if the owner of the
property upon which the wireless telecommunications facility is located
wishes to retain any access roadway to the wireless
telecommunications facility, the owner may do so with the approval of
the Council.
D. If removal, or substantial progress to complete removal has not
occurred within 90 days after the permit holder has received notice,
then the Council may order officials or representatives of the City to
remove the wireless telecommunications facility and associated
structures at the sole expense of the owner or permit holder.
E. If the owner of property that is removed does not claim the property
and remove the property from the site to a lawful location within 10
days, then the City may take steps to declare the property abandoned
and sell it and its components.
F. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the Council
may approve a temporary use agreement/permit for the wireless
telecommunications facility, for no more 90 days, during which time a
suitable plan for removal, conversion or relocation of the affected
wireless telecommunications facility shall be developed by the holder of
the permit, subject to the approval of the Council, and an agreement to
such plan shall be executed by the holder of the permit and the City. If
such a plan is not developed, approved and executed within the ninetyday
time period, then the City may take possession of and dispose of the
affected wireless telecommunications facility in the manner provided in
this section.
§ 196-27 RYE CODE § 196-28
187:894
§ 196-28. Applicability of application requirements and permit
conditions.
§ 196-29. Adherence to state and/or federal rules and regulations.
§ 196-30. Conflict with other laws.
Where this chapter differs or conflicts with other laws, rules and
regulations, unless the right to do so is preempted or prohibited by the
county, state or federal government, the more restrictive or protective of
the City and the public shall apply.
A. Any applicant can request the waiver of application requirements that
are inapplicable to their permit application. Such request shall be in
writing. Requests should be discussed at the pre-application meeting.
The applicant shall have the burden of supporting such requests.
Determinations as to applicability of application requirements shall be
made by the City.
B. In determining permit conditions, the City Council can waive
inapplicable permit requirements, consistent with the policy goals and
priorities of this chapter. The applicant shall have the burden of
supporting such requests. Determinations as to applicability of permit
condition requirements shall be made by the City Council.
A. To the extent that the holder of a special use permit, special exception
permit, or eligible facility permit for a wireless telecommunications
facility has not received relief, or is otherwise exempt, from appropriate
state and/or federal agency rules or regulations, then the holder of such
a special use permit, special exception permit, or eligible facility permit
shall adhere to and comply with all applicable rules, regulations,
standards and provisions of any state or federal agency, including but
not limited to the FAA and the FCC. Specifically included in this
requirement are any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting,
security, electrical and RF emission standards.
B. To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards and
provisions of any state or federal agency, including but not limited to
the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and
regulations regarding height, lighting and security, are changed and/or
are modified during the duration of a special use permit, special
exception permit, or eligible facility permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility, then the holder of such permit shall
conform the permitted wireless telecommunications facility to the
applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard or
provision within a maximum of 24 months of the effective date of the
applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation, standard or
provision, or earlier as may be required by the issuing entity.
§ 196-28 TREES § 196-31
187:895
§ 196-31. Severability.
If any phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection or other portion of this
chapter or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is
declared void, unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, then such word,
phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection or other portion, or the
proscribed application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining
provisions of this chapter, and all applications thereof, not having been
declared void, unconstitutional or invalid, shall remain in full force and
effect.
§ 196-32. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector or the City
Engineer in the same manner as provided in Chapter 197, Zoning.
§ 196-33. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law. This
chapter shall supersede the provisions of City law to the extent it is
inconsistent with the same, and to the extent permitted by the New York
State Constitution, the Municipal Home Rule Law or any other applicable
statute.
Chapter 197
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Architectural review — See Ch. 53.
Building construction — See Ch. 68.
Coastal Zone management waterfront
consistency review — See Ch. 73.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 87.
Filling and dredging — See Ch. 92.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 102.
Landmarks preservation — See Ch. 117.
Signs — See Ch. 165.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 170.
Surface water control — See Ch. 173.
§ 196-31 RYE CODE § 196-33
187:896
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 197-1. Definitions and usage. [Amended 7-17-1957; 1-21-1959;
11-15-1967 by Ord. No. 4-1967; 10-18-1972 by Ord. No. 2-1972;
3-5-1980 by Ord. No. 3-1980; 9-18-1985 by Ord. No. 9-1985;
11-28-1990 by Ord. No. 19-1990; 6-19-1991 by Ord. No. 13-1991;
1-20-1999 by Ord. No. 2-1999]
A. Definitions. Certain words in this chapter are defined for the purpose
thereof as follows:
ACCESSORY USE — See "use, accessory."
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within the City of Rye subject to a one-percent or greater chance
of flooding in any given year, as shown on the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map as being within the one-hundred-year-flood boundary.
ATTIC — The area between the top of the ceiling joists of any story and
the roof rafters.[Amended 7-16-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003]
AUTOMOBILE TRAILER or HOUSE CAR — Any vehicle used or
arranged to be used for living or as sleeping quarters, mounted on
wheels and movable or propelled either by its own power or drawn
by another power vehicle. Self-propelled vehicles used primarily for
transportation, less than 18 feet long and with not more than two axles,
shall not be considered a "house car.
BASEMENT — A portion of a building partially underground but having
more than half of its clear height below the average elevation of the
adjoining ground. Clear height shall be measured from the finished
floor to the finished ceiling or, in the event of an unfinished basement,
from the floor to the bottom of the joists supporting the floor
immediately above. Floors partially underground that existed prior to
July 3, 2003, shall be considered basements where they meet the
definition of "story, first, ground or lowest" as defined in this
section.[Added 7-16-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003]
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by
walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or chattel.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate building or a portion of the
main building on a lot, the use of which is customarily incidental to that
of the main or principal building.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average finished
grade adjacent to the perimeter of all exterior walls of the building to
the highest point of the roof, if the roof is flat or mansard, or to the
average level between the eaves and the highest point of the roof, if the
roof is of any other type.[Amended 7-16-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003]
§ 197-1 TREES § 197-1
187:897
BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted
the main or principal use of the lot on which it is located.
COASTAL ZONE — That portion of the City of Rye delineated as the
"Coastal Zone" on the New York State Coastal Zone Area Map, and as
amended.
COURT — An open, unoccupied space other than a yard, on the same
lot with a building or group of buildings and which is bounded on two
or more sides by such building or buildings.
COURT HEIGHT — The height of a court shall be measured from the
level of the windowsills of the lowest story it is required to serve.
COURT LENGTH — The horizontal dimension of a court at right angles
to its width.
COURT, OUTER AND INNER — An "outer court" is one which extends
directly to and opens for its full width on a street or other permanent
public open space at least 20 feet wide, or on a rear yard as herein
required. An "inner court" is any other court.
COURT WIDTH — The width of an outer court is that horizontal
dimension which is substantially parallel to the principal open end of
such court. The width of an inner court is its least horizontal dimension.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms providing living facilities for
one family, including equipment for cooking or provisions for the same,
and including room or rooms for living, sleeping and eating.
FAMILY — A single individual living on the premises as a separate
housekeeping unit, or a collective body of one or more persons living
together on the premises as a single housekeeping unit in a domestic
relationship based on birth, marriage or other domestic bond.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated the areas of
special flood hazard and the regulatory floodway in the City of Rye,
effective April 1, 1980, and as amended.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of the building, excluding basements and attics, except
where regulated by § 197-43.2. All horizontal dimensions shall be taken
from the exterior faces of walls. See also § 197-43.2 for the computing
of gross floor area for single-family residences located in one-family
districts (i.e., R-1 through R-6).[Amended 7-16-2003 by L.L. No.
6-2003]
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The gross floor area of all buildings on a
lot, including accessory buildings, divided by the total lot area.[Added
7-16-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003]
HIGHWAY, ARTERIAL — A street in the City of Rye designated as an
arterial highway by the Superintendent of Public Works of the State of
New York according to Chapter 543 of the Laws of 1944, as amended.
§ 197-1 RYE CODE § 197-1
187:898
HOTEL — A building or part thereof containing six or more rooms,
without individual kitchen facilities, occupied or to be occupied
primarily by transients for sleeping purposes for compensation, and
where there may be a general kitchen, dining room and other public
rooms for the use of all guests.
LODGING HOUSE — A building or part thereof containing more than
two but less than six rooms, without individual kitchen facilities,
occupied or to be occupied for sleeping purposes for compensation.
"Lodging house" shall include "rooming house" and "boardinghouse"
but not "hotel" or "motel."
LOT — A parcel of land in the same recorded ownership, devoted or
to be devoted to one main building or use or to an integrated group of
buildings with its accessory buildings and the required open spaces.
LOT AREA — The horizontal area of a lot or parcel bound by property
lines, not including any area in a public or private street or any
watercourse or wetland (including any illegally filled-in watercourse or
wetland), except as provided for in § 197-38.[Amended 7-19-2006 by
L.L. No. 8-2006]
LOT, CORNER — Any lot which has an interior angle of more than 45º
and of less than 135º at the intersection of two street lot lines.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal dimension measured from the front
or street lot line in the general direction of the side lot lines.
LOT WIDTH (at any point) — The horizontal dimension at any point
measured at right angles to the lot depth.
MOTEL — A hotel having an outside entrance for each sleeping unit and
provided with automobile parking spaces directly accessible to each
such unit.
PHYSICAL FITNESS FACILITY — An establishment or use where
physical exercise or training is conducted on an individual or group
basis, using exercise equipment or open floor space with or without
instruction with a personal trainer and/or in a group class, to include,
but not be limited to, the following: weight training, yoga, gymnastics,
spin, aerobics, martial arts, wrestling, boxing, etc. Support functions
accessory to the principal use include a child care area, spas, lockers,
showers, health food bar, game or party room, counter and sales desk
for sports health or fitness items associated with the facility.[Added
7-17-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
PREEXISTING GRADE — The topographic elevation of a property that
exists at the date of the submission of an application for any City permit
or any application to any board, commission or department, whichever
is earlier.[Added 7-16-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003]
RESTRICTED, MORE AND LESS — A use district is "more restricted" if
it is listed earlier in § 197-2 and "less restricted" if listed later.
§ 197-1 TREES § 197-1
187:899
ROOM, HABITABLE — A living, dining or sleeping room, a kitchen or
other room in a residential structure which is not a bath or toilet room
and not used exclusively for storage or accessory purposes.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there be no
floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next
above it. A mezzanine shall be deemed a full story where it covers more
than 50% of the ground story area.
STORY, FIRST, GROUND OR LOWEST — The story whose floor is not
more than three feet below the average ground level at the exterior
walls of the building, such ground level to be measured at the top of
any areaways, except that any lower story used for residence other than
for a janitor or caretaker or his family shall be deemed a ground story.
A basement shall not be considered a story.[Amended 7-16-2003 by
L.L. No. 6-2003]
STORY, HALF — A space under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the gross
floor area of which (measured between the wall plates of at least two
opposite exterior walls extending two or more feet above the floor of
such story) does not exceed 60% of the floor area of the next floor area
immediately below.[Amended 12-18-2013 by L.L. No. 5-201396]
STREET LINE — A line dividing the lot from a street.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction
framed of component structural parts for occupancy or use, including
buildings.
UPLAND — All that land or area other than wetland above the mean
high-tide line.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to
include any nonconforming use.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such
principal use or building.
USE, NONCONFORMING — A use of land or a building that does not
conform to the use regulations of this chapter for the district in which
it is located, which use was in existence and lawful at the time this
chapter or amendments thereto became effective.
WATERCOURSE — As per § 195-3 of the Rye City Code.[Amended
7-19-2006 by L.L. No. 8-2006]
WETLAND — As per § 195-3 of the Rye City Code.[Amended
7-19-2006 by L.L. No. 8-2006]
96.Editor’s Note: This local law also provided that it shall take effect eight months upon its
adoption and filing with the Secretary of State.
§ 197-1 RYE CODE § 197-1
187:900
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a main building or group
of buildings, extending between the building or group of buildings and
the nearest lot line.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of a lot and
lying between a front lot line of the lot and the nearest point of the
building.
YARD LINE, FRONT — A line bounding the required front yard and
located parallel to the front line of a lot at a depth equal to the required
minimum front yard dimension measured perpendicular to the front lot
line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of a lot and lying
between a rear lot line of the lot and the nearest point of the building.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between a side lot line of a lot and the nearest
point of the building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
B. Use of words. Words used in the present tense include the future; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the
word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "building" includes the
word "structure."
§ 197-1 TREES § 197-1
187:901

ARTICLE II
Districts and Maps
§ 197-2. Districts. [Amended 7-17-1957 by resolution; 11-6-1957;
10-4-1963 by Ord. No. 7-1963; 7-15-1964 by Ord. No. 11-1964;
6-18-1968 by Ord. No. 3-1968; 5-2-1979 by Ord. No. 2-1979;
11-18-1981 by L.L. No. 9-1981; 4-7-1982 by L.L. No. 6-1982;
4-21-1982 by Ord. No. 2-1982; 9-15-1982 by L.L. No. 8-1982;
6-15-1983 by L.L. No. 5-1983; 11-21-1984 by Ord. No. 1-1984;
2-3-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988; 6-19-1991 by L.L. No. 13-1991]
For the purposes of this chapter, the City of Rye is hereby divided into
the following classes of residence, business, parking, floating, landmarks
preservation and coastal zone districts:
A. Residence districts. [Amended 12-2-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
R-1 One-Family Districts — Minimum lot size one acre
R-2 One-Family Districts — Minimum lot size 1/2 acre
R-3 One-Family Districts — Minimum lot size: area of special flood
hazard — 1/2 acre; all other areas — 1/3 acre
R-4 One-Family Districts — Minimum lot size: area of special flood
hazard — 1/2 acre; all other areas — 10,000 square feet
R-5 One-Family Districts. — Minimum lot size: area of special
flood hazard — 1/2 acre; all other areas — 7,500 square feet
R-6 One-Family Districts — Minimum lot size: area of special flood
hazard — 1/2 acre; all other areas — 6,000 square feet
RS School and Church Districts
RT Two-Family Districts — Minimum area per family 3,000
square feet
RA-1 Garden Apartment Districts — Minimum area per family 5,000
square feet
RA-2 Apartment Districts — Minimum area per family 3,500 square
feet
RA-3 Apartment Districts — Minimum area per family 2,500 square
feet
RA-4 Apartment Districts — Minimum area per family 2,500 square
feet
RA-5 Senior Citizens Apartment Districts — Minimum area per
family 800 square feet
RA-6 Active Senior Residence District — Minimum area per family
2,000 square feet
B. Business districts.
§ 197-2 TREES § 197-2
187:903
§ 197-3. Zoning Map; Parking Districts Map. [Amended 7-17-1957;
5-2-1979 by Ord. No. 2-1979]
B-1 Neighborhood Business Districts
B-2 Central Business Districts
B-3 Beach Business Districts
B-4 Office Building Districts
B-5 Interchange Office Building Districts
B-6 General Business Districts
B-7 Waterfront Business Districts
C. Parking districts.
A Core Central Business District
B Peripheral Central Business District
C Remainder of City of Rye
D. Floating districts.
RFWP Residential Floodplain and Wetland Preservation District
E. Landmarks preservation districts.
LPD Landmarks Preservation District
LPD- Landmarks Preservation District — Alansten A
F. Coastal Zone districts.
MC Membership Club District
WR Waterfront Recreation district
C Conservation District
A. Zoning Map. The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as
shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map of the City of Rye, New York,"
which accompanies and is hereby made a part of this chapter.97 The
district boundary lines are intended in the main to follow lot lines as
they existed on the effective date of this section, but where such a
boundary line obviously does not coincide with the lot lines, or where it
is not the center line of a railroad right-of-way or of a street or
watercourse or the shoreline of a body of water, or where it is not
located by dimensions shown on the map, its position shall be as shown
on the map by scaled measurement. Where a right-of-way, street or
watercourse is shown as a district boundary line, the center line is
intended to be the boundary line. If the district classification of any land
is in question, it shall be deemed to be in the most restricted adjoining
97.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 197-2 RYE CODE § 197-3
187:904
district. The district classification of any water area within the City of
Rye inshore from the mean low-tide line on the effective date of this
section shall be deemed to be the same as the classification of the
adjoining land area; and the district area extending outward from the
shore beyond the said mean low-tide line shall be "R-1."
B. Parking Districts Map. The boundaries of the parking districts are
established as shown on the map entitled "Parking Districts Map,"
which accompanies and is made part of this chapter.98
98.Editor's Note: The Parking District Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 197-3 TREES § 197-3
187:905

ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 197-4. Compliance required.
No building, structure or premises shall hereafter be used and no building
or part thereof or other structure shall be erected, moved, reconstructed,
enlarged or altered except in conformity with regulations herein specified
for the district in which it is located. No existing yard, lot area, dimension
or other requirement shall be diminished below the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 197-5. Continuing or replacing existing uses or structures.
A. Regulation of nonconforming uses or structures.
(1) Any building, structure or use existing on the effective date of this
section which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter for
the district in which it is located may be continued subject to the
requirements of this Article.
(2) An existing nonconforming use may be replaced by another
nonconforming use, provided no structural alterations are made,
and provided the substituted use is not prohibited in the most
restricted district in which such existing nonconforming use is
allowed and is approved as not more objectionable by the Board of
Appeals, subject to appropriate conditions.
(3) If a nonconforming use of buildings or land shall have been
changed to a more restricted use, it may not be changed to a less
restricted use.
(4) If a nonconforming use shall cease for a period of six months or
longer, it shall not be resumed.
(5) No nonconformity as to use shall be increased or enlarged, except
under the provisions of § 197-82. [Amended 2-5-1992 by L.L. No.
1-1992]
(6) No structure used for a nonconforming use shall be reestablished,
restored or used if the structure is destroyed, damaged or removed
by any cause if the cost of such re-establishment or restoration
would, according to the estimate of the Building Inspector, exceed
50% of the assessed value of the structure at the time of the
destruction, damage or removal; but if such cost would be less than
50% of such value, it may be restored or used, provided that it is
done within 12 months of such time. In a specific case involving
unnecessary hardship, the Board of Appeals may permit such reestablishment,
restoration or use even though such cost would
exceed 50% of such assessed value, provided that it would not
exceed 50% of the reproduction value of the damaged structure at
such time of damage, except as provided for in § 197-5A(10) and
§ 197-4 TREES § 197-5
187:907
(12). In cases involving water-dependent uses and related
structures, the Board of Appeals may permit such re-establishment,
restoration or use even though such cost would exceed 50% of
the assessed value or reproduction value, provided that the
reestablished or restored use and structures will result in no
greater intensity of activity and development than the use and
structures at the time they were destroyed or damaged, the cost
of the re-establishment or restoration will not exceed 100% of
the reproduction value of the damaged structures at such time
of damage and the work will be done within 12 months after
approvals are obtained from all other government agencies.
[Amended 6-19-1991 by L.L. No. 11-1991; 12-1-1993 by L.L.
No. 11-1993]
(7) A building that is conforming in use but does not conform to the
height, yard or land coverage requirements of this chapter shall not
be considered to be nonconforming within the meaning of
Subsection A(2), (3), (4), (5), (6) and (8) of this Subsection A.
However, no permit shall be issued that will result in the increase
of any nonconformity in height, yard space or land coverage except
as provided in § 197-81 of this chapter. [Amended 8-15-1990 by
L.L. No. 13-1990; 2-5-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992]
(8) Any use permitted under this chapter in the district in which it is
located only by special permit from the Board of Appeals or the
Planning Commission, which use was in existence prior to the
enactment of such requirement for a special permit, shall be
considered to be a conforming use.
(9) A building or structure in an area of special flood hazard, as shown
on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map or Flood Insurance Rate
Map, that is conforming in use but does not conform to the
requirements of § 197-6.1 of this chapter shall not be considered
nonconforming within the meaning of § 197-5. However, no permit
shall be issued for further development of said building or
structure except as provided for in § 197-6.1 of this chapter.
[Added 3-5-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980]
(10) In a Membership Club District, club uses, buildings, structures,
features and other development existing on June 28, 1991, that do
not conform to current property line setback requirements shall
not be considered nonconforming within the meaning of this
Subsection A. Such uses, buildings, structures, features and other
development, if destroyed or damaged, may be replaced, restored
or reestablished in the same location, provided that the replaced,
restored or reestablished uses, buildings, structures, features and
other development will not be closer to a property line, be larger or
result in a greater intensity of activity than before they were
destroyed or damaged. In addition, the cost of the replacement, reestablishment
or restoration shall not exceed 100% of the
reproduction value of the damaged structures at such time of
§ 197-5 RYE CODE § 197-5
187:908
damage, and the work shall be done within 12 months after
approvals are obtained from all other government agencies.
[Added 6-19-1991 by L.L. No. 14-1991]
(11) Lots created by the donation of portions of historic sites, and the
lands, buildings and structures located thereon, to a nonprofit
organization for the purposes of historic preservation and adaptive
reuse, which do not conform to the provisions of this Chapter for
the district in which these lots are located shall be considered to be
conforming, subject to the following limitations: [Added
6-16-1993 by L.L. No. 6-1993]
(a) The land and buildings located thereon are designated as
protected sites and structures pursuant to Chapter 117,
Landmarks Preservation, of the Code of the City of Rye, and
listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
(b) A certificate of appropriateness is obtained from the Board of
Architectural Review pursuant to Chapter 117, Landmarks
Preservation, of the Code of the City of Rye.
(c) Site plan approval pursuant to § 197-7, Site development plan,
of the Code of the City of Rye and approval of an adaptive reuse
pursuant to § 197-10, Uses permitted subject to additional
standards and requirements, of the Code of the City of Rye are
obtained from the Planning Commission.
(12) In cases involving waterfront recreational facilities owned by
neighborhood associations, such uses, buildings, structures,
features and other development existing on June 28, 1991, that do
not conform to current requirements of the Code of the City of Rye
shall not be considered nonconforming within the meaning of this
Subsection A. Such uses, buildings, structures, features and other
development, if destroyed or damaged, may be replaced, restored
or reestablished in the same location, provided that the replaced,
restored or reestablished uses, buildings, structures, features and
other development will not be closer to a property line, larger or
result in a greater intensity of activity than before they were
destroyed or damaged. In addition, the cost of the replacement, reestablishment
or restoration shall not exceed 100% of the
reproduction value of the damaged structures at such time of
damage, and the work shall be done within 12 months after
approvals are obtained from all other government agencies.
Restorations, re-establishment and replacements smaller than 200
square feet shall not require Zoning Board of Appeals approval.
[Added 12-1-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993]
B. Restoring unsafe buildings. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any
building or structure declared unsafe by the Building Inspector, or
compliance with his lawful requirements.
§ 197-5 TREES § 197-5.1
187:909
§ 197-5.1. Floodplain zoning. [Added 5-3-1978 by Ord. No. 1-1978]
Residential structures shall have the lowest habitable floor elevated to at
least one foot above the one-hundred-year flood, defined as the highest level
of flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years, i.e.,
that has a one-percent chance of occurring each year.
§ 197-5.1 RYE CODE § 197-5.1
187:910
ARTICLE IV
Use Regulations
§ 197-6. Uses regulated by districts. [Amended 8-20-1958]
In each district as established by § 197-2, the use of the land, structures
and premises shall be regulated as set forth in the Table of Regulations,
incorporated herein as Article VIII, and as further regulated hereinafter.
Only those uses listed under each district in the Tables of Regulations by
name or by reference to another district shall be permitted in said district.
§ 197-6.1. Development in areas of special flood hazard. [Added
3-5-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980; amended 6-15-1988 by L.L. No.
10-1988]
No land, building or structure located in an area of special flood hazard
shall be developed, altered, extended, converted or enlarged within the
area of special flood hazard except in compliance with the requirements of
Chapter 100 of this Code.
§ 197-7. Site development plan. [Amended 9-21-1960; 4-1-1964 by
Ord. No. 3-1964; 10-18-1972 by Ord. No. 2-1972; 6-16-1976 by Ord.
No. 8-1976; 10-4-1978 by Ord. No. 3-1978; 11-15-1989 by L.L. No.
13-1989; 4-3-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991; 12-18-1991 by L.L. No.
26-1991; 11-20-1996 by L.L. No. 10-1996]
A. A site development plan for the entire lot shall be approved by the
Planning Commission in the same manner as prescribed by the City of
Rye for the approval of a subdivision, except as provided for in
Subsection C of this section, in conjunction with the following:
(1) The construction or establishment of the following structures or
uses, or their enlargement, extension or change in such a manner
as to increase the ratio of floor area to lot area by 10% or more
above that existing on January 1, 1964, or in such a manner as to
affect required additional off-street parking or access from streets
to the premises, or design of interiors, entrances, exits or hallways
of buildings to accommodate additional occupancies or changes of
occupancy:
(a) A residential use involving the housing of three or more
families on one lot or a residential care facility.
(b) A nonresidential use or structure or a group of uses or
structures aggregating more than 1,000 square feet of gross
floor or land area.
(c) A nonresidential use of vacant land as a main use on a lot.
(d) Any use of a lot containing land created by the filling of a
wetland or watercourse where a permit for such filling and a
site plan were not required at the time such land was created,
§ 197-6 TREES § 197-7
187:911
§ 197-8. Apartment regulations.
The construction or remodeling of a structure or group of structures
housing three or more families on one lot shall be subject to the following
requirements:
as is provided for in Subsection A(2)99 of this section and
Section 8-4.1 of the General Ordinances of the City.
B. The Planning Commission may require as a condition of approval such
modifications of a site plan and/or permit as it deems necessary to
ensure compliance with the spirit as well as the letter of this chapter.
Such conditions may include those authorized by §§ 117-9 and 170-18 of
this Code. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued
for development or use of such property except in conformity with the
approved site development plan. In addition, the Commission may
authorize such development to be undertaken in stages, provided that
each stage and any combination of stages would, upon completion,
constitute an appropriate development of the site.
C. In the case of a lot with a legally existing building for which a site
development plan was not required at the time it was constructed or
last modified, the owner or applicant need not apply for preliminary site
development plan approval and may apply directly for final site
development plan approval. Upon receipt of a complete application for
final site plan approval, submitted as provided for in this subsection,
the City Planner may schedule the application for a public hearing at
the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission.
A. No building shall contain more than six dwelling units on each floor, nor
exceed 120 feet in maximum horizontal dimension. [Amended
10-24-1963 by Ord. No. 7-1963]
B. Each dwelling unit shall have access to a secondary service entrance to
the building within which it is located, if primary access to the dwelling
unit is through a main entrance to the building serving several dwelling
units in the building. [Amended 2-7-1990 by Ord. No. 2-1990]
C. There shall be garage or parking space as required by § 197-28. In
order that some of these spaces may be convenient for use by visitors as
well as occupants, 1/2 of the required car spaces shall be directly
accessible and within 100 feet by the normal approach from the street
to the main entrance of the residential building they serve. At least 2/3
of the required car spaces shall be outdoor spaces. However, the
Planning Commission, when acting on a particular site plan, may
approve covered or garage parking up to 2/3 of the required car spaces
if it finds that the design and location of such spaces is such that it is
99.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A2, which immediately followed this subsection and
listed conditions to be considered by the Planning Commission prior to taking action on a
dredging permit and joint site plan application, was repealed 12-18-1991 by L.L. No.
26-1991.
§ 197-7 RYE CODE § 197-8
187:912
§ 197-8.1. Active Senior Residence District Regulations. [Added
12-2-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
reasonable to expect that visitors and occupants will actually park their
cars there in normal usage, except when a particular site abuts the
B-2 Central Business District all spaces may be coverage or garaged.
[Amended 4-1-1964 by Ord. No. 4-1964; 7-17-1996 by L.L. No.
6-1996]
D. The Planning Commission may modify the requirements of Subsections
A and C of this section where in its judgment it deems such
modifications desirable and appropriate because of the characteristics
of the specific site, such as topography, size, shape and location thereof.
[Added 5-7-1969 by Ord. No. 1-1969]
E. If the Planning Commission finds that a general surface water problem
in the vicinity of a site can be improved by incorporating the surface
water runoff from the proposed site improvements and the surface
water runoff in the vicinity of the site into a single stormwater retention
facility, it may reduce the required front, side and rear yards specified
in the Table of Regulations for RA Apartment Districts, but to no less
than the requirements for the next-less-restrictive RA Apartment
District, to properly locate the buildings, parking and the stormwater
retention facility. [Added 2-20-1980 by L.L. No. 2-1980]
A. Limitations on occupancy.
(1) The occupancy of residential units within the Active Senior
Residence Zone shall be limited to:
(a) A single person 55 years of age or older;
(b) Two or three persons, all of whom are 55 years of age or older;
(c) A married couple, live-in companion, or partner, one of which is
55 years of age or older;
(d) The surviving spouse of a person 55 years of age or older,
provided that the surviving spouse was duly registered as a
resident of the development at the time of the elderly person's
death;
(e) One adult 18 years of age or older residing with a person who
is 55 years of age or older, provided that said adult is essential
to the long-term care of the elderly person as certified by a
physician duly licensed in New York State
(2) Persons under the age of 55 not specifically permitted to be
occupants shall not be permitted to be permanent residents of
dwelling units. For the purposes of this section, a "permanent
resident" shall mean any person who resides within the dwelling
for more than three consecutive weeks or in excess of 30 days in
§ 197-8 TREES § 197-8.1
187:913
any calendar year, or has listed the residence as an abode for
any purpose whatsoever, including, but not limited to, enrollment
in public or private schools. Temporary occupancy by guests of
families shall be permitted, provided that such occupancy does not
exceed a total of 30 days in any calendar year.
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing, one dwelling unit within the
community may be set aside to be occupied by a superintendent or
building manager, to which the limitations on occupancy set forth
above shall not apply.
(4) The limitations on occupancy shall be included in the marketing
materials for the development as well as within the rules and
regulations or terms of any leases, bylaws or covenants and
restrictions for the development. Violations of the limitations on
occupancy shall be enforceable by the City of Rye Building
Inspector against the owner or lessee or the agent of any of them
and shall be punishable by a fine of $250 per day or by
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Exceptions to these regulations shall be granted if
any limitations are determined to be in violation of any state or
federal law.
(5) The Planning Commission shall have the right to require that the
owner execute agreements and covenants as it may deem to be
required during any site plan approval process as it may reasonably
deem to be required to ensure compliance with the stated intent of
this section. Said agreements or covenants shall be recorded in the
office of the Westchester County Clerk and constitute a covenant
running with the land. Such covenant or agreement may be
modified or released only as set forth in said covenant or
agreement or by the City Council.
B. Site development
(1) At least 80% of the required parking for the development shall be
provided in a covered parking structure within the basement level
of the principal structure(s).
(2) For any corner lot abutting Boston Post Road or Old Post Road, the
front lot line of the lot shall be Boston Post Road or Old Post Road
for purposes of the applicable front yard setback, irrespective of
building arrangement. The provisions of § 197-52 shall not apply to
properties in the RA-6 Zone.
(3) The provisions of § 197-8A and C shall not apply to properties in the
RA-6 Zone.
(4) A landscaping buffer a minimum of 10 feet wide shall be required to
be provided around the perimeter of the site.
(5) A maximum building coverage of 35% shall be permitted.
§ 197-8.1 RYE CODE § 197-8.1
187:914
§ 197-9. Accessory uses. [Amended 10-24-1963 by Ord. No. 7-1963;
6-18-1968 by Ord. No. 3-1968; 4-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985;
10-8-1997 by L.L. No. 12-1997]
C. Capital improvement contribution.
(1) The City Council has found that projects of the size and scope as
reasonably anticipated to be developed within this zoning district
will result in additional demands upon City infrastructure and
community facilities. The City Council has found that, to effect an
equitable balancing of the costs associated with the infrastructure
and facility needs, there should be a fair assessment of a financial
"capital improvement contribution" from new development under
this zoning district.
(2) The capital improvement contribution for any new development
proposed within this zoning district shall be $10,000 per new
dwelling unit.
(3) The capital improvement contribution shall be a one-time fee paid
by the property owner and/or developer at the time a building
permit is issued and shall be calculated based on the amount of
new dwelling units approved in such application.
(4) The provisions of this section shall apply to any new development
or additions to any existing development within this zoning district.
(5) Any capital improvement contributions collected under this section
shall be used by the City solely for the purpose of capital
improvements to offset the additional demands and impacts
relating to approved Active Senior Residence applications.
A. Residence districts. Permitted accessory uses, except wireless
telecommunications facilities as set forth in Subsection A(5) of this
subsection, shall be limited to uses not only customarily incidental to,
but in fact accessory to and a minor part of, a permitted main use, and
subject to the following specific provisions:
(1) No private way or walk giving access to a use not permitted in the
district shall be permitted as an accessory use in any district.
(2) No portions of a detached garage or other accessory structure shall
be provided with cooking facilities or otherwise equipped as a
housekeeping unit except for occupancy by domestic employees of
the owners or tenants of the main building. Any such accessory
building so used shall have the same front, side and rear yards as
are required of a principal residential building in that district.
(3) Garage space or current parking space may be provided for two
motor vehicles on any lot. In an R-1 to RT District inclusive, space
for one additional motor vehicle may be provided for each 3,000
square feet by which the area of the lot exceeds 5,000 square feet;
§ 197-8.1 TREES § 197-9
187:915
but a garage for more than five vehicles shall be at least 50 feet
from every lot line. Not more than one commercial vehicle and not
exceeding one-half-ton weight or capacity may be currently parked
or garaged on any lot, except that farms or truck gardens are
not subject to this limitation. Space for one noncommercial vehicle
may be rented to persons not resident on the same lot. The above
provisions apply also to private stables, one horse being considered
as the equivalent of two motor vehicles. In an RA-1, RA-2, RA-3 or
RA-4 District, there may be accessory garage space not over one
story high for one car for each dwelling unit on the lot, but no such
building shall be within 10 feet of any lot line.
(4) A satellite earth station dish antenna that is an incidental and
accessory use to the permitted main residence and is for the
exclusive use of the occupants of the residence and their guests
may be permitted by the Board of Architectural Review, subject to
the following conditions:
(a) It shall be located in the rear yard.
(b) It shall be ground-mounted.
(c) It shall be set back from side and rear property lines at least 20
feet in R-1 Districts and 15 feet in all other districts.
(d) The overall height, measured from the average natural grade
to the highest part of the dish antenna, and width and depth of
the dish antenna shall each not exceed 15 feet.
(e) It shall be screened, including accessory equipment, from the
view of the street and abutting residentially zoned properties
by a ten-foot-wide landscaping strip planted and maintained
with at least a double row of alternately spaced evergreens,
with an actual height of at least six feet above the natural
grade when installed. The Board of Architectural Review may,
in appropriate cases, approve alternative landscaping for the
same reasons as set forth for alternate landscaping for pools
and courts in § 53-5D(1) through (6) of this Code. In addition,
the Board of Architectural Review may, upon a showing by the
applicant that the required landscaping screen will
significantly diminish the reception capacity of the dish
antenna, modify or vary the landscaping requirements, but
only to the extent that the modification or variation will not be
inconsistent with the spirit and intent of this section or be less
protective of the view from abutting properties.
(5) Wireless telecommunications facilities are subject to the
requirements of Chapter 196, Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities, of this Code.
B. Business and Coastal Zone districts.
§ 197-9 RYE CODE § 197-9
187:916
§ 197-10. Uses permitted subject to additional standards and
requirements. [Amended 7-17-1957; 7-20-1960]
(1) Wireless telecommunications facilities are subject to the
requirements of Chapter 196, Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities, of this Code.
(2) Accessory uses permitted in these districts are found elsewhere in
this chapter.
C. Public buildings and property in all districts. (Reserved)
A. The uses indicated in Column 2 of the Table of Regulations made a part
hereof, entitled "Uses Permitted Subject to Additional Standards and
Requirements," are permitted as follows: Upon receipt of an application
for any such use by the Building Inspector, he shall refer such
application to the Planning Commission of the City at its next regular
meeting. The Planning Commission, after public notice and hearing,
shall within 90 days thereafter file with the Building Inspector a report
on such application so referred to it. The Planning Commission shall, in
each such case, give consideration and effect to the objectives set forth
in Subdivisions 24 and 25 of § 20 of the General City Law, and it shall
give consideration to and make findings as to whether the following
conditions prevail:
(1) In a residence district the proposed use will serve a community
need or convenience.
(2) The proposed use will be appropriate in the proposed location and
will have no material adverse effect on existing or prospective
conforming development, and the proposed site is adequate in size
for the use.
(3) In cases where conversion is proposed of a structure designed and
built originally for other uses, the structure will be adaptable.
(4) The proposed use will be provided with adequate off-street parking
to meet its needs, properly screened from adjoining residential
uses, and entrance and exit drives are to be laid out to minimize
traffic hazards and nuisance.
(5) The potential generation of traffic will be within the reasonable
capacity of the existing or planned streets and highways providing
access to the site.
(6) There are available adequate and proper public or private facilities
for the treatment, removal or discharge of sewage, refuse or other
effluent that may be caused or created by or as a result of the use.
(7) In a Coastal Zone District, a conventional subdivision or a
subdivision lot grouped pursuant to § 197-39 will accomplish the
following: [Added 6-19-1991 by L.L. No. 13-1991]
§ 197-9 TREES § 197-10
187:917
(a) All wetlands and floodplains shall be preserved.
(b) All buildings and facilities shall be so arranged as to preserve
to the maximum extent practical, the view of the shoreline
from public streets.
(c) Where any development borders the waterfront there shall be
a one-hundred-foot-wide strip of land along the waterfront
which shall not include any area of the site below mean sea
level or beyond the upland property line, whichever is most
protective of proper drainage, flood protection and edge effect
along the waterfront.
B. The Commission, in its report, shall also recommend in appropriate
instances whether the maximum size of the establishment in the
number of employees, square feet of floor space, number and size of
dwelling units or other appropriate measure should be limited, and also
the extent of any such limitation required in order to limit the potential
generation of traffic, to limit the impact upon the community of other
consequences of the establishment of such a use and to minimize
potentially adverse effects. [Amended 5-7-1969 by Ord. No. 1-1969]
C. Upon receipt by the Building Inspector of such report of the Planning
Commission showing that said conditions in Subsection A(1) to (6)
inclusive prevail, as well as its recommendations as to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, and upon compliance by the applicant with
the applicable standards and requirements set forth in said Table of
Regulations and in §§ 197-11, 197-12 and 197-84 hereof and the
provisions of the Building Code of the City100 and the provisions of any
other applicable laws and ordinances, the applicant shall, upon the
payment of any fee prescribed therefor, be entitled to a building permit
or certificate of compliance, as the case may be, from the Building
Inspector, subject to the recommended conditions and safeguards. In
the event that the Planning Commission shall not make a finding that
any of the above-enumerated conditions in Subsection A(1) to (6)
inclusive prevail, the Building Inspector shall refuse to issue a building
permit or certificate of compliance, as the case requires.
D. If the Building Inspector, after considering the report and
recommendations of the Planning Commission, issues the permit
applied for or if he refuses to issue such permit, then in either of such
cases any person aggrieved by such determination and action of the
Building Inspector in issuing or refusing to issue such permit may take
an appeal from the Building Inspector's decision and action to the
Board of Appeals as provided in § 197-81 within such period of time as
is prescribed by such Board by general rule and as provided in § 81 of
the General City Law. Said Board is hereby authorized and empowered
in such cases to hear and fully decide and dispose of such matter with
the same force and effect as if this chapter required it in the first
100. Editor's Note: See Ch. 68, Building Construction.
§ 197-10 RYE CODE § 197-10
187:918
§ 197-11. Office buildings in B-4 Districts. [Amended 9-18-1957;
7-20-1960]
Office buildings permitted in B-4 Districts subject to additional standards
and requirements shall also conform to the standards and requirements
listed hereinafter:
instance to pass upon and approve or disapprove any such application
under this section. Said Board of Appeals, in making its decision, may
adopt, modify or reject any of the findings of the Planning Commission
and may make new and/or additional findings. Such Board may reverse
or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision and action of the
Building Inspector appealed from.
A. Procedure. The site development plan, concerning which the Planning
Commission shall make its recommendation prior to the issuance of a
permit therefor by the Building Inspector, shall show all proposed main
and accessory buildings and use of land, including parking and roads,
and uses of floor space, and shall be accompanied by sufficient data to
permit determination of compliance with the regulations and
requirements. Any subsequent change, alteration or addition in the use
of land or buildings shall require a new application. [Amended
9-18-1957]
B. Standards and requirements. [Amended 9-18-1957; 7-20-1960;
10-4-1961 by Ord. No. 14-1961; 4-1-1964 by Ord. No. 5-1964;
8-21-1974 by L.L. No. 4-1974; 4-7-1982 by L.L. No. 6-1982;
1-20-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
(1) Access and service roads from existing streets or highways shall
properly relate to the public street and highway system so as to
avoid unsafe conditions and traffic congestion.
(2) Parking space shall be provided on the lot in conformity with the
provisions of §§ 197-26 to 197-31 inclusive, except that such
parking areas shall be effectively screened from nearby residence
districts by walls, fences or landscaping properly maintained and
shall be set back at least 50 feet from all street and side and rear lot
lines, but between adjoining office building developments,
permanent arrangements for a lesser distance than 50 feet may be
approved.
(3) Signs shall be subject to the regulations provided in Chapter 165,
Signs. There shall be no unshaded light sources, nor shall there be
other illumination such as will be detrimental to any nearby
residential districts. Necessary safety lighting of roads and
buildings and necessary directional signs shall be permitted.
(4) Laboratories for limited scientific research and testing, consisting
of rooms in which are located apparatus for studying or testing of
physical or chemical properties of substances only in small
§ 197-10 TREES § 197-11
187:919
§ 197-12. Uses permitted in B-5 Districts subject to additional
standards and requirements. [Amended 9-18-1957; 7-20-1960]
All uses permitted in B-5 Districts subject to additional standards and
requirements, except those also permitted in R-2 Districts, shall also
conform to the standards and requirements listed hereinafter:
quantities, may be permitted as accessory to office uses, provided
that such laboratories occupy less than 25% of the aggregate floor
area of the establishment, involve no more than 1/3 of all persons
employed and normally present on the site and do not involve
operations or machinery prohibited in a B-6 District.
(5) The following specific prohibitions shall apply particularly to any
uses that may be permitted:
(a) No operation or process shall be permitted which creates
smoke, dust, dirt, fly ash, noise, glare, heat, odor, gases,
vibration, electrical radiation or interference or any other
evidence of potential nuisance which is detectable at the
property line at levels objectionable or inappropriate in a
residential area.
(b) No operation or process shall be permitted that makes
excessive demands upon the water supply, stormwater drains,
sewerage or sewage disposal systems of the community due to
character or amount, unless provision is made by the developer
to meet any off-site costs necessary to meet such demands.
(6) Yard requirements may be reduced or waived for any portion of the
site adjoining a railroad or limited access highway right-of-way, and
side or rear yards may be reduced to no less than 25 feet for any
portion of the site adjoining land in B-5 or B-6 Districts or similar
districts in an adjoining municipality if the Planning Commission, in
its report, finds that such waiver will not be contrary to the general
intent of this chapter and will produce a more efficient site plan.
A. Procedure. The procedure followed for approval of the site development
plan shall be the same as required for office buildings in § 197-11A.
B. Standards and requirements. [Amended 4-1-1964 by Ord. No.
5-1964; 4-7-1982 by L.L. No. 6-1982]
(1) The standards and requirements of § 197-11B(1), (2), (3), (5) and
(6) shall apply.
(2) No building located nearer than 100 feet to a street line facing a
residential district shall have a maximum horizontal dimension
greater than 120 feet or shall be located closer than 60 feet to any
part of any other building that is nearer than 100 feet to a street
line facing a residence district.
§ 197-11 RYE CODE § 197-12.1
187:920
§ 197-12.1. . Wireless telecommunications facilities in B-4, B-5 and
B-6 Districts. 101 [Amended 10-8-1997 by L.L. No. 12-1997]
Wireless telecommunications facilities in B-4, B-5 and B-6 Districts are
subject to additional standards and requirements as set forth in § 197-10,
site development plan review as set forth in § 197-7 and the requirements
of Chapter 196, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities, of this Code.
§ 197-13. Variable height apartment developments. [Added
10-24-1963 by Ord. No. 7-1963]
Variable height apartment developments permitted in RA-4 Districts subject
to additional standards and requirements shall also conform to the
standards and requirements listed hereinafter:
§ 197-13.1. Residential Floodplain and Wetland Preservation
District. [Added 11-18-1981 by L.L. No. 9-1981]
The City of Rye finds that it is in the interest of the public health, safety
and welfare to create a new zoning district zoning category which will
encourage the owners of lots with areas of 10 acres or more located in
R-1 and R-2 Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts, at least 25% of the
acreage of which is a wetland and/or in an area of special flood hazard, to
develop these lots for residential use without locating buildings in the area
of special flood hazard nor in any other way increase flooding elsewhere
in the City of Rye. To implement this policy, the Residential Floodplain and
A. In addition to the findings required by § 197-10, the Planning
Commission shall give consideration to and make findings as to whether
the following conditions prevail:
(1) The topography and natural features of the site make it particularly
suitable for such development.
(2) The design of the development, including buildings and
landscaping, is such as to be in harmony with the prevailing
character of the neighborhood.
B. The maximum height of apartment houses shall not exceed 45 feet or
four stories. The average height of all apartment houses in a
development shall not exceed 30 feet, such average being calculated as
weighted average based on the number of square feet of ground floor
area of buildings for each of such different heights as are being
averaged.
C. No building higher than 30 feet shall be located closer to any lot line
than a distance equal to 1 1/2 times its height. No two buildings shall be
located closer to each other than a distance equal to the average of
their heights.
101. Editor's Note: Former § 197-12.1, Variable-height office buildings, added 4-7-1982 by L.L.
No. 6-1982, was repealed 5-17-1989 by L.L. No. 7-1989.
§ 197-12.1 TREES § 197-13.1
187:921
Wetland Preservation District and the following procedures and standards
have been adopted.
A. Petition and review procedures. The municipal authorities authorized to
act under this section are the City Council and the Planning
Commission. After approval of the rezoning of a site from R.1 or R-2
Single-Family Residential District to Residential Floodplain and
Wetland Preservation District by the City Council, in accordance with
§ 20 of the General City Law and this section, the Planning Commission
shall have site plan review authority as provided for in § 197-7 of this
chapter.
(1) The petition for rezoning, an environmental assessment form and
the preliminary site development plan shall be presented, together
with the filing fee, to the City Clerk, who shall submit the petition,
form and plan to the City Council at its next regular meeting.
(2) Planning Commission recommendation. If the City Council refers
the petition, then within 45 days after receipt of a referred petition
and site development plan and completion of all state
environmental quality review requirements, the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing, unless a public hearing
was already held on the environmental issues, and file a written
report with the City Council, which recommends rezoning with or
without specific conditions or recommends denial of the rezoning.
In recommending, granting or denying the rezoning, the Planning
Commission shall set forth, in writing, findings that the proposed
rezoning would or would not be in the public interest; that the
preliminary plan is or is not consistent with the declaration of
policy and standards and requirements of this section and all other
applicable requirements of the Code of the City of Rye; and that the
preliminary plan does or does not make adequate provision for
public services for control of vehicular traffic, for light and air, for
protection and enhancement of wetlands and areas of special flood
hazard and for other environmental objectives.
(3) City Council action on zoning petition.
(a) If the petition was referred to the Planning Commission, after
receipt of the Planning Commission's recommendation, the
City Council shall hold a public hearing on the rezoning
petition and shall grant approval of the rezoning; grant
approval subject to stated conditions; or deny the rezoning.
(b) If the City Council grants the rezoning, with or without
conditions, the Planning Commission may recommend to the
City Council that the land be rezoned to the prior zoning
designation if one of the following occurs, unless said time
periods are extended by the City Council upon good cause
shown:
§ 197-13.1 RYE CODE § 197-13.1
187:922
[1] The applicant has not filed an application for preliminary
site plan approval with the Planning Commission within 12
months from the date the City Council approved the
rezoning.
[2] The applicant fails to start construction as defined in
§ 100-2 of the Code of the City of Rye and in accordance
with the approved site development plan within 12 months
from the date of final approval by the Planning
Commission.
(4) Such petition shall set forth the name and address of the applicant;
the location of the site proposed to be developed; the nature of the
applicant's interest in the land; the density of the land use to be
allocated to various parts of the site; the use, height, bulk, location
and general design of all buildings and other structures; the
proposed provision for the control of stormwater and the disposal
of sanitary sewage; the substance of any covenants, grants,
easements or any other restrictions proposed to be imposed upon
the land or buildings, including easements for public utilities; the
proposed provisions for parking; locations and widths of proposed
travelways; the projected schedule for development and the
approximate times when final approvals would be requested; and a
statement of why the public interest would be served by the
proposed development. Said statement shall be supported by a
report setting forth the manner in which the proposed development
would satisfy the objectives stated in the declaration of policy of
this section. If the petition is referred to the Planning Commission,
the applicant shall present evidence to the Planning Commission as
to objectives and purpose to be served, satisfactory application of
planning and design standards, economic feasibility and the
projected schedule for development. To this end, factual evidence
and expert opinion shall be submitted by the applicant in the form
of such necessary maps, charts, plans, reports, models and other
tangible materials, prepared by architects, engineers, lawyers,
realtors and economists, as requested by the Planning Commission
so as to state clearly and completely the full nature and extent of
the proposal. If the number of proposed dwelling units is based on
the option in Subsection B(3) of this section, a preliminary
subdivision plat and construction plan shall be submitted.
(5) A site development plan submitted pursuant to this section shall
provide for residential buildings located only outside of any area of
special flood hazard and/or wetland with the intention of
permanently preserving the area of special flood hazard, wetland
and other undeveloped open space and keeping as much of the
existing foliage, particularly around the perimeter of the site, as
possible, and shall comply with the requirements of Subsection B,
Standards, of this section.
B. Standards.
§ 197-13.1 TREES § 197-13.1
187:923
(1) The lot as approved shall have a minimum area of 10 acres under
single ownership.
(2) At least 25% of the lot shall be located in an area of special flood
hazard and/or be an existing wetland. For the purposes of this
calculation, acreage that is located in both a wetland and an area of
special flood hazard shall only be counted once.
(3) The maximum number of dwelling units that may be permitted shall
be calculated by the following formula or, at the option of the
applicant, one dwelling unit for each lot determined by the
Planning Commission to be available for building, based on a
review of a conventional subdivision of the site into lots for singlefamily
residences under the zoning standards applicable to the
property prior to the change in zoning to the RFWP District:
Dwelling units = E [A-(B + C)]
D
Where:
A = Area of lot in acres.
B = Area of wetland in acres.
C = Area located in regulatory floodway, in acres, exclusive of
any area included in the formula as wetland.
D = One acre for lots previously zoned R.1.
D = Five-tenths (0.5) acre for lots previously zoned R-2.
E = Eighty-seven hundredths (0.87) for lots previously zoned
R-1.
E = Ninety-hundredths (0.90) for lots previously zoned R-2.
(4) The lowest floor, including basements, of all buildings shall be at
least two feet above the elevation of the base flood.
(5) All buildings shall be set back at least 85 feet from all street
frontages and in accordance with the following for all other
property lines:
(a) For lots previously zoned R-1, the setback of buildings from all
other property lines shall be as follows:
[1] Single-family residence: 60 feet.
[2] Two-family residence: 70 feet.
[3] Apartments: 85 feet.
(b) For lots previously zoned R-2, the setback of buildings from all
other property lines shall be as follows:
[1] Single-family residence: 50 feet.
§ 197-13.1 RYE CODE § 197-13.1
187:924
§ 197-13.2. (Reserved)102
§ 197-14. Lighting. [Amended 4-21-1960; 10-18-1972 by Ord. No.
3-1972]
There shall be no flashing or intermittent lights, unshaded light source
either inside or outside of a building, floodlighting or other illumination
for advertising purposes of an exterior wall, visible from any point outside
[2] Two-family residence: 60 feet.
[3] Apartments: 75 feet.
(6) No single building shall contain more than four dwelling units.
(7) The minimum spacing between buildings shall be 25 feet.
(8) The maximum permitted coverage of the site by all buildings shall
not exceed (2,600) square feet times the number of approved
dwelling units in the R-1 District and 1,700 square feet times the
number of approved dwelling units in the R-2 District.
(9) The minimum requirement for on-site parking shall be 2.5 parking
spaces for each dwelling unit.
(10) The maximum length of any building shall not exceed 120 feet.
(11) The maximum permitted floor area on the site shall not exceed 2.5
times the maximum permitted coverage of the site by all buildings.
(12) No building shall have a height of more than 35 feet.
(13) No building shall have more than 2 1/2 stories.
(14) Each dwelling unit shall have a separate entrance from the outside
at ground level.
(15) Outdoor tennis courts, paddle courts, racquet courts and other
similar courts, swimming pools and other active recreational
facilities shall conform to the setback and related restrictions
governing active recreational uses located on lands to be reserved
for park and playground purposes set forth in § 170-17A(3) of this
Code. The Planning Commission may modify these requirements
where, in its judgment, it deems such modifications desirable and
appropriate because of characteristics of the specific site, such as
topography, size, shape and location, and proximity to facilities
such as streets, schools, public buildings and facilities, other
recreational facilities and similar active use areas. [Added
2-17-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
102. Editor's Note: Former § 197-13.2, Landmarks Preservation District - Alansten, added
6-15-1983 by L.L. No. 5-1983, was repealed 12-1-1999 by L.L. No. 12-1999.
§ 197-13.1 TREES § 197-14
187:925
of the lot, except that safety lighting to the extent necessary shall be
permitted.103
§ 197-15. Special use permit for historic preservation in B-2
Central Business District. [Added 10-22-2014 by L.L. No. 7-2014]
A. Findings; intent.
(1) The Council creates this incentive-based special use permit in
order to maintain the historic elements of convenience retail
storefront design and uses which contribute to the character of the
City's Central Business District. As such, the Council adopts a
policy to incentivize the preservation of the character of the
Central Business District by allowing in the B-2 Central Business
District banks to be located on the first floor of a building on the
condition that the historic nature of the building, or its contributing
elements, are preserved and maintained. The purpose of this
section is to achieve the following goals:
(a) Promoting the preservation of buildings that have enhanced
and defined the historic nature of Rye over the past decades.
(b) Preserving the existing small convenience and retail stores in
the B-2 Central Business District and furthering the
community needs to preserve a diverse economic base.
(c) Balancing the desire for historic preservation of certain
buildings and uses with the need to allow for financially viable
uses of buildings.
(d) Furthering the City's goal to provide incentive zoning
techniques for development projects that meet a defined
community need and desire such as historic preservation and
maintaining community character.
B. Procedures for special use permits; permit applications.
(1) Applications for a permit shall be made to the City Planner on forms
furnished by the City Planner's office.
(2) An application for a permit shall not be deemed complete if it does
not include all of the following information:
(a) The application fee of $150.
(b) Complete plans for the building(s), or portions thereof, which
the applicant believes furthers the intent of this section and for
the bank or other uses of the building(s) on the property.
103. Editor's Note: Former §§ 197-15 through 197-20, regarding signs, were repealed
1-20-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999. See Chapter 165, Signs.
§ 197-14 RYE CODE § 197-15
187:926
(c) Full environmental assessment form in accordance with the
State Environmental Quality Review Act, except that a short
environmental assessment form may be submitted at the
discretion of the City Council.
(d) A narrative from the applicant setting forth the reasons why
the proposed building(s) to be preserved would further the
intent of this law and promote the community character that
the City wishes to maintain.
(e) The City Council may require additional information as it
deems appropriate.
(f) By filing an application, the applicant thereby consents to the
entry onto his land by the City Council or other agents
designated by the City Council for the purpose of undertaking
any investigation, examination, survey or other activity
necessary for the purposes of this chapter.
C. Special use permit requirements; determining historic significance of
application.
(1) The Council will undertake a review of an application pursuant to
this section in a timely fashion and shall act within a reasonable
period of time given the complexity of the application and the
circumstances.
(2) The Council may, at its sole discretion, refer any application for this
special use permit for historic preservation to the Landmarks
Committee for its review and comment.
(3) If the application is referred to the Landmarks Advisory
Committee, the Committee shall provide any comments to the
Council within 30 days of the referral.
(4) The City Council shall also review the application to determine if it
furthers the goals and intent of this section. The applicant shall
bear the burden of proof by putting forth substantial evidence
showing how the application meets the purposes and intent of this
section and that its application should be considered for the special
use permit.
(5) If the Council finds that the application furthers the purposes and
intent of this section, it shall simultaneously consider the
application for the special use permit and site development plan in
accordance with Rye City Code § 197-7. The City Council shall hold
a public hearing to consider the approval of both the special use
permit and site development plan.
(6) As part of any approval of the special use permit and site
development plan, the City Council shall consider the following
potential conditions, including, but not limited to:
§ 197-15 TREES § 197-15
187:927
§ 197-16. through § 197-20. (Reserved)
§ 197-21. Prohibited uses.
Within each district, no building or lot shall be used or arranged or designed
to be used in whole or in part for other than one or more of the uses listed
as permitted in the Table of Regulations (Article VIII).
§ 197-22. Uses prohibited in all districts. [Amended 11-4-1970 by
Ord. No. 9-1970; 10-18-1972 by Ord. No. 2-1972; 3-5-1980 by L.L.
No. 3-1980; 5-4-1988 by L.L. No. 7-1988]
(a) A restrictive covenant that preserves the building(s), or
portions thereof, in its current state and any modifications to
such restrictive covenant shall be reviewed and approved by
the City Council; and/or
(b) A deed restriction that preserves the building(s), or portions
thereof, in its current state and any modifications to such deed
restriction can only be approved by the City Council; and/or
(c) A facade easement or other restrictive easement that
preserves the building(s), or portions thereof, in its current
state and any modifications to such easement can only be
approved by the City Council; and/or
(d) All covenants, restrictions, and/or easements shall be recorded
in the County Clerk's office; and/or
(e) A maintenance plan that ensures the continued upkeep of the
preserved building(s), or portions thereof; and/or
(f) A community amenity such as landscaping or other
improvement to further enhance the community character in
the area near the proposed development; and/or
(g) Any other condition that the City Council deems necessary to
preserve the historical nature of the building(s) and to ensure
that such preservation will continue into the future regardless
of the owner.
D. This law shall expire three months from the effective date of its filing. If
an application is received within the three month period, it shall be
considered timely and processed in accordance with this section.
A. The following uses are specifically prohibited in all districts as being
inconsistent with the character of Rye as a predominantly residential
city:
(1) Any industry, use, operation or process which, when conducted
under proper and adequate conditions and safeguards, is likely at
any time to produce such nuisances as obnoxious smoke, dust, dirt,
§ 197-15 RYE CODE § 197-22
187:928
§ 197-23. Prohibited use of lots. [Amended 10-18-1972 by Ord. No.
2-1972; 6-16-1993 by L.L. No. 6-1993; 7-19-2006 by L.L. No. 8-2006]
No lot shall be used for residence purposes unless it fronts upon a street
approved and improved as provided in Article 3 of the General City Law
and its street frontage is at least 25 feet wide, except that lots created
by the donation of portions of historic sites to a nonprofit organization for
the purposes of historic preservation and adaptive reuse may provide for
said street frontage with an easement of suitable width to a street or an
easement of suitable width to another lot which has actual street frontage,
subject to obtaining a variance from the Board of Appeals as provided for
in the General City Law. No lot shall be used for any use permitted only in
RA Districts unless it fronts upon a street at least 50 feet in width having a
pavement at least 30 feet in width.
§ 197-24. Conversions with substandard yards.
Any conversion or alteration of a dwelling unit from seasonal to year-round
occupancy by the installation of a permanent foundation, a heating system,
the insulation of walls, floors or roof or the relocation of utilities below the
frost line, on a lot or tax parcel where more than one dwelling unit exists
and yard requirements thereon are not observed, shall be prohibited.
§ 197-25. Intent of off-street parking requirements. [Amended
5-2-1979 by Ord. No. 2-1979; 5-20-1992 by L.L. No. 11-1992]
It is the intent of this chapter that all buildings, structures and lands and
any of their uses shall have a sufficient amount of off-street automobile
parking to meet the needs of persons residing within, employed at or
otherwise making use of such buildings, structures or lands and their uses,
except as provided herein for the A and B Parking Districts where an
agreement has been entered into to make payments or payment has been
fly ash, glare or heat, offensive odor, corrosive, toxic or noisome
fumes or gases, offensive noise or vibration, dangerous or
objectionable electrical radiation or interference, or dangerous or
hazardous condition due to risk of fire or explosion.
(2) Billboards and advertising signs, except advertising signs
permitted in § 197-15.
B. The following shall be prohibited in all districts as being inconsistent
with the public health, safety and welfare: [Amended 12-18-1991 by
L.L. No. 26-1991]
(1) An activity conducted in a watercourse, wetland or wetland/
watercourse buffer, as defined in Chapter 195 of this Code, except
in accordance with the requirements of the Chapter 195 of this
Code.
(2) Roof-mounted satellite earth station dish antennas.
§ 197-22 TREES § 197-25
187:929
made in full in lieu of providing required on-site parking. No permit for
the erection or substantial alteration of a building or structure or for the
development of a land use or a change in use subject to review under
§ 197-7A(1) shall be issued unless off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 197-26. Effect on existing uses of off-street parking requirements.
[Amended 5-2-1979 by Ord. No. 2-1979; 5-20-1992 by L.L. No.
11-1992]
§ 197-26.1. Calculation of parking requirements in A and B Parking
Districts. [Added 10-16-1985 by L.L. No. 12-1985]
On-site parking requirements for new uses or buildings, building
expansions or changes in use shall be calculated by first determining the
A. Buildings, structures and land uses in existence at the time this section
became effective or buildings, structures and uses for which building
permits or site plans have been approved at the time this section or
pertinent amendments thereto become effective shall not be subject to
the requirements set forth in § 197-28, provided that any parking
facilities now existing to serve such buildings, structures or uses shall
not in the future be reduced except where they exceed such
requirements, in which case they may not be reduced below such
requirements. Required parking facilities for such buildings, structures
or uses as well as for any enlargement, extension or change in use
which increases off-street parking requirements as set forth in § 197-28
shall, however, be provided as a condition for the issuance of any
building permit or the approval of any site plan for such enlargement,
extension or change in use in the future.
B. In case of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship to such
properties arising out of this requirement, appeal may be made to the
Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with § 197-81, which shall
require only such degree of compliance as may be deemed reasonable
for that part of the building, structure or use that is legally
nonconforming but may not waiver any part of the requirements for
that part of the building, structure or use that constitutes an
enlargement or extension and may not permit reduction or elimination
of whatever quantity of parking may already be in existence unless it is
in excess of such requirements. Required off-street parking facilities
which after development are later dedicated to and accepted by the
City shall be deemed to continue to serve the buildings, structures and
uses to meet the requirements for which they were originally provided.
In the event that a prior agreement was entered into to make payments
or payment has been made in full in lieu of providing required on-site
parking in the A or B Parking District, the number of on-site parking
spaces represented by said agreement or payment in full shall be
counted as existing on-site parking, provided that the property owner is
not in default of making said payments.
§ 197-25 RYE CODE § 197-26.1
187:930
existing use credit by dividing the area of the lot, in square feet, by 832
square feet and adding thereto parking spaces, if any, already provided on
site and which are to remain. The parking requirements for the proposed
use of the site shall be determined based on the requirements set forth in
§ 197-28 of this chapter. In the event that the credit is larger than the new
requirement, the excess shall be noted on the approved site development
plan as a credit for future site plan modifications. When the requirement
for the proposed use shall exceed the credits, then such additional parking
shall be provided on site unless the Planning Commission has approved a
payment in lieu thereof as provided for in § 197-27 of this chapter. Fees
paid in lieu of providing on-site parking shall be noted on the approved site
development plan and thereafter credited as existing on-site parking.
§ 197-27. (Reserved)104
§ 197-28. Schedule of off-street parking requirements. [Amended
2-4-1959; 11-18-1959; 4-21-1960; 9-21-1960; 4-18-1962 by Ord. No.
3-1962; 7-20-1966 by Ord. No. 4-1966; 11-18-1970 by Ord. No.
10-1970; 2-3-1971 by Ord. No. 1-1971; 10-4-1978 by Ord. No.
3-1978]
A. Schedule of parking requirements. Off-street automobile parking
facilities shall be provided as follows: [Amended 5-2-1979 by Ord.
No. 2-1979]
Number of Spaces per Unit
(by Parking District)
Unit of Measurement
and
Use A B C Conditions
Home for 1 or 2 families 1 1 1 Dwelling unit
Structures for 3 or more
families on same lot
[Amended 7-17-1996 by
L.L. No. 6-1996]
2 (first floor) 0.7
(other floors),
except as
otherwise
provided
1 2 Dwelling unit
********
Apartments for senior
citizens located in RA-5
Districts [Added
4-21-1982 by Ord. No.
2-1982; readopted
11-21-1984 by Ord. No.
1-1984]
1 1 1 4 dwelling units
104. Editor's Note: Former § 197-27, Payment of fee in lieu of parking space requirements, as
amended, was repealed 1-18-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989.
§ 197-26.1 TREES § 197-28
187:931
Number of Spaces per Unit
(by Parking District)
Unit of Measurement
and
Use A B C Conditions
Apartments for active
seniors located in RA-6
Districts [Added
12-2-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
1.5 1.5 1.5 Dwelling unit
Homes for 1, 2 or 3 or more
families in RFWP and LPDA
Districts [Amended
6-15-1983 by L.L. No.
5-1983]
2.5 2.5 2.5 Dwelling unit
Doctor or dentist permitted
in residence district as
accessory use
--- --- 3 Doctor or dentist
in addition to
residence
requirements
Professional office (other
than doctor or dentist) or
home occupation permitted
in residence district as
accessory use
--- --- 1 Professional office
or home
occupation, in
addition to
residence
requirements
Hotel, boarding-, rooming
or lodging house
[Amended 11-6-1985 by
L.L. No. 14-1985]
1 1 1 Guest sleeping
room 600 square
feet of nonrentable
floor
space, exclusive of
basements ****
And, in addition 1 1 1
First floor:
Physical fitness facility
[Added 7-17-2019 by L.L.
No. 4-2019]
1 1 1 200 square feet of
gross floor ara
§ 197-28 RYE CODE § 197-28
187:932
Number of Spaces per Unit
(by Parking District)
Unit of Measurement
and
Use A B C Conditions
Retail trade of goods,
including but not limited to
foods, drugs, dry goods,
photographic equipment,
clothing, sporting goods,
novelties, furniture, art
supplies, stationery, liquor,
shoes, household and office
supplies and furnishings,
musical instruments, books
and flower shops; candy
stores or ice cream parlors;
banks which are specifically
oriented to serving the
general public; uses of a
service nature, including
but not limited to barbers,
hairdressers, dry-copy
printers, cleaners, shoe
repair or other businesses
0 1 2*
Other floors 0 0.7 1 200 square feet of
gross floor area**
Professional, administrative
service and agency offices
0.7 (first floor)
0.3 (other
floors)
0.3 2* 200 square feet of
gross floor area
Office for physicians and
dentists
4 (first floor) 2
(other floors)
2 At least 4 Each doctor in
practice on the site
Public building other than
school
1 1 1 200 square feet of
gross floor area**
Restaurant or similar use,
full service [Amended
8-21-1985 by L.L. No.
7-1985; 11-6-1985 by L.L.
No. 14-1985; 9-14-1988
by L.L. No. 13-1988;
5-20-1992 by L.L. No.
11-1992]
0.7 0.3 2 200 square feet of
floor area devoted
to patron use******
Restaurant or similar use,
fast food****** [Added
5-20-1992 by L.L. No.
11-1992]
2 2 2 3 employees on
maximum
shift*******
§ 197-28 TREES § 197-28
187:933
Number of Spaces per Unit
(by Parking District)
Unit of Measurement
and
Use A B C Conditions
And, in addition 1 1 1 60 square feet of
patron use area
but not less than
10 spaces for take
out, exclusive of
drive-through
******
And, in addition 11 stacking
queuing spaces
11 stacking/
queuing
spaces
11 stacking/
queuing
spaces
1 drive-in window,
5 of which are to
be reserved for
ordering station
******
Hospital, clinic, sanatorium
convalescent home
4 4 4 5 patient beds,
excluding
bassinets
Theater, auditorium,
stadium, place of public
assembly or funeral parlor
1 1 1 6 seats (excluding
places of worship)
Skating rink or other place
of amusement, the capacity
of which is not measurable
in seats
1 1 1 200 square feet of
floor area devoted
to patron use
Bowling alley 10 10 10 Lane
Wholesale, storage, utility,
manufacturing or other
industrial use
1 1 1 2 persons
employed or in
tended to be
employed at one
time
Office building, laboratory,
telephone exchange, other
permitted use in B-4
Districts [Amended
5-17-1989 by L.L. No.
7-1989]
7 7 7 10 persons
employed or
intended to be
employed at one
time
And, in addition 1 1 1 Company-owned
vehicle, as deemed
necessary by
Planning
Commission for
visitors and
employees
§ 197-28 RYE CODE § 197-28
187:934
Number of Spaces per Unit
(by Parking District)
Unit of Measurement
and
Use A B C Conditions
Office building in B-5
Districts [Added
5-17-1989 by LL. No.
7-1989]
3 3 3 1,000 square feet
of gross floor
area*****
Small boat facilities 8 8 8 10 berths or
mooring spaces
And, in addition 1 1 1 Each person to be
employed on the
premises
Tennis and badminton
courts***
8 8 8 Court
Schools:
Senior high 7 7 7 10 faculty and
employees
Junior high 1 1 1 3 students
Elementary 7 7 7 10 faculty and
employees
NOTES:
*May be reduced to no less than one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area upon finding
by the Planning Commission in a specific case that a lesser requirement is in accordance with
good standard practice for the size and type of activity.
**May be reduced to no less than one space per 400 square feet of gross floor area upon finding
by the Planning Commission in a specific case that a lesser requirement is in accordance with
good standard practice for the size and type of activity.
***May be reduced to four per court upon finding by the Planning Commission in a specific case
that a lesser requirement is in accordance with good standard practice for the size and type of
activity.
****Where a motel contains 100 or more rooms, together with a restaurant, the Planning
Commission may reduce the parking requirement to one space per guest sleeping room. [Added
11-6-85 by L.L. No. 14-1985]
*****The maximum number of on-site parking spaces shall not exceed three spaces per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area, except when additional on-site parking spaces are specifically
required by the Planning Commission. [Added 5-17-1989 by L.L. No. 7-1989]
******Restaurant uses that have received preliminary and/or final site plan approval prior to
5-20-1992 shall only be required to provide that amount of off-street parking required by their
current site plan approval and to include the payment of a fee in lieu of providing off-street
parking as provided for in the Code at the time of the approval if such payment was permitted by
the approval. [Added 5-20-1992 by L.L. No. 11-1992]
§ 197-28 TREES § 197-28
187:935
§ 197-29. Parking for two or more uses on same lot. [Amended
11-6-1985 by L.L. No. 14-1985]
§ 197-30. Layout and location of off-street parking facilities.
[Amended 10-3-1956 by resolution]
*******The Planning Commission, in a particular case, may permit a lesser amount of on-site
parking upon finding that a lesser amount will substantially meet the intent of the requirements
by reason of variation in the probable time of maximum use by patrons and employees, provided
that such approval of a lesser amount shall be automatically terminated upon the termination
of the operation of any such establishment or a change in the operation of such establishment.
[Added 5-20-1992 by L.L. No. 11-1992]
********The Planning Commission, in a particular case, when a property abuts the B-2 Central
Business District, may permit 1/2 of the on-site parking to be indirectly accessible. [Added
7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
B. Off-street parking requirements for other uses not listed above shall be
as determined by the Common Council and adopted as an amendment
to this chapter.
A. Where two or more different uses occur on a single lot, the total amount
of parking facilities to be provided shall be the sum of the requirements
for each individual use on the lot, except that the Board of Appeals may
approve the joint use of parking space by two or more establishments
on the same lot or on contiguous lots, the total capacity of which space
is less than the sum of the spaces required for each, provided that the
Board finds that the capacity to be provided will substantially meet the
intent of the requirements by reason of variation in the probable time of
maximum use by patrons or employees among such establishments, and
provided such approval of such joint use shall be automatically
terminated upon the termination of the operation of any such
establishments.
B. Where a hotel use contains 100 or more rooms and has a separate
accessory restaurant facility designed primarily for guests, the total
amount of parking facilities to be provided shall be the sum of the
requirements for each individual use but may be reduced to no less than
one parking space per guest sleeping room upon finding by the
Planning Commission, in a specific case, that a lesser requirement is in
accordance with good standard practice for the size and type of activity.
A. The required off-street parking facilities for structures and land uses
which are developed after § 197-28 becomes effective shall be provided
on the same lot or premises with such structure or land use; except that
off-street parking spaces required for structures or land uses on two
adjoining lots may be provided in a single common facility on one or
both of said lots.
B. Any driveway providing access to required off-street parking facilities
shall be graded and laid out as follows:
§ 197-28 RYE CODE § 197-30
187:936
(1) The grade of the driveway at the street property line shall be four
inches above the street grade at the center line of the driveway.
(2) The grade of the driveway shall not exceed 10% from the front
property line to the required front yard setback line or to a depth of
25 feet, whichever is greater.
(3) The alignment of the driveway shall be generally at right angles to
the street in this required depth.
(4) Where size of lot and topography permit, the driveway shall be so
arranged that cars entering onto a street may do so facing that
street.
C. In R-1 to RT Districts inclusive, no off-street parking facility shall be
developed within any required front yard or any required side yard
adjacent to a street line or within any other side or rear yard within five
feet of the lot line; except that for a corner lot existing on the effective
date of this section, the distance from the side street lot line may be
reduced to five feet where an existing house is so located on the lot that
the side street yard is less in width than the required front yard depth,
or where a proposed house cannot be so located on the lot as to provide
a side street yard equal in width to the required front yard depth and
still conform to the side yard requirements on the opposite side of the
house. [Amended 6-18-1968 by Ord. No. 3-1968]
D. In RA-1, RA-2, RA-3, RA-4, RA-5 and RA-6 Districts, no off-street parking
facility accessory to apartments or office buildings shall be developed
within five feet of any lot line. Required off-street parking facilities
accessory to other main uses shall conform to the provisions of
Subsection C above. [Amended 10-26-1963 by Ord. No. 7-1963;
7-20-1966 by Ord. No. 4-1966; 4-21-1982 by Ord. No. 2-1982;
readopted 11-21-1984 by Ord. No. 1-1984; 12-2-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
E. Subject to the discretion of the Planning Commission during site plan
review, in the RA-6 District, tandem parking arrangements may be
utilized for multiple spaces reserved to a single dwelling unit.
[Amended 9-21-1960 by resolution; 12-2-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
F. The plans for any new buildings or any replacement or reconstruction
of an existing building when submitted to the Building Inspector for a
building permit shall show specifically the location and size of the offstreet
parking facilities required to comply with this section and the
means of access to such space from the public street or highways; and
except for single-family and two-family residences, the plan for traffic
access, traffic circulation and general layout of the parking facility shall
be approved by the City Engineer with regard to improvement plan, to
safety to traffic on the public street, to safety to pedestrians on public
sidewalks and to safety and adequacy of access to cars and pedestrians
§ 197-30 TREES § 197-30
187:937
using the parking facility before a building permit may be issued.
[Amended 9-21-1960 by resolution]
G. Except where otherwise limited in this chapter, required off-street
parking facilities may be enclosed in a structure or may be open,
provided that all required parking facilities shall be graded, surfaced,
drained and suitably maintained to the satisfaction of the City Engineer
to the extent necessary to avoid nuisance of dust, erosion or excessive
water flow across public ways. In appropriate situations the City
Engineer may require suitable markings to indicate individual parking
spaces, maneuvering area, entrances and exits. [Amended 4-1-1964
by Ord. No. 5-1964; 3-17-1982 by L.L. No. 5-1982]
H. All required car parking spaces shall be laid out and located in
accordance with the following standards: [Added 3-17-1982 by L.L.
No. 5-1982]
(1) Dimensional requirements for standard car space.
Space Space Aisle Width
Space
Angle
Width
(feet)
Depth
(feet)
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
90º 8.5 20 25 25
60º 8.5 20 18 22
45º 8.5 20 13 22
Parallel to
aisle
8.5 22 12 22
NOTE: A space which abuts a fixed object, such as a wall or
column, whether within a structure or not, shall have a minimum
width of 10 feet.
(2) Compact car spaces may be permitted by the Planning Commission
as part of an approved site development plan in accordance with
the following standards and dimensional requirements:
(a) Where at least 50 parking spaces are to be provided, the
Planning Commission may permit not more than 30% of the
employee or tenant parking spaces to be compact car spaces.
(b) Compact car spaces shall be grouped in a location or in
locations convenient to both vehicle and pedestrian access.
Single compact spaces shall not be dispersed throughout the
site.
(c) Compact car parking areas shall be clearly identified by
marking the pavement with the letter "C."
(d) Dimensional requirements for compact car space.
§ 197-30 RYE CODE § 197-30
187:938
§ 197-31. Operation and maintenance of off-street parking
facilities. [Amended 9-21-1960 by resolution]
Required off-street parking facilities shall be maintained as long as the
use or structure exists which the facilities are designed to serve. Required
parking areas developed for specific structures and uses shall be reserved
at all times to those persons who are employed at or make use of such
structures and land uses, except when dedicated to and accepted by the
City as public parking areas. Cars shall only be parked in stalls laid out
according to approved plans. All aisles and drives shall be kept clear for
movement of cars.
Space Space Aisle Width
Space
Angle
Width
(feet)
Depth
(feet)
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
90º 7.5 15 20 20
60º 7.5 15 16 20
45º 7.5 15 13 20
Parallel to
aisle
7.5 16.5 12 20
NOTE: A space which abuts a fixed object, such as a wall
or column, whether within a structure or not, shall have a
minimum width of 8.9 feet.
§ 197-30 TREES § 197-31
187:939

ARTICLE V
Lot, Floor Area, Height, Yard and Court Regulations
§ 197-32. District regulations other than use.
The restrictions and regulations as to minimum lot size, minimum lot area
per family or equivalent, minimum lot width, maximum floor area ratio,
minimum residential floor area, maximum height, minimum dimensions of
front, side and rear yards, minimum usable open space, building spacing
and minimum dimensions of courts in the several districts shall be as set
forth in the Table of Regulations incorporated as Article VIII of this chapter,
except as hereinafter provided.
§ 197-33. Area and yard requirements applicable to only one
building.
No land area, yard or other open space provided about any building for the
purpose of complying with these regulations shall be included as any part
of the land area, yard or open space required for any other building; no
land area, yard or any other open space on one lot shall be considered as
land area, yard or open space for a building on any other lot. Should a lot
hereafter be formed from the part of a lot already occupied by a building,
such separation shall be effected in such manner as not to impair conformity
with any of these regulations with respect to the existing building and all
land area, yards and other required spaces in connection therewith, and no
permit shall be issued for the erection of a building on the new lot thus
created unless both lots comply with all the provisions of these regulations.
§ 197-34. Lot area requirements for combined uses.
In computing the lot area requirements for any structure in which
residential accommodations are combined with one or more nonresidential
permitted main uses, each 1,500 square feet of floor space devoted to such
nonresidential uses shall be counted as equivalent to one family unit.
§ 197-35. Parts of lot not counted toward requirements. [Amended
7-19-2006 by L.L. No. 8-2006]
A. For any lot created by subdivision subsequent to the effective date of
this section, no part of such lot less in width than 1/2 of the requirement
for the district in which it is located shall be counted as part of the
required lot area.
B. No portion of any watercourse or wetland (as defined by § 195-3 of the
Rye City Code) shall be counted as part of the required lot area nor
shall any such watercourse or wetland area be used in the ratio of floor
area to lot area calculation.
§ 197-32 TREES § 197-36
187:941
§ 197-36. Lot width required.
Within any residence district no part of any dwelling, house or other
structure housing a main use, and within any business district no part of
any residence structure, shall be erected on any part of the lot which has a
width of less than the distances specified in the table incorporated as Article
VIII, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 197-37. Exemption of certain nonconforming lots not located in
areas of special flood hazard. [Amended 10-24-1963 by Ord. No.
7-1963; 7-15-1964 by Ord. No. 11-1964; 6-18-1968 by Ord. No.
3-1968; 2-3-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988]
The provisions of Article VIII shall not prevent the construction or alteration
of a single-family dwelling, provided that the yard requirements are
observed, on any lot in separate ownership which was duly recorded by
plan or deed or was assessed as a separate parcel prior to the effective
date of this section or on any lot in a subdivision approved by the Planning
Commission within five years prior to said date. Except in such a
subdivision, two or more contiguous lots in a single ownership on or after
such date shall be replotted to create one or more lots which will conform
to the above provisions. The Board of Appeals, however, if it finds that such
a reparceling or replotting cannot reasonably be done without creating or
retaining one or more lots that provide less than the required area or width,
may permit the construction of a single-family dwelling on such lot or lots.
The Board shall not permit any lesser dimensions than the following unless
more than 1/2 of the frontage on the same street block between the two
nearest intersecting streets is already built up at lower standards:
District
Lot Area
(square feet)
Lot Width
(feet)
R-1 30,000 115
R-2 16,000 90
R-3 11,000 75
R-4 7,500 60
R-5 6,000 50
R-T, RA-1, RA-2, B-3 4,500 45
R-6, RA-3, RA-4, B-1 4,000 40
§ 197-37.1. Exemption of certain nonconforming lots located in an
area of special flood hazard. [Added 2-3-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988]
The provisions of Article VIII shall not prevent the construction or alteration
of a single-family dwelling on any lot in separate ownership which was
legally recorded by subdivision plat or deed and was assessed as a separate
parcel prior to February 17, 1988, that conforms to the requirements for
a lot not located in an area of special flood hazard. The Board of Appeals
§ 197-36 RYE CODE § 197-37.1
187:942
may permit the construction of a single-family dwelling on existing lots that
provide less than the area and width required for lots located outside of an
area of special flood hazard, provided that the Board shall not permit any
lesser dimensions than the following unless more than 1/2 of the frontage
on the same street block between the two nearest intersecting streets is
already built up at lower standards:
District
Lot Area
(square feet)
Lot Width
(feet)
R-1 30,000 115
R-2 16,000 90
R-3 11,000 75
R-4 7,500 60
R-5 6,000 50
R-T, RA-1, RA-2, B-3 4,500 45
R-6, RA-3, RA-4, B-1 4,000 40
§ 197-37.2. (Reserved)105
§ 197-38. Nonconforming lots containing watercources or wetlands.
[Added 9-18-1972 by Ord. No. 2-1972]
The provisions of § 197-1, Definitions and usage, "lodging house" through
"lot width," and § 197-23 shall not prevent the construction, alteration
or expansion of a permitted main or accessory use, provided the yard
requirements are observed, on any lot in an undivided ownership prior
to the effective date of this section or any lot in a subdivision approved
by the Planning Commission within five years prior to said date which
is nonconforming due to the exclusion of a wetland or watercourse area
from allowed calculations as provided in the above-cited section, provided
that the proposed filling of a wetland or watercourse or the development
of such land created by such filling does not result in an increase in
permitted development beyond that which would have been allowed before
the dredging or filling. However, the exemptions of this section shall not
apply to a lot or parcel conveyed to the present or past owner as an
underwater land grant or to any illegally filled-in watercourse, and, further,
in the case of a subdivision approved more than five years prior to the
effective date of this section, two or more contiguous lots in a single
ownership shall be replotted to create one or more lots which conform to
the standards of this chapter.
105. Editor's Note: Former § 197-37.2, Reduction of standards for development in areas of
special flood hazard, added 3-5-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980 as amended, was repealed
6-15-1988 by L.L. No. 10-1988.
§ 197-37.1 TREES § 197-39
187:943
§ 197-39. Lots in new subdivisions. [Amended 8-21-1985 by L.L. No.
8-1985]
Simultaneously with the approval of a subdivision plat, the Planning
Commission may either confirm the zoning regulations of the land so platted
as shown on the Official Zoning Map or create lots, by lot averaging or lot
grouping, with lesser area and dimensional requirements than permitted
in the Table of Regulations and require the owner to submit a plat which
reflects such change, which lots shall thenceforward be deemed
conforming, subject to the following limitations:
A. Lot averaging. The creation of one or more lots of lesser area and width
than are required in the Table of Regulations shall be permitted,
provided that the following conditions are met: [Amended 6-18-1975
by Ord. No. 3-1975]
(1) The area and width of no lot shall be reduced below the area and
width specified for each district in § 197-37.
(2) The average area and the average width of all lots shall be equal to
or greater than the minimum area and width required in the Table
of Regulations.
(3) Not more than 1/4 of the lots shall have areas and widths smaller
than the area and width specified in the Table of Regulations.
B. Lot grouping. The creation of lots of lesser area and dimensional
requirements than specified in the Table of Regulations shall be
permitted when the grouping of smaller lots will, in the opinion of the
Planning Commission, improve the appearance of the subdivision,
contribute to the attractiveness of the neighborhood, preserve areas of
open space, protect or enhance wetlands or reduce the exposure of
residences to flood hazards for recreational, scenic, safety or ecological
purposes, provided that the following conditions are met: [Added
6-18-1975 by Ord. No. 3-1975; amended 7-19-1978 by Ord. No.
2-1978; 3-7-1979 by Ord. No. 1-1979]
(1) The property proposed to be subdivided is located in an R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, R-5 or R-6 One-Family Zoning District and has an area of
three acres or more.
(2) The number of lots shall not exceed the number the Planning
Commission has determined would be approved if the property
were subdivided in the conventional manner, based on a review of a
conventional layout supplied by the subdivider. The Commission, in
determining the permitted number of lots, shall take into
consideration provisions of the Land Subdivision Regulations106
concerning the reservation of land for park and playground
purposes and shall require the reservation of such land or a cash
payment in lieu thereof.
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Subdivision of Land.
§ 197-39 RYE CODE § 197-39
187:944
(3) The lots shall meet all requirements for the zoning district, except
that the area and dimensional requirements shall conform to the
single-family requirements of the next-less-restrictive residence
district and, in the case of subdivisions which will protect or
enhance wetlands or reduce the exposure of residences to flood
hazards, then to the requirements of the next two less-restrictive
residence district, as specified in the Table A of the Table of
Regulations, and, further, the Planning Commission may waive the
requirements of § 197-51 when both of the affected lots will directly
abut lands in the subdivision which will be preserved as open
space. [Amended 5-2-1990 by L.L. No. 10-1990]
(4) The open space to be preserved is shown on the approved
subdivision plat with a notation that such land is to be covenanted
as permanent open space in the ownership of the owners of the
subdivided lots and is provided in such a manner that it is available
for use by all residents of the subdivision.
(5) The open space to be preserved has an area equal to or greater
than 30% of the total area of the land to be subdivided and shall
exclude all lands shown on the approved plat as building lots,
public and private rights-of-way created as part of the subdivision,
and land, if any, reserved for conventional park and playground
purposes.
(6) The land to be preserved as open space is restricted by deed or
covenant to scenic, recreational and ecological activities and to
facilities designed for common use, which shall include buildings,
structures and man-made surfaces as are approved by the Planning
Commission, provided that such facilities constructed for common
use do not have an aggregate gross floor area in excess of 1/2 of 1%
of the area of such land or cover more than 10% of the area of such
land and conform to the setback and related restrictions governing
active recreational facilities located on lands to be reserved for
park and playground purposes set forth in § 170-17A(3) of this
Code. The Planning Commission may modify these requirements
where, in its judgment, it deems such modifications desirable and
appropriate because of characteristics of the specific site, such as
topography, size, shape and location, and proximity to facilities
such as streets, schools, public buildings and facilities, other
recreational facilities and similar active use areas. [Amended
2-17-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
(7) An existing house intended to remain shall be provided with a lot
meeting all of the requirements of the district, including the
requirements of § 197-71, except that the lot for such building may
be reduced in the manner provided for in Subsection B(3) above if
the Planning Commission finds that the size and shape of the house
will not significantly differ from the size and shape of the houses to
be developed on other lots in the subdivision.
§ 197-39 TREES § 197-40
187:945
§ 197-40. Approval of lot prior to sale or construction. [Amended
7-19-1961 by Ord. No. 10-1961; 6-16-1993 by L.L. No. 6-1993]
No person shall develop any lot or plot created after August 1, 1961, or
erect any permanent building thereon, without first obtaining approval of
the Planning Commission of the proposed lot arrangement and the proposed
methods of providing water and sanitary and storm sewerage facilities and
physical access for each of the said lots or plots, except as provided for
in § 170-5E, Exemptions for historic properties, of the Code of the City of
Rye. No permit for construction on said lot or plot shall be approved by the
Building Inspector for issuance by the Clerk until the aforesaid approval of
the Planning Commission has been obtained.
§ 197-41. Ratio of gross floor area to lot area. [Amended
11-15-1967 by Ord. No. 4-1967]
For any building or group of related buildings on a lot, the aggregate
gross floor area, including accessory buildings, shall not exceed the ratios
specified in the Table of Regulations (Article VIII), except as provided in the
following sections.
§ 197-42. Gross floor area authorized for later construction. [Added
8-7-1960 by resolution; amended 11-15-1967 by Ord. No. 4-1967]
For uses permitted subject to additional standards and requirements, the
gross floor area authorized in the permit as granted but not constructed
initially shall be deemed to be authorized for later construction within a
period of 10 years from the date of the issuance of the permit, regardless of
reductions in lot area resulting from taking of parts of the lot for public use,
provided such takings do not reduce the aggregate lot area by more than
15% of the area included in the plot plan approved in connection with the
permit.
§ 197-43. Exceptions to gross floor area ratio. [Amended
11-15-1967 by Ord. No. 4-1967]
For a single-family house to be built upon a nonconforming lot under the
provisions of § 197-37, the ratio specified in the Table of Regulations may
be increased to permit a gross floor area no greater than is permitted on a
lot of the minimum size specified in said table for the district in which the
lot is located, but in no event shall such increase exceed the specified ratio
by more than 0.10.
§ 197-40 RYE CODE § 197-43.1
187:946
§ 197-43.1. Floor area ratio for oversized properties. [Added
7-16-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003107]
The floor area ratio for single-family residences located in one-family
districts (i.e., R-1 through R-6) as set forth in Article VIII, Tables of
Regulations, § 197-86, shall be reduced to 1/2 of that portion of a property
exceeding 150%, but less than 250% of the minimum lot area for the district
in which the property is situated. The floor area ratio as set forth in Article
VIII, Tables of Regulations, § 197-86, shall be further reduced to 1/4 of
that portion of a property exceeding 250% of the minimum lot area for
the district in which the property is situated. For example, a property of
122,000 square feet (approximately 2.8 acres) in the R-1 District would be
permitted to build a total of 13,559 square feet of floor area. The R-1 District
has a minimum lot area of 43,560 square feet (one acre) and a maximum
FAR of 0.15. To calculate the maximum permitted floor area, the first 150%
of the minimum lot area of the R-1 District (43,560 x 1.5 = 65,340) would
apply the FAR of 0.15, resulting in 9,801 square feet of floor area (65,340
x 0.15 = 9,801). The next 100% of minimum lot area of the R-1 District (or
43,560 square feet) would apply an FAR reduced to one-half (0.15 x 0.50 =
0.075), resulting in 3,267 square feet of floor area (43,560 x 0.075 = 3,267).
The remaining 13,100 square feet of lot area (122,000 - 65,340 - 43,560 =
13,100) would apply an FAR reduced to one-quarter (0.15 x 0.25 = 0.0375),
resulting in 491 square feet of floor area (13,100 x 0.0375 = 491). Total floor
permitted floor area would be 13,559 square feet (9,801 + 3,267 + 491 =
13,559).
§ 197-43.2. Calculation of floor area for single-family residences.
[Added 7-16-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003108]
The gross floor area for single-family residences located in one-family
districts (i.e., R-1 through R-6) shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of all
floors, roofed or covered areas of a residence measured from the exterior of
the outside walls. Certain other space shall be counted in the computation
of gross floor area for single-family residences as follows:
A. Voids. Any interior floor area, excluding stairways, with a floor-toceiling
height in excess of 14 feet shall be counted twice. In the case of
a sloped ceiling, only that portion of the interior floor area shall be
counted twice where a theoretical floor above such floor area could be
provided and the headroom above such theoretical floor (excluding
headroom associated with a sloped ceiling) exceeds seven feet, six
inches and the width between existing or theoretical five-foot high knee
walls exceeds seven feet.
107. Editor's Note: This local law also stated that it would not apply if a building permit
application or Zoning Board of Appeals application had been received by the City prior to
7-3-2003.
108. Editor's Note: This local law also stated that it would not apply if a building permit
application or Zoning Board of Appeals application had been received by the City prior to
7-3-2003.
§ 197-43.1 TREES § 197-43.2
187:947
§ 197-44. Minimum residential floor area. [Amended 11-15-1967 by
Ord. No. 4-1967; 6-16-1976 by Ord. No. 8-1976]
For any dwelling unit in any district, the minimum amount of residential
floor area, calculated by subtracting from the gross floor area the sum of
the floor areas of public halls, public stairs and elevators, unenclosed roofed
areas, accessory buildings and nonresidential accessory floor space, shall
be not less than the following:
B. Attics. Fifty percent of the attic floor area shall be counted in the
computation of gross floor area where the headroom height measured
from the finished or unfinished attic floor to the bottom of the roof
rafters exceeds seven feet and the distance between existing or
theoretical five-foot-high knee walls exceeds seven feet. [Amended
12-18-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013109]
C. Basements. Twenty-five percent of the basement floor area shall be
included in the computation of gross floor area only where the
preexisting grade (as defined in § 197-1) abutting the exterior of the
basement wall has been reduced by more than three feet to create an
exposed wall more than seven feet in height and five feet in width.
D. Porches. Unenclosed porches at or below the first-floor elevation shall
not be included in the computation of gross floor area. For the purposes
of this regulation, “unenclosed porches” shall mean any roofed area
attached to a building where 80% of the outer limits of the area under
the porch ceiling, to a point three feet, six inches above the floor of the
roofed area, is open to air and having no solid material. Walls, screens,
glass, lattice or other similar materials, as well as structural or
architectural elements, shall be considered a solid material. Any roofed
structure associated with the storage of vehicles such as a carport or
porte cochere shall not be considered an unenclosed porch and shall be
included in the computation of gross floor area.
A. For a single-family house or for each dwelling unit of a two-family
house, 1,000 square feet.
B. For dwelling units in apartments or other buildings containing three or
more dwelling units, except in an RA-5 District, an average of 750
square feet for all dwelling units in the same building or group of
related buildings. In an RA-5 District the minimum size of all dwelling
units shall be 400 square feet. [Amended 4-21-1982 by Ord. No.
2-1982; readopted 11-21-1984 by Ord. No. 1-1984]
C. For dwelling units in B-2 Central Business Districts, an average of 500
square feet for all dwelling units in the same building or group of
related buildings.
109. Editor’s Note: This local law also provided that it shall take effect eight months upon its
adoption and filing with the Secretary of State.
§ 197-43.2 RYE CODE § 197-44
187:948
§ 197-45. Height restrictions.
The restrictions as to height of buildings and structures in the several
districts shall be as set forth in the Table of Regulations incorporated as
Article VIII of this chapter.
§ 197-46. Exceptions to height limits. [Amended 9-18-1957;
4-1-1964 by Ord. No. 5-1964; 4-3-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985; 5-4-1988
by L.L. No. 7-1988; 5-17-1989 by L.L. No. 7-1989; 10-8-1997 by L.L.
No. 12-1997]
The provisions of § 197-45 shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas,
domes, monuments, observation towers, windmills, chimneys, smokestacks,
silos, derricks, flagpoles, utility poles, masts, aerials other than satellite
earth station dish antennas, the requirements for which are set forth in
§ 197-9A(4), and roof-mounted wireless telecommunications facilities, the
requirements for which are set forth in Chapter 196, Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities, bulkheads, elevator headhouses, water
tanks, parapet walls, scenery lofts, air-conditioning and ventilating
equipment and other necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried
above the roof level. Such features shall be erected only to such height as
is necessary to accomplish the purpose they are intended to serve, shall
not exceed in cross-sectional area 10% of the lot area nor 15% of the roof
area and shall not be used for human occupancy. In addition, such features
as water tanks, scenery lofts, air-conditioning and ventilating equipment
and other necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried above the
roof level shall be enclosed by walls so as to obscure pedestrian view of
these features from sidewalks on abutting streets. The requirement for
walls to obscure the view of water tanks, scenery lofts, air-conditioning
and ventilating equipment and other necessary mechanical appurtenances
usually carried above the roof level shall not apply to buildings for which
a building permit was approved prior to May 19, 1989, or to existing
buildings proposed to be modified or enlarged when such required walls
would interfere with the proper functioning of existing water tanks, scenery
lofts, air-conditioning and ventilating equipment and other necessary
mechanical appurtenances usually carried above the roof level.
D. For a single-family residence used as a residential care facility, 1,500
square feet. [Added 10-4-1978 by Ord. No. 3-1978]
E. For dwelling units in apartments or other buildings containing three or
more dwelling units in an RA-6 District, the minimum amount of
residential floor area in each unit shall be 750 square feet for onebedroom
units, 900 square feet for two-bedroom units and 1,100 square
feet for three-bedroom units. Additionally, three-bedroom units must be
equipped with at least 1 1/2 bathrooms. [Added 12-2-2015 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
§ 197-44 TREES § 197-46.1
187:949
§ 197-46.1. First-floor elevations for single-family residences.
[Added 7-16-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003110]
The first-floor elevation (excluding basements) for single-family residences
located in one-family districts (i.e., R-1 through R-6) shall not be more
than three feet above the average preexisting grade (as defined in § 197-1)
abutting the front building line of the residence. This provision shall not
apply in the following cases:
§ 197-47. Front yard restrictions. [Amended 12-1-1999 by L.L. No.
10-1999]
The restrictions in the various districts as to front yard lines shall be as set
forth in the Table of Regulations, incorporated as Article VIII of this chapter.
No building or structure shall be erected within the required front yard
except as permitted in Chapter 90, Fences and Walls.
§ 197-48. Exception for existing building alignment.
If the alignment of existing buildings within 100 feet on each side of the
lot in question and within the same district and block between the nearest
two intersecting streets is nearer the street than the setback line above
prescribed, any building or structure may extend as near the street lot
line as the average formed by the prescribed setback and such existing
alignment. This provision shall not apply to apartments in all RA Districts.
§ 197-49. (Reserved)
§ 197-50. (Reserved)111
A. Area of special flood hazard. Where a residence is situated in an area of
special flood hazard, the first-floor elevation shall be no less than the
minimum floor elevation required to comply with Chapter 100,
Floodplain Management, of the Rye City Code.
B. Modifications to existing residences. The requirement that the firstfloor
elevation shall not be more than three feet above the average
preexisting grade (as defined in § 197-1) shall not apply where an
expansion is proposed to an existing residence that increases the floor
area of the first floor by less than 50%.
C. Corner lots. In the case of a property having frontage on more than one
street, the applicant shall have the option of choosing only one front
yard in meeting the requirements of this section.
110. Editor's Note: This local law also stated that it would not apply if a building permit
application or Zoning Board of Appeals application had been received by the City prior to
7-3-2003.
111. Editor's Note: Former § 197-49, Traffic visibility across corners, and § 197-50, Fences and
terraces, as amended, were repealed 12-1-1999 by L.L. No. 9-1999. See now Ch. 90, Fences
and Walls.
§ 197-46.1 RYE CODE § 197-51
187:950
§ 197-51. Front yard for rear lot.
Where a residence is to be located on a lot in such a position that that
portion of the lot including required side and rear yards is to the rear of
some other lot on which a residence is or may be located, the minimum
distance of the residence on the rear lot from the nearest point of the
other lot shall be 50 feet greater than the depth of the required front yard
specified in the Table of Regulations.112
§ 197-52. Front yards for corner lots.
The owner of a corner lot shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have
the privilege of calling either street lot line the front, without reference
to the building arrangement, except that any part of such a parcel more
than 100 feet from the front street lot line shall be considered as fronting
on the side street for purposes of determining its required front, side and
rear yards. On any corner lot in a residential subdivision approved by the
Planning Commission after the effective date of this section, the building
shall observe the required front yard setback on each of its street frontages.
§ 197-53. Side yard restrictions.
In any residence district a side yard extending through from the front yard
line to the rear is required along each side lot line of each lot, except
as hereinafter prescribed, within which no building or structure shall be
erected except as hereinafter permitted. The restrictions as to side yards
in the various districts shall be as set forth in the Table of Regulations,
incorporated as Article VIII of this chapter.
§ 197-54. Apartment house side yards. [Amended 4-21-1982 by Ord.
No. 2-1982; readopted 11-21-1984 by Ord. No. 1-1984]
In RA-1, RA-2, RA-3, RA-4 and RA-5 Districts where all the habitable rooms
of any dwelling unit face only upon one side yard, the minimum width of the
side yard opposite such rooms shall be 30 feet in an RA-5 District and the
same as the required rear yard depth in all other districts; and where some
of the habitable rooms of any dwelling unit face upon one side yard and the
other such rooms of the same dwelling units face only upon the other side
yard, the minimum width of one side yard shall be the same as the required
front yard depth opposite such rooms and of the other side yard 30 feet in
an RA-5 District and the same as the required rear yard depth in all other
districts.
§ 197-55. Side yards in business districts.
In business districts, except as required by § 197-69, no side yards are
required except as specified in the schedule of side yard requirements, but
if a side yard is provided or is substituted for a required court, its width
112. Editor's Note: See § 197-86, Tables of regulations.
§ 197-51 TREES § 197-55
187:951
shall be at least six feet, and for the purposes of determining its width, the
lowest story it is required to serve shall be considered the ground story.
§ 197-56. Reduction of side yard widths. [Amended 6-18-1968 by
Ord. No. 3-1968]
For each foot by which a lot, at the time of enactment of this chapter, is
narrower than the required width in the district in which it is located, one
inch shall be deducted from the required width of any side yard and two
inches from the required sum of both side yards, provided that no side yard
shall be narrower than eight feet in any R, RS, RT or RA-1 District or six feet
in any other district. This provision shall not apply to apartments in RA-1
Districts.
§ 197-57. Side walls not parallel to lot line.
Where a side wall of a building is not parallel to the side lot line, the
required width of any side yard may be taken as the average width,
provided that said side yard shall not be narrower at any point than 3/4 of
the required side yard width.
§ 197-58. Location of accessory buildings.
In any residence district no part of any accessory building, garage or stable
situated within 75 feet, or a distance equal to 75% of the lot depth if that be
less, of the street line shall extend within any required side yard. Elsewhere
on the lot it may extend to within the distance of the side lot line set forth
in the Table of Regulations, incorporated as Article VIII of this chapter.
§ 197-59. Mutual garages across lot lines.
In any residence district a detached garage may be built across a common
lot line by written agreement between adjoining property owners, recorded
in the office of the County Clerk.
§ 197-60. (Reserved)113
§ 197-61. Projections into side yards.
Bays, balconies, chimneys, flues and fire escapes may project into a
required side yard not more than 1/3 of the width of the latter, nor more
than 3 1/2 feet in any case. Open iron fire escapes and ground story bays or
porches, not over half the length of the side wall, may project into any side
yard 3 1/2 feet. Belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels and ornamental
features may project not more than one foot and cornices and gutters not
more than two feet over a required sideyard. In any case no such projection
shall come within three feet of any side lot line.
113. Editor's Note: Former § 197-60, Fences and walls not in front yards, as amended, as
repealed 12-1-1999 by L.L. No. 9-1999. See now Ch. 90, Fences and Walls.
§ 197-55 RYE CODE § 197-62
187:952
§ 197-62. Side yards for certain corner lots.
Where the rear lot line of a corner lot is also the side line of a lot fronting
on the side street, no main or accessory building shall be erected on the
rear third of the corner lot nearer to the side street than the required front
setback on the side street, except that for any such corner lot created after
the effective date of this chapter, the side yard along the entire side street
frontage of the corner lot shall not be less than the required front yard on
the side street.
§ 197-63. Rear yard restrictions.
In every district there shall be a rear yard on every lot, except as hereinafter
specified, within which no building or structure shall be erected except
as hereinafter provided. The restrictions as to rear yards in the various
districts shall be as set forth in the Table of Regulations, incorporated as
Article VIII of this chapter.
§ 197-64. Rear yards in business districts. [Amended 9-21-1960 by
resolution; 3-21-1962 by Ord. No. 2-1962; 10-24-1963 by Ord. No.
7-1963]
Except as required by § 197-69, there shall be a rear yard having a depth
at least equal to the height of each building in a business district, provided
that this section shall not be interpreted as requiring that any part of
a business property within 60 feet of a street be devoted to rear yard.
Where a rear or side yard for other than one- and two-family residences,
hotels and lodging houses in an RA-1, RA-2, RA-3, RA-4 or Business District
would adjoin the right-of-way of a railroad, a parkway or a limited access
highway, the rear or side yard requirement may be waived by the Board
of Appeals in accordance with § 197-82. In the case of a development
plan for apartments and nonresidential structures requiring the approval
of the Planning Commission, and in the case of uses permitted subject to
additional standards and requirements, the rear or side yard requirement
may be waived by the Building Inspector on recommendation of the
Planning Commission. Accessory structures in the rear yard area shall be
permitted to be extended to the side lines and rear line of said rear yard.
§ 197-65. Accessory buildings in rear yards.
Accessory buildings may occupy portions of the required rear yards as
indicated in the table in Article VIII, except that no garage or other
accessory building may be located within three feet of a rear lot line in all
residence districts, provided that any building accessory to apartments in
RA-1 Districts may not be located within 10 feet of a rear lot line.
§ 197-66. Reduction of rear yards.
For each foot by which a lot at the time of enactment of this chapter is less
than 100 feet deep, four inches may be deducted from the required depth
of the rear yard, provided that no rear yard shall be less than 10 feet in
§ 197-62 TREES § 197-66
187:953
depth any case. In any district no lot shall be so reduced in area after the
enactment of this chapter as to make the required rear yard less in depth
than is prescribed herein for a lot 100 feet in depth.
§ 197-67. Projections into rear yards.
Chimneys and flues, elevator shafts and connecting hallways, fire escapes,
fire balconies and fireproof outside stairways, bays and balconies, cornices
and belt courses may project not over 3 1/2 feet into a required rear yard.
No permitted projection into a required rear yard, except cornices and belt
courses, shall extend within 15 feet of a rear lot line or within eight feet of
an accessory building.
§ 197-68. Open space provision. [Amended 10-24-1963 by Ord. No.
7-1963; 4-21-1982 by Ord. No. 2-1982; readopted 11-21-1984 by
Ord. No. 1-1984; 2-17-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
Included in every lot used in whole or in part for residences for three or
more families, there shall be a total area allotted, designed appropriately,
developed and maintained for outdoor recreational use equal to at least 400
square feet per family, except that this may be reduced to 200 square feet
per family in an RA-2, RA-3 or RA-4 District and to 40 square feet per family
and an RA-5 District. Development of said outdoor recreational space shall
be subject to the following restrictions:
A. Such space shall be of such grade and dimensions as to be in fact usable
for recreation, with at least 75% of the area having a grade of less than
5% and with no dimension less than 20 feet, and shall be located
conveniently to building entrances and not less than 10 feet away from
any residence structure and any lot line.
B. Outdoor tennis courts, paddle courts, racquet courts and other similar
courts, swimming pools and other active recreational activities shall be
subject to the following restrictions:
(1) They shall be set back from all property lines of abutting properties
not included in the site development plan a distance at least equal
to the number of proposed residences times 10 feet but not to
exceed 300 feet and not less than 20 feet from any proposed
residence in the development.
(2) They shall be screened, including accessory equipment, from the
view of the street and abutting residentially owned properties.
Such screening shall, at a minimum, consist of a ten-foot-wide
landscape strip planted and maintained with at least a double row
of alternately spaced evergreens, with an actual height of at least
six feet above the natural grade when installed.
(3) Fence heights shall not be in excess of six feet above the average
natural grade, except that fences not exceeding a height of 10 feet
above the average natural grade, which are open mesh and are set
§ 197-66 RYE CODE § 197-68
187:954
§ 197-69. Transitional yard requirements. [Amended 5-2-1956;
9-21-1960 by resolution; 3-18-1964 by Ord. No. 2-1964; 7-15-1964
by Ord. No. 11-1964; 4-7-1965 by Ord. No. 1-1965]
In any business district, a side yard or rear yard abutting a residence
district shall conform to the requirements in that residence district as
to minimum width or depth and as to maximum percentage of rear yard
occupied by accessory buildings, and a strip at least 10 feet wide along
such side or rear lot line shall be planted and maintained with appropriate
landscaping. In any business district facing a residence district across a
street, there shall be a front yard which shall be planted and maintained
with appropriate landscaping, shall contain no parking, storage or other
business use and shall be crossed only by sidewalks and access drives. The
front yard shall be at least 10 feet in depth in B-1, B-2 and B-6 Districts, at
least five feet in B-7 Districts and as specified elsewhere in this chapter for
B-3, B-4 and B-5 Districts. Required landscaping shall include evergreens
sufficient to screen from view from the street or from abutting property any
accessory parking area and any business operations, other than operations
such as servicing of cars at filling stations, not hidden by buildings or other
walls or fences. In the case of a required site development plan or a use
permitted subject to additional standards and requirements, a fence or wall
suitable in appearance to the surrounding area may be substituted for or
back and screened, as required for tennis and other similar courts,
are permitted and may be equipped with the customary attached
windbreaks.
(4) Tennis and other similar courts shall have no lighting.
(5) Swimming pools shall have no floodlighting, directly or indirectly,
and all other lighting shall be arranged and shaded so as to reflect
light away from adjoining premises or a public street.
(6) Swimming pools shall be completely surrounded by fences,
freestanding walls and/or the walls of a building containing no
doors, at least four feet high above grade at all points, and each
gate or door opening through the fence or freestanding wall shall
be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping
the gate or door securely closed at all times and shall be locked
when the pool is not in actual use.
(7) Swimming pools shall be located at least 25 feet away from any
septic tank and its fields.
C. The Planning Commission may modify these requirements where, in its
judgment, it deems such modifications desirable and appropriate
because of characteristics of the specific site, such as topography, size,
shape and location, and proximity to facilities such as streets, schools,
public buildings and facilities, other recreational facilities and similar
active use areas.
§ 197-68 TREES § 197-69
187:955
required in addition to the landscaping on recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
§ 197-70. Building spacing. [Amended 2-7-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
Two or more buildings for more than two families on the same lot shall
be located so that the primary entrance to the building, whether a main
entrance serving several dwelling units in the building or a separate
entrance to an individual dwelling unit in the building, is located on a side
of the building which is parallel to the street upon which the property has
frontage. Each building, whether principal or accessory, shall be at least 25
feet distant from any other building in the group, which distance shall be
measured in a straight line between the points of the buildings which are
nearest each other. In the case of principal buildings, no principal building
shall be located on the site such that another principal building on the
site will be located between it and the street upon which the property has
frontage, unless they are separated by a distance of not less than 75 feet,
which distance shall be measured in a straight line between the points
of the buildings which are nearest each other. The Planning Commission
may modify the strict application of the requirements of this section in a
specific case where it is demonstrated to the Planning Commission that said
modification will accomplish the following:
§ 197-71. Setbacks for existing houses in new subdivisions. [Added
11-15-1967 by Ord. No. 4-1967]
In order to provide a suitable lot for any existing house in a new subdivision,
each proposed lot line shall be located away from the building a distance
equal to the normal minimum yard dimension or a distance equal to half the
sum of the length and height of the building facade parallel or substantially
parallel to that proposed lot line, whichever is greater.
§ 197-72. When courts required.
In any district, wherever any rooms in which persons live, sleep or work,
except stores or storage rooms, cannot be reasonably and adequately
lighted and ventilated from a street or from a side yard or rear yard
as required in this chapter, a court conforming to the provisions of the
following sections shall be provided on which such rooms shall open. Such
court need not extend below the lowest story it is required to serve.
A. Be more compatible with the character of the neighborhood, including
the predominant streetscape in the area.
B. Provide for a safe site with sufficient separation between buildings to
ensure adequate air and light for the dwelling units.
C. Reduce the potential impacts of surface water runoff.
§ 197-69 RYE CODE § 197-73
187:956
§ 197-73. Court restrictions. [Amended 10-24-1963 by Ord. No.
7-1963; 6-18-1968 by Ord. No. 3-1968]
The restrictions as to courts in the various districts and at various heights
shall be as follows:
Outer Court Inner Court
Width for each foot of court height
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, RS, RT
and RA-1 Districts
8 inches 12 inches
RA-2, RA-3, RA-4 Districts and
residential buildings in business
districts
6 inches 9 inches
Nonresidential buildings in
business districts
4 inches 6 inches
Minimum width of court in any case
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, RS, RT
and RA-1 Districts
8 feet 12 feet
RA-2, RA-3, RA-4 Districts and
residential buildings in business
districts
6 feet 9 feet
Nonresidential buildings in
business districts
4 feet 6 feet
Maximum ratio of length to width of
outer court
R.1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, RS, RT
and RA-1 Districts
2 times
RA-2, RA-3, RA-4 Districts and
residential buildings in business
districts
4 times
Nonresidential buildings in
business districts
6 times
§ 197-74. Area of inner courts.
No inner court shall be shorter than twice its width, except that such court
may be shorter and wider, provided that its area is at least the same as that
of the required inner court.
§ 197-75. Courts between apartment wings.
When a court is enclosed by apartment wings either of which contains all
the rooms of one or more dwelling units, its width shall be not less than 18
inches for each foot of court height, and its length shall not exceed its width
unless the width is greater than 40 feet, and shall not exceed 1 1/2 times its
width unless the width is greater than 60 feet.
§ 197-73 TREES § 197-76
187:957
§ 197-76. Projections into courts.
Required courts shall be open to the sky, unobstructed, except that cornices,
gutters, belt courses, sills, pilasters and ornamental features may project
not more than six inches into such courts.
§ 197-77. Fences and walls within courts.
No fence or wall above a height of six feet, except retaining wall, shall be
permitted within the limits of any required outer court.
§ 197-78. Accessory buildings excluded from courts.
No accessory building shall be located within any required court.
§ 197-76 RYE CODE § 197-78
187:958
ARTICLE VI
Appeals
§ 197-79. Creation of Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals is hereby created as provided by law.
§ 197-80. Interpretative jurisdiction of Board.
The Board of Appeals in a specific case, after public notice and hearing,
shall decide any question or dispute as to the meaning or intent of any word,
phrase, provision, requirement or regulation contained in this chapter,
whether brought before it by any municipal officer or agency or by an
interested person.
§ 197-81. Appellate jurisdiction of Board. [Amended 3-19-1997 by
Ord. No. 3-1997]
A. Orders, requirements, decisions, interpretations, determinations. The
Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination
appealed from and shall make such order, requirement, decision,
interpretation or determination as in its opinion ought to have been
made in the matter by the administrative official charged with the
enforcement of such ordinance or local law and to that end shall have
all the powers of the administrative official from whose order,
requirement, decision, interpretation or determination the appeal is
taken.
B. Definitions. As used in this § 197-81, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
AREA VARIANCE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals
for the use of land in a manner which is not allowed by the dimensional
or physical requirements of the applicable zoning regulations.
USE VARIANCE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals
for the use of land for a purpose which is otherwise not allowed or is
prohibited by the applicable zoning regulations.
C. Use variances.
(1) The Board of Appeals, on appeal from the decision or determination
of the administrative official charged with the enforcement of such
ordinance or local law, shall have the power to grant use variances,
as defined herein.
(2) No such use variance shall be granted by a Board of Appeals
without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning
regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship. In
order to prove such unnecessary hardship the applicant shall
demonstrate to the Board of Appeals that for each and every
§ 197-79 TREES § 197-81
187:959
permitted use under the zoning regulations for the particular
district where the property is located:
(a) The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that
lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by competent
financial evidence;
(b) The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is
unique and does not apply to a substantial portion of the
district or neighborhood;
(c) The requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
(d) The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(3) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall grant
the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to
address the unnecessary hardship proven by the applicant and at
the same time preserve and protect the character of the
neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
D. Area variances.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power, upon an appeal
from a decision or determination of the administrative official
charged with the enforcement of such ordinance or local law, to
grant area variances as defined herein.
(2) In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take
into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the variance is
granted, as weighed against the detriment to the health, safety and
welfare of the neighborhood or community by such grant. In
making such determination the Board shall also consider whether:
(a) Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area variance;
(b) The benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved by some
method feasible for the applicant to pursue, other than an area
variance;
(c) The requested area variance is substantial;
(d) The proposed variance will have an adverse effect or impact on
the physical or environmental conditions in the neighborhood
or district; and
(e) The alleged difficulty was self-created, which consideration
shall be relevant to the decision of the Board of Appeals but
shall not necessarily preclude the granting of the area
variance.
§ 197-81 RYE CODE § 197-81
187:960
(3) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall grant
the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate
and at the same time preserve and protect the character of the
neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
E. Imposition of conditions. The Board of Appeals shall, in the granting of
both use variances and area variances, have the authority to impose
such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to
and incidental to the proposed use of the property. Such conditions
shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of the zoning ordinance or
local law and shall be imposed for the purpose of minimizing any
adverse impact such variance may have on the neighborhood or
community.
F. To facilitate public notification, the applicant shall prepare a public
notification list using the most current City of Rye Tax Maps and Tax
Assessment Roll, showing the Tax Map sheet, block and lot number, the
owner's name and the owner's mailing address for each property
located wholly or partially within 300 feet of the perimeter of the
property that is the subject of the application. The applicant shall
deliver a copy of the public notice provided by the City Clerk to all of
the property owners contained on the public notification list by mail in
accordance with the following requirements: [Amended 3-10-2010 by
L.L. No. 4-2010114]
(1) The mailing shall be limited solely to the public notice provided to
the applicant by the City Clerk.
(2) The public notice shall be mailed to all property owners by certified
mail with certificate of mailing (no return receipt necessary) at a
post office or official depository of the Postal Service, at least 10
days prior to the date of the public hearing.
(3) At least five business days prior to the public hearing, the
subdivider shall provide to the City Clerk all certificates of mailing.
(4) In accordance with General City Law, at least five days prior to the
public hearing, the City will publish a notice regarding the public
hearing in the official newspaper of the City. The applicant shall be
responsible for payment of all fees associated with such publication
and any subsequent publication necessary.
114. Editor's Note: This local law provided that it shall take effect 5-1-2010.
§ 197-81 TREES § 197-82
187:961
§ 197-82. Original jurisdiction of Board. [Amended 11-18-1959;
3-21-1962 by L.L. No. 2-1962; 10-24-1963 by L.L. No. 7-1963;
4-1-1964 by L.L. No. 6-1964; 6-21-1976 by L.L. No. 10-1976;
3-5-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980; 5-6-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981; 2-18-1985
by L.L. No. 17-1985; 8-15-1990 by L.L. No. 14-1990; 2-5-1992 by L.L.
No. 2-1992; 1-20-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
The Board of Appeals may in a specific case, after public notice and hearing
and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, determine and grant
special exceptions to the regulations herein established, in harmony with
their general purpose and intent, as follows:
A. Expansion of a nonconforming use: permit the expansion of
nonconforming uses or buildings upon the land occupied by such uses
at the time such uses become nonconforming or on land adjoining,
provided that such adjoining land was under the same ownership as the
land in question at that time and provided that there has been no
substitution of a new use for the original nonconforming use and
provided that such extension or extensions of nonconforming uses shall
not exceed in all 30% of the floor area of the building containing the
nonconforming use at the time it became nonconforming, and the
expansion or extension of a nonconforming use shall not exceed in all
an increase of 30% in the intensity of the use at the time it became
nonconforming, which percentage shall be related to number of
employees, hours of operation, number of vehicles or such other
characteristics or combination of characteristics as the Board of
Appeals determines as the most accurate measure of the intensity of
the particular use. In each case, the Board shall give consideration to
and make a finding that the following conditions prevail prior to
approving a special exemption:
(1) The expansion or extension will not have a significant adverse
impact on surrounding conforming development.
(2) Proposed off-street parking complies with the provisions of
§ 197-26.
(3) The use is not a use prohibited by the provisions of § 197-22.
B. Expansion into a more restricted district: permit the expansion of a use
or building, within the same lot as such lot existed at the time the
district boundary was established, into a contiguous more restricted
district, but in no case for a distance of more than 25 feet into the more
restricted district.
C. Substitution for a nonconforming use: permit a substitution for an
existing nonconforming use, provided that such substitution is in
accordance with the provisions of § 197-5A(2).
D. Construction of a single-family dwelling on a nonconforming lot: permit
the construction of a single-family dwelling on a lot that does not
§ 197-82 RYE CODE § 197-82
187:962
conform to the requirements of the district in which it is located,
subject to the provisions of § 197-37.
E. Joint use of parking space: approve the joint use of parking space as
provided in § 197-29.
F. Reduction of side yards and waiving of off-street parking requirements:
reduce to not less than eight feet the required side yards for a dwelling
proposed to be converted for up to four families in RA-1, RA-2, RA-3,
RA-4 and B-3 Districts, as provided in Article VIII, Tables of
Regulations, and waive off-street parking requirements for such
proposed conversions in RA-3 Districts where the Building Inspector
finds it impossible to provide the required parking.
G. Reduction of yard requirements as authorized under § 197-64.
H. Issue permits: grant a permit wherever it is provided in this chapter
that the approval of the Board of Appeals is required.
I. Permit the use of floor space in existing buildings in the B-2 Central
Business District which is in excess of the maximum permitted in the
district on the effective date of this chapter, provided that the total
usable space in the building will not exceed a floor-area-to-lot-area ratio
of 2.80 and the excess floor space will be used for a use permitted in the
district, which shall not include the expansion of a nonconforming use.
J. Permit reductions in the standards required by § 197-6.1 of this chapter
and Chapter 100 of this Code, subject to the requirements of § 197-37.1
of this chapter.
K. Permit the filming of movies, commercials, documentaries, serials,
shows, performances or other similar events and activities, including
still photography in excess of filming permitted as an accessory use,
subject to the following requirements and limitations:
(1) Such filming shall also be subject to the requirements of Chapter
93 of this Code.
(2) The Board shall deny any application for a special exception which
in its judgment will be detrimental to the neighborhood because of
anticipated excessive noise, illumination or other effect caused by
the proposed filming.
§ 197-82 TREES § 197-82
187:963

ARTICLE VII
Interpretation and Enforcement
§ 197-83. Interpretation and purpose.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety, morals, comfort, prosperity and general welfare.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any
way impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law or ordinance
or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or
which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of
buildings or premises; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes
a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon heights
of buildings, or requires larger yards, courts or other open spaces than
are imposed or required by such existing provision of law or ordinance or
by such rules or regulations or permits, the provision of this chapter shall
control.
§ 197-84. Enforcement.
A. Enforced by the Building Inspector. This chapter shall be enforced by
the Building Inspector in accordance with the administrative provisions
of the Building Code115 and of this chapter, except in such provisions
which provide for enforcement by other City officers or officials. No
permit for excavation, construction or filling and/or dredging shall be
issued by the City Clerk until the Building Inspector or other official or
officer so designated is satisfied that the plan, specifications and
intended use conform to the provisions of this chapter. [Amended
10-18-1972 by Ord. No. 2-1972]
B. Filing plans. All applications for building permits as required by the
Building Code116 shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to
scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built
upon, the exact size and location on the lot of the buildings and
accessory buildings existing and the lines within which the building or
structure shall be erected or altered, the existing and intended use of
each building or part of a building, the number of families or
housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate and such
other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be
necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
One copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner when such plans
shall have been approved by the Building Inspector. All dimensions
shown on these plans relating to the location and size of the lot to be
built upon shall be based on an actual survey and the lot shall be staked
out on the ground before construction is started.
115. Editor's Note: See Ch. 68, Building Construction.
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. 68, Building Construction.
§ 197-83 TREES § 197-84
187:965
C. Certificate of compliance. [Amended 12-5-1984 by L.L. No.
17-1994; 6-18-1986 by L.L. No. 10-1986; 5-31-1995 by L.L. No.
8-1995; 12-17-1997 by L.L. No. 17-1997]
(1) It shall be unlawful for an owner to use or permit the use of any
building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted or enlarged, wholly or partly, in its use or
structure, until a certificate of compliance shall have been issued
by the Clerk upon the approval of the Building Inspector. Such
certificate shall show that such building or premises or part thereof
and the proposed use thereof are in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.
(2) Under such rules and regulations as may be established by the
Building Inspector, a temporary certificate of compliance for a part
of a building may be issued herein by the Clerk upon the approval
of the Building Inspector.
(3) Upon written request from the owner and payment by him of a fee,
to be set by the City Council annually by resolution before adoption
of the budget, the Clerk shall issue a certificate of occupancy, after
inspection and approval by the Building Inspector, for any building
or premises for which no certificate has been issued or no record of
an application can be found, certifying the extent and kind of use or
disposition of the building or premises and whether such use or
disposition conforms to the provisions of this chapter. [Amended
12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 14-1998]
(4) No final certificate of compliance shall be issued for a structure,
access to which is from a street or streets in a new subdivision,
which street or streets has or have been or is or are to be
constructed under a performance bond or other suitable security,
unless the City Engineer has certified to the Building Inspector that
the traveled way giving access to the structure or structures is
suitable for general automobile and truck use and shall be kept
suitable for such use. In addition to street or streets in said
subdivision, there shall be included those street or streets adjacent
or abutting, whether private or public, wherein the developer has
or will have done any construction work in connection with said
subdivision. Failure of the developer to proceed with remedial
action necessary within 72 hours following written notice from the
City Engineer shall be cause for the City Engineer to have the work
done, the charges for which shall be applied against said
performance bond or other security.
(5) Waiver of penalties and fees and architectural review.
(a) All penalties and additional fees arising from the failure to
secure a building permit before the beginning of construction
are waived, provided that the applicant shows by clear and
convincing proof that:
§ 197-84 RYE CODE § 197-84
187:966
[1] The construction for which no permit was secured was for
a modification or addition to a single-family or two-family
residence;
[2] The construction was completed either before January 1,
1985, or before the date on which the construction was
entered in the City's assessment records; and
[3] A building permit application for the project is filed before
June 30, 1998.
(b) Any building permit issued under this subsection based upon
the work being completed before January 1, 1985, shall not
require approval of the Board of Architectural Review.
D. Pending applications for building permits. All permits for buildings or
structures issued prior to the enactment of this chapter, including
permits authorized by the Board of Appeals or the Planning
Commission, which are contrary to the provisions of this chapter, shall
be null and void unless substantial work has been done toward the
construction of said building or structure, including completion of the
ground story framework and the second tier of beams. If any of the
above requirements shall not have been fulfilled within the time
between the filing of the application and the enactment of this chapter,
or if building operations are discontinued for a period of six months, any
further construction shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.
E. Penalties. Any owner, lessee, architect or builder or the agent of any of
them who violates or is accessory to the violation of any provision of this
chapter, or fails, neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of this
chapter or any rule, regulation, order or special direction duly made
thereunder, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not
more than $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, and each day such violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 1-7-1976 by Ord. No.
1-1976]
F. Fees. [Amended 4-15-1964 by Ord. No. 7-1964; 1-7-1976 by Ord.
No. 1-1976; 12-5-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984; 10-19-1988 by L.L.
No. 16-1988; 4-4-1990 by L.L. No. 9-1990; 4-17-1991 by L.L. No.
5-1991; 12-18-1991 by L.L. No. 32-1991; 11-18-1992 by L.L. No.
15-1992; 12-16-1992 by L.L. No. 23-1992; 3-6-1996 by L.L. No.
1-1996; 12-18-1996 by L.L. No. 18-1996; 10-8-1997 by L.L. No.
15-1997; 12-16-1998 by L.L. No. 14-1998]
(1) Upon the filing of an application for site development plans and
uses subject to additional standards and requirements, fees shall
be payable in connection with the following. The City Council shall
set the fees annually by resolution before adoption of the budget:
(a) Informal review of a new use or building.
§ 197-84 TREES § 197-84
187:967
(b) Preliminary application for a new use or building. In the event
that more than one public hearing is held, a fee shall be paid
for each additional public hearing.
(c) Final application for a new use or building. In the event that
more than one public hearing is held, a fee shall be paid for
each additional public hearing.
(d) Application for modification of a preliminary approval
requiring public hearing. In the event that more than one
public hearing is held, a fee shall be paid for each additional
public hearing. If the approval has expired, then the fee shall
be the above fee plus that fee times the number of years or
fraction thereof that have elapsed since the expiration of the
approval.
(e) Application for modification of a preliminary approval not
requiring public hearing. If the approval has expired, then the
fee shall be the above fee plus that fee times the number of
years or fraction thereof that have elapsed since the expiration
of the approval.
(f) Application for modification of a final approval requiring public
hearing. In the event that more than one public hearing is held,
a fee shall be paid for each additional public hearing. If the
approval has expired, then the fee shall be the above fee plus
that fee times the number of years or fraction thereof that have
elapsed since the expiration of the approval.
(g) Application for modification of a final approval not requiring
public hearing. If the approval has expired, then the fee shall
be the above fee plus that fee times the number of years or
fraction thereof that have elapsed since the expiration of the
approval.
(h) An inspection fee. (NOTE: An application involving both a site
development plan and use subject to additional standards and
requirements will be required to pay only one fee.)
(i) In addition, the Planning Commission, in the review of the
application, may refer such application to the Westchester
County Soil and Water Conservation District for a written
review. Fees charged by the Westchester County Soil and
Water Conservation District for its written review shall be paid
by the applicant before action is taken on the application.
Payment of the fee shall be a check made payable to the
Westchester County Soil and Water Conservation District and
shall be submitted to the City Planner for transmittal to the
Westchester County Soil and Water Conservation District.
(j) Due to the large additional administrative and inspection
expenses incurred by the City, an additional application fee
§ 197-84 RYE CODE § 197-84
187:968
shall be payable when construction or occupancy has
commenced prior to the issuance of a resolution of approval
from the Rye City Planning Commission, or when construction
and/or use which requires modification of a previous approval
has commenced prior to the issuance of a resolution of
approval from the Rye City Planning Commission, except in the
following specific cases:
[1] The additional fee shall not apply to trees removed without
prior approval; such removal shall remain subject to the
fees set forth in § 197-84F(1)(f) and (g).
[2] If a building permit and/or a certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the Building Department or a street
opening permit and/or surface water control permit has
been issued by the Engineering Department prior to
construction, the additional fee shall be reduced by 75%.
[3] The additional fee shall not apply to minor variations in the
siting of buildings and other site improvements; such site
variations shall remain subject to the fees set forth in
§ 197-84F(1)(f) and (g).
(k) The Planning Commission, in the review of any application,
may refer such application to such engineering, planning,
legal, technical or environmental consultant or other
professionals, hereinafter referred to as "consultant or
consultants," as it deems reasonably necessary to enable it to
review such application as required by law, provided that the
required expertise is not available from City staff, and subject
to the following:
[1] The detailed statement of the consulting services to be
provided by the consultant shall include the consultant's
fees for said services and a statement by the consultant
that the applicant, not the City, shall be ultimately
responsible to the consultant for the services provided.
The detailed statement shall be sent to the applicant by the
City Planner, by certified mail, return receipt requested.
[2] If the applicant wishes to review the services and the costs
with the Planning Commission, the request for a review
shall be in writing and mailed to the City Planner, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, within seven days
of their receipt of the service and cost statement provided
by the City Planner. The Planning Commission shall review
the services and costs with the applicant at its next regular
meeting following receipt of the request.
[3] The City Planner shall authorize the consultant to proceed
if he has not received a written request for a review of the
consultant's services and costs from the applicant within
§ 197-84 TREES § 197-84
187:969
§ 197-85. Prohibition of permits contrary to pending amendment.
Whenever the Common Council by resolution authorizes a public hearing on
a proposed change in the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map and for a period
of 60 days following such date of resolution, no building shall be erected,
enlarged or altered and no permit shall be issued for the construction,
enlargement or alteration of any building or for the occupancy of any land
or building in any manner that would be contrary to the ordinance or map
as it would be amended by said proposed change.
seven days of the applicant's receipt of the City Planner's
transmittal. The receipt date is the date shown as received
on the return receipt card returned by the post office.
[4] The applicant shall pay the consultant's fee upon receipt of
the consultant's detailed statement for the services
provided. The statement will be forwarded to the applicant
by the City Planner.
[5] Payment of the consultant's fees shall be required in
addition to any and all other fees required by this or any
other section of this chapter or any other City law or
regulation.
[6] The Planning Commission document taking final action on
the application shall not be issued until all consultant's
fees charged in connection with the review of the
applicant's project have been paid. Payment of the
consultant's fees shall be by check made payable to the
consultant and shall be submitted to the City Planner for
transmittal to the consultant.
[7] This Subsection F(1)(k) shall expire two years after the
date of its adoption, unless specifically reenacted by the
City Council.
(2) Upon the filing of an application for rezoning a fee shall be payable
(to be refunded if no public hearing is held).
(3) Upon the filing of an application to the Board of Appeals, fees shall
be payable in connection with the following:
(a) For any application for a one-family residence.
(b) For all other applications.
§ 197-84 RYE CODE § 197-85
187:970
ARTICLE VIII
Tables of Regulations
§ 197-86. Tables of regulations.
Use, area, height, yard, coverage and flood area ratio requirements in
the various districts shall be as follows, subject to such exceptions and
limitations as are specified in other sections of this chapter:
TABLE OF REGULATIONS: TABLE A
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS — USE REGULATIONS
Column 1
Permitted Main Uses
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 and RS Districts
(1) Houses. A single detached residence on its own lot for not more
than one family.
RT Districts
(1) Uses permitted in R-6 Districts. Not subject to additional
standards and requirements.
(2) Houses for two families. A detached house on its own lot for not
more than two families or housekeeping units, or a house for not
more than one family on each side of a party wall; such house
shall be deemed a single main building.
RA-1 Districts
(1) Uses permitted in RT Districts not subject to additional standards
and requirements.
(2) Apartments. A detached residence for three or more families or
housekeeping units, or a group of buildings housing three or
more families on one lot, subject to the requirements of § 197-7.
RA-2 Districts
(1) Uses permitted in RA-1 Districts not subject to additional
standards and requirements.
RA-3 Districts
(1) Uses permitted in RA-1 Districts not subject to additional
standards and requirements.
(2) Nontransient hotels and lodging houses. A hotel or lodging house
for any number of guests but not primarily for transients,
provided that a structure with six or more guest sleeping rooms
shall be subject to the requirements of § 197-7.
RA-4 Districts
(1) Uses permitted in RA-1 Districts not subject to additional
standards and requirements.
§ 197-86 TREES § 197-86
187:971
RA-5 Districts [Added 4-21-1982 by Ord. No. 2-1982, readopted
11-21-1984 by Ord. No. 1-1984]
(1) Apartments for senior citizens and handicapped. A detached
residence for three or more families or housekeeping units or
a group of buildings housing three or more families on one lot,
undertaken by private nonprofit sponsors with public financial
assistance, subject to the requirements of § 197-7.
RA-6 Districts [Added 12-2-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
(1) Apartments for active seniors. A detached residence for three
or more families or housekeeping units, or a group of buildings
housing three or more families on one lot, subject to the
requirements of §§ 197-7 and 197-8.1.
RFWP Districts [Added 11-18-1981 by L.L. No. 9-1981]
(1) Any combination of the following residential uses on the same lot,
subject to the requirements of § 197-13.1:
(a) Houses. Single detached residences for not more than one
family.
(b) Houses. Houses for two families. A detached house for not
more than two families or housekeeping units, or a house
for not more than one family on each side of a party wall,
such house to be deemed a single building.
(c) Apartments. Single detached residence for three or more
families or housekeeping units.
LPD-A District [Added 6-15-1983 by L.L. No. 5-1983]
(1) Single-family detached residences for not more than one family,
subject to the requirements of § 197-13.2.
(2) Jay Mansion: A detached single-family residence for not more
than one family or a multifamily residence for not more than
three dwelling units and not more than one family per dwelling
unit, as required by and subject to the requirements of
§ 197-13.2.
(3) Carriage House: A detached single-family residence for not more
than one family or a multifamily residence for not more than six
dwelling units and not more than one family per dwelling unit, as
required by and subject to the requirements of § 197-13.2.
§ 197-86 RYE CODE § 197-86
187:972
TABLE OF REGULATIONS: TABLE A
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS USE REGULATIONS
Column 2
Uses Permitted Subject to Additional
Standards and Requirements
(Subject to the requirements and provisions of § 197-10)
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, RS and RT Districts
(1) Educational uses. Public schools and private and parochial
schools with curricula similar to those of public elementary and
secondary schools and operated under the Education Law of
this state on sites not less than 10 acres in area (except that
in RS Districts any school shall be on a site not less than 1/3
acre), provided that no building, parking area or grounds for
organized games or sports shall be located within the specified
distance from any side or rear lot line adjoining property zoned
for residence and that such buffer space shall be so densely
landscaped as to provide effective visual and sound screening
of such activities or left in its natural state if this will fulfill the
screening objectives; and nonprofit libraries and museums open
to the public.
(2) Public recreational uses. Municipal recreation buildings,
playgrounds, parks and reservations, provided that no
buildings, parking area or grounds for picnicking or organized
games or sports shall be located within the specified distance of
any lot line, subject to the same regulations as for educational
uses.
(3) Private recreational uses. Outdoor and indoor recreational
uses, including but not limited to golf, badminton, tennis,
paddle tennis, bathing, swimming and boating, with
appurtenant clubhouses, except those where a chief activity is
carried on primarily for gain, provided:
(a) A minimum site of 7.5 acres shall be provided.
(b) The floor-area-to-lot-area ratio shall not exceed that
permitted for a single-family residence in the district in
which it is located, except that in an R1 Residential Zoning
District 0.10 shall be the maximum permitted.
(c) Fifty percent of any such site shall be natural ground
cover, to include but not be limited to grass, trees, shrubs
and plants.
(d) No green or fairway shall be located within 1/2 the
specified distance from any lot line.
§ 197-86 TREES § 197-86
187:973
(e) Any building, parking lot or other recreational use shall
be subject to the same regulations as specified for
educational uses. [Amended 10-4-1961 by Ord. No.
13-1961; 10-18-1972 by Ord. No. 4-1972]
(4) Extension of welfare uses. Extension of home for the aged,
religious institutions and public health research institutions
operated by nonprofit corporations organized under the laws of
this state, in existence on or for which a permit was authorized
before January 1, 1958. Any building or structure in connection
with such use shall not be located less than twice the specified
distance from any lot line, subject to the same regulations as
for educational uses. The Planning Commission shall determine
on-site parking requirements based on good standard practice
for the size and type of activity. [Amended 6-16-1993 by L.L.
No. 4-1993]
(5) Public uses. Federal, state, county or municipal buildings or
uses, except any such use as is customarily conducted as a
gainful business.
(6) Nursery schools. Duly licensed nursery schools for not to
exceed 30 children, provided that at least 1,000 square feet of
outdoor play area for each five children or fraction thereof is
provided, located on the premises at such a distance and so
screened from any lot line and from any residential structure on
an adjoining lot as to avoid a noise nuisance.
(7) Agricultural uses. Nurseries, truck gardens, greenhouses and
similar agricultural uses, provided that no greenhouse or other
accessory building shall be located within the specified distance
of any side or rear lot line and that there shall be no sale of
products not growing or grown on the premises and not more
than one unilluminated sign not over six square feet in area
located behind the required front yard line.
(8) Railroad passenger stations and electric substations for local
service only.
(9) Temporary real estate sales office in connection with a
subdivision containing 10 or more lots, located only on part
of the property being or to be subdivided. Any such structure
shall be removed six months after either the last lot in the
subdivision shall have been sold or all required improvements
shall have been completed whichever is earlier.
§ 197-86 RYE CODE § 197-86
187:974
(10) Religious headquarters offices. In R-1 and R-2 Districts only,
headquarters offices of religious organizations on sites of 20
acres or more, provided there shall not be more than five
employees per acre nor more than an equal number of visitors,
provided that not more than 10% of the lot shall be covered by
buildings or otherwise used as headquarters offices of religious
organizations, and provided that no building or parking area
shall be located within the specified distance of any lot line,
except that the Planning Commission may permit the limited
use of existing buildings within the specified distance of any lot
line if such limited use will have no material adverse effect on
adjoining property.
(11) Parking lot or parking garage. In RT Districts as the sole or
secondary use, the storage or parking of private passenger
vehicles of residents of other lots, only when found by the
Planning Commission to be essential to the public interest,
as evidenced by pressing need for off-street parking facilities.
Such parking lot or parking garage use may be permitted to
provide satellite parking for nonconforming public commercial
restaurants, subject to the same finding of essential need.
[Amended 7-17-1985 by L.L. No. 5-1985]
(12) Religious uses. Churches and other places of religious worship.
(13) Residential care facility uses. A residential care facility licensed
or supervised by an appropriate state or federal agency to
provide resident services and twenty-four-hour supervision to
10 or fewer mentally, emotionally, physically or socially disabled
persons or for persons in need of supervision or juvenile
delinquents, provided that: [Added 10-4-1978 by Ord. No.
3-1978]
(a) A minimum site of 0.5 acres shall be provided, with the
following minimum yards: front yard, 35 feet; rear yard,
60 feet; side yard, 30 feet; and a total of two side yards, 80
feet. All other area, height and miscellaneous regulations
shall be the same as required for a single-family residence
in the district in which it is located.
(b) Any building to be erected, converted or occupied shall
maintain the appearance of a single-family residence
when located in a residence district and in any district
shall be compatible with the existing architectural
character of the area.
(c) The applicant has presented a set of regulations, which
shall apply to all employees, residents, visitors and guests,
covering, at a minimum, all outdoor activities and those
indoor activities that are likely to adversely affect
neighboring properties if not properly limited and
supervised.
§ 197-86 TREES § 197-86
187:975
(d) A soundproof indoor recreation room shall be provided for
activities such as but not limited to Ping-Pong and games,
and for the use of sound reproduction or amplification
equipment.
(e) An outdoor recreation area, designed appropriately,
developed and maintained for outdoor recreation use,
shall be provided in accordance with the following
standards:
[1] Required area.
[a] For each resident under 12 years of age: 200
square feet.
[b] For each resident between 12 and 17 years of
age: 300 square feet.
[c] For each resident 18 years of age or older:
150 square feet.
[2] Such area shall be of such a grade and dimensions
as to be, in fact, usable for recreation, with at least
75% of the area having a grade of less than 5% and
with no dimensions less than 20 feet, and shall be
located conveniently to a building entrance other
than the main entrance and shall be outside of the
required front yard.
[3] Such area shall be screened from the view of the
street and abutting residentially zoned property to
a minimum height of six feet when installed, so as
to provide both visual and sound screening.
(f) There shall be sufficient on-site laundry equipment to
accommodate the needs of the facility, and there shall be
no outdoor drying of laundry.
(g) An enclosed trash storage area of adequate size shall be
provided.
(h) Any on-site parking required or proposed shall be laid out
in accordance with the following standards:
[1] Such parking area shall be so laid out as to ensure
that no parking will be permitted on any portion
of any access driveway located within the required
front yard.
[2] Such parking area shall be screened from the view
of the street and abutting residentially zoned
property to a minimum height of six feet when
installed, so as to provide both visual and sound
screening.
(i) The site shall bear the following relationship to other
existing or proposed residential care facilities:
§ 197-86 RYE CODE § 197-86
187:976
[1] Not closer than 1,000 feet, such measurement to be
the length of the shortest line that can be drawn
between the perimeter of the sites.
[2] Not more than one facility in any block.
[3] Not more than one facility per each 179 existing
dwelling units in the planning areas, as defined
by the Rye City Development Plan, in which the
facility will be located, which shall be calculated by
dividing the number of existing dwelling units by
179 and rounding off to the nearest whole number.
(j) The Planning Commission may waive or modify the
requirements of Subsection (13)(d) and (e) where it finds
it is appropriate, and further the Planning Commission
may modify the side yard requirements of Subsection
(13)(a) for an existing building, but in no case shall the
side yard requirements be reduced below the minimum
required in an R-2 Single-Family Residence District.
(14) Adaptive reuse of historic buildings. For a building designated
as a protected structure pursuant to Chapter 117, Landmarks
Preservation, of the Code of the City of Rye, and listed on the
National Register of Historic Places, the Planning Commission
may permit the following uses: [Added 3-18-1992 by L.L. No.
4-1992; amended 6-16-1993 by L.L. No. 6-1993]
(a) Use of the building as an auxiliary facility to an existing
museum, operated as a nonprofit educational corporation
in the City of Rye, for offices, accessory space for library,
conservation, storage of historic artifacts and caretaker's
quarters, provided that said use is the sole use of the
building and site, and further provided that a certificate
of appropriateness is also obtained from the Board of
Architectural Review pursuant to Chapter 117, Landmarks
Preservation, of the Code of the City of Rye. The Planning
Commission shall determine on-site parking requirements
based on good standard practice for the size and type of
activity.
§ 197-86 TREES § 197-86
187:977
(b) For a building designated as a protected structure
pursuant to Chapter 117, Landmarks Preservation, of the
Code of the City of Rye, which is part of a district listed
on the National Register of Historic Places, and owned
by a nonprofit organization, the Planning Commission may
permit use of such building and its site as an historical,
educational and/or cultural facility, including uses such
as meeting rooms and classrooms, office space for notfor-
profit organizations, museum, exhibition, library and
archival space, gift shop space, kitchen facilities and
apartments, and the Planning Commission may permit
use of such building and its site as an environmental
education and visitor center, including laboratory, library
and exhibition space, classrooms and meeting rooms, gift
shop space, kitchen facilities and apartments, provided
that a certificate of appropriateness is also obtained from
the Board of Architectural Review pursuant to Chapter
117, Landmarks Preservation, of the Code of the City
of Rye. The Planning Commission shall determine on-site
parking requirements based on good standard practice for
the size and type of activity and may permit the required
parking that cannot be provided on the site to be provided
on an abutting site or other reasonably nearby site.
RA-1 Districts
(1) As permitted in RT Districts.
(2) Moderate-income housing on properties fronting Cottage
Street or Theodore Fremd Avenue. [Added 6-12-2002 by L.L.
No. 3-2002]
(a) Any buildings erected or converted for moderate-income
housing shall conform to all bulk and dimensional
requirements for one single-family dwelling in the RA-1
Zoning District, except that:
[1] Any required rear yard abutting an interstate
highway may be no less than five feet;
[2] The floor area ration shall be no greater than 1.0;
[3] The provisions of §§ 197-23 and 197-52 shall not
apply; and
[4] The minimum size of lot per family or equivalent
shall be no less than 2,500 square feet.
(b) "Moderate-income housing" shall mean residential
dwelling units in which at least 85% of the units are
available at below-market rates and the purchasers of the
units shall have an income of no more than 80% of the
Westchester County AMI (area median income) adjusted
for household size as published by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
§ 197-86 RYE CODE § 197-86
187:978
RA-2 and RA-3 Districts
(1) As permitted in RT Districts.
(2) Social clubs and lodges except where chief activity is conducted
primarily for gain.
(3) Medical offices. On property fronting on Purchase Street, Cedar
Street, Boston Post Road or Theodore Fremd Avenue, medical
offices for physicians or (Cont'd on page 19770.3) dentists
exclusive of bed care of patients. Any building erected or
converted shall conform to all requirements for residential
structures.
(4) Offices. On property fronting on Purchase Street between the
Cedar-Highland intersection and the New Natoma intersection
and on property fronting on the east side of Boston Post Road
between Cross Street and Purchase Street, offices for clerical,
administrative, professional and agency uses.
RA-4 Districts
(1) As permitted in RT Districts.
(2) Variable height apartment developments. Groups of apartment
houses varying in height, but with no building exceeding 45
feet, subject to the special requirements in § 197-13.
RA-5 Districts [Added 4-21-1982 by Ord. No. 2-1982; readopted
11-21-1984 by Ord. No. 1-1984]
RA-6 Districts [Added 12-2-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
(Reserved)
RFWP Districts [Added 11-18-1981 by L.L. No. 9-1981]
(Reserved)
LPD-A District [Added 6-15-83 by L.L. No. 5-1983]
(Reserved)
TABLE OF REGULATIONS: TABLE A
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS-USE REGULATIONS
Column 3
Permitted Accessory Uses
(Subject to the requirements and provisions of § 197-9)
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, RS and RT Districts
(1) Agriculture and greenhouses. Agriculture, truck gardens and
greenhouses accessory to residences or institutions, provided
that any greenhouse heating plant is at least 20 feet from
any lot line and operated without objectionable air pollution,
fertilizer is stored at least 50 feet away from any lot line and
no retail sales are conducted on the premises.
§ 197-86 TREES § 197-86
187:979
(2) Garages and stables. A one- or two-story garage on the same
lot with or in the main building and in which no business or
industry is conducted.
(3) Boarders and roomers. Renting by a resident family of one
or two rooms to a maximum of two nontransient boarders or
roomers, provided no sign shall be displayed and no separate
cooking facilities shall be maintained in such rooms.
(4) Professional occupation. Office accessory to the residence of
a doctor, dentist, musician, teacher, lawyer, artist, architect,
City planner, engineer or other member of a recognized
profession, provided that not more than one assistant
nonresident on the premises shall be employed upon the
premises.
(5) Home occupations. Telephone answering services and
customary home occupations, such as dressmaking, millinery,
hairdressing, manicuring, laundering, preserving and home
cooking, conducted solely by and employing only a person
or persons resident on the premises. Such use shall not be
carried on in an accessory building and shall not occupy more
than 1/2 of the area of one floor nor more than 1/2 of the area
of one dwelling unit, and only customary home equipment
shall be used, except telephone answering services may
employ only such specialized equipment as can be and is
operated without annoyance to occupants of the same or other
premises by reason of sound or light.
(6) Piers and boathouses. Piers, wharves, boathouses and similar
facilities for the berthing, maintaining and storage of
recreational small craft or other recreational use of the
residents of a one- or two-family house and facilities for
berthing of boats of their guests, provided no activity is
carried on for gain.
(7) Other accessory uses. Other accessory uses or structures
customarily incidental to any permitted use. Outside storage
of boats, boat trailers and automobile trailers or house cars in
residence districts is prohibited unless the boats, boat trailers
and automobile trailers or house cars are owned by the
occupants of the property used for storage, and provided that
such storage is not within the front yard of the property nor a
yard abutting a street. Such storage in said front yard or yard
abutting a street may be permitted by the Board of Appeals
if the Board finds that storage elsewhere on the premises
would create a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship,
and storage in said front yard or yard abutting a street is not
within the vision of motorists in a manner to create a traffic
hazard. [Amended 9-18-1985 by L.L. No. 9-1985]
§ 197-86 RYE CODE § 197-86
187:980
(8) Parish houses and buildings for religious use on the same lot
or on a separate lot within 300 feet of the permitted main
use, and the use of such buildings by community organizations
for social activities and events, provided the Planning
Commission finds that such community use satisfies the
provisions of § 197-10A(1) through (6) of this chapter.
(9) Outdoor tennis courts, paddle courts, racquet courts and
other similar courts and swimming pools, accessory to and on
the same lot with a single- or two-family residence, are subject
to the following limitations: [Added 12-5-1979 by Ord. No.
7-1979]
(a) Outdoor tennis courts, paddle courts, racquet courts and
other similar courts shall:
[1] Not be located in a required front yard.
[2] Be set back from side and rear property lines at
least 20 feet in R-1 Districts and 15 feet in all
other districts.
[3] Be screened, including accessory equipment,
from the view of the street and abutting
residentially zoned properties along the side and
rear property lines. Such screening shall be
reviewed and approved by the Board of
Architectural Review pursuant to §§ 53.3 and 53.4
and the standards contained therein before a
permit may be issued. [Amended 12-1-1982 by
L.L. No. 12-1982]
[4] Have no night lighting.
[5] Not have fence heights in excess of the fence
heights normally permitted, except that fences
not exceeding a height of 10 feet above the
average natural grade, which are open mesh and
are set back and screened as required for the
above courts, are permitted and may be equipped
with the customary attached windbreaks.
(b) Outdoor swimming pools, including accessory
equipment shall:
[1] Not be located in a required front yard.
[2] Be set back, including accessory equipment, from
side and rear property lines at least 20 feet in R.1
Districts and 15 feet in all other districts.
§ 197-86 TREES § 197-86
187:981
[3] Be screened, including accessory equipment,
from the view of the street and abutting
residentially zoned properties along the side and
rear property lines. Such screening shall be
reviewed and approved by the Board of
Architectural Review pursuant to §§ 53-3 and 53-4
and the standards contained therein before a
permit may be issued. [Amended 12-1-1982 by
L.L. No. 12-1982]
[4] Be completely surrounded by fences, freestanding
walls and/or the walls of a building containing no
doors, at least four feet high above grade at all
points, and each gate or door opening through the
fence or freestanding wall shall be equipped with
a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping
the gate or door securely closed at all times and
shall be locked when the pool is not in actual use.
[5] Have no floodlighting, directly or indirectly, and
all other lighting shall be arranged and shaded as
to reflect light away from adjoining premises or a
public street.
[6] Be located at least 25 feet away from any septic
tank and its fields.
(10) The filming of movies, commercials, documentaries, serials,
shows, performances or other similar events and activities,
including still photography, subject to the following
limitations: [Added 12-18-1985 by L.L. No. 17-1985]
(a) Filming shall also be subject to the requirements of
Chapter 93 of this Code.
(b) The number of days of filming shall be limited to not
more than six days in any 12 consecutive months.
[Amended 2-15-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989]
(c) All activity related to filming shall be limited to the hours
of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. [Amended 2-15-1989 by L.L.
No. 2-1989]
(d) Filming in excess of the limitations of Subsection (10)(b)
and (c) above shall be subject to approval by the Board
of Appeals as provided for in § 197-82L of this Code.
RA-1 Districts
(1) As permitted in RT Districts.
RA-2 -Districts
(1) As permitted in RT Districts.
RA-3 Districts
(1) As permitted in RT Districts.
§ 197-86 RYE CODE § 197-86
187:982
(2) Professional occupations with limitation of not more than
three assistants not resident on the premises.
(3) Home occupations with not more than two employees not
resident on the premises and not occupying more than 1/2 the
area of the dwelling unit.
(4) Dining rooms, newsstands, barbershops, beauty parlors and
other such uses accessory to hotels and lodging houses,
provided there is no exterior display or advertising except for
one announcement sign not over six square feet in area for all
such uses and provided such uses shall have no immediate or
independent access from the street.
RA-4 Districts
(1) One-story garages on the same lot with or in the main building
and in which no business or industry is conducted.
(2) Piers, wharves, boathouses and similar facilities for the
berthing, maintaining and storage of recreational small craft
or other recreational use of the residents and facilities for
berthing of boats of their guests, provided no activity is
carried on for gain.
(3) Other accessory uses or structures customarily incidental to
any permitted main use. Outside storage on land of boats and
boat trailers is prohibited.
(4) The filming of movies, commercials, documentaries, serials,
shows, performances or other similar events and activities,
including still photography, subject to the following
limitations: [Added 12-18-1985 by L.L. No. 17-1985]
(a) Filming shall also be subject to the requirements of
Chapter 93 of this Code.
(b) The number of days of filming shall be limited to not
more than 15 days in any 12 consecutive months.
(c) Filming shall be limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
(d) Filming in excess of the limitations of Subsection (4)(b)
and (c) above shall be subject to approval by the Board
of Appeals as provided for in § 197-82L of this Code.
RA-5 Districts [Added 4-21-82 by Ord. No. 2-1982; readopted
11-21-1984 by Ord. No. 1-1984]
(1) The filming of movies, commercials, documentaries, serials,
shows. performances or other similar events and activities,
including still photography, as regulated in RA-4 Districts.
[Added 12-18-1985 by L.L. No. 17-1985]
RA-6 Districts [Added 12-2-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
(1) Off-street parking facilities, subject to the requirements and
provisions of § 197-8.1.
§ 197-86 TREES § 197-86
187:983
(2) Other accessory uses or structures customarily incidental to
any permitted main use, including active and passive
recreational facilities (i.e., fitness center, pool, library, media
room, storage areas, etc.) for the use of the residents of the
principal structure. Outside storage on land of boats and boat
trailers is prohibited.
(3) The filming of movies, commercials, documentaries, serials,
shows, performances or other similar events and activities,
including still photography, as regulated in RA-4 Districts.
RFWP Districts [Added 11-18-1981 by L.L. No. 9-1981]
(1) Outdoor tennis courts, paddle courts, racquet courts and
other similar courts and swimming pools accessory to and on
the same lot with a permitted main use for the common use of
all residents on the lot, subject to the same requirements as
apply to such accessory uses in R-1 and R-2 Districts; for lots
previously zoned R-1, the R-1 standards shall apply, and for
lots previously zoned R-2, the R-2 standards shall apply, and,
in addition, there shall also be a six-foot-high opaque fence
between the required landscaping strip and the accessory use.
(2) Garages. One-story garages in main buildings and in which no
business or industry may be conducted.
LPD-A District [Added 6-15-1983 by L.L. No. 5-1983]
(1) A clubhouse and outdoor tennis courts, paddle courts, racquet
courts and other similar courts and swimming pools accessory
to and on the same lot with permitted main uses for the
common use of all residents on the site.
(2) Garages. One-story garage building or buildings detached
from the Jay Mansion and Carriage House and for the
residents thereof, but not to exceed one garage parking space
for each dwelling unit.117
TABLE OF REGULATIONS: TABLE B
BUSINESS DISTRICTS-USE REGULATIONS
Column 1
Permitted Main Uses
B-1 Neighborhood Business Districts [Amended 1-21-1959; 7-20-1960;
4-1-1964 by Ord. No. 6-1964; 6-18-1968 by Ord. No. 3-1968;
7-15-1987 by L.L. No. 7-1987]
(1) Main uses permitted in RT Districts and as limited therein. (See
Column 1 of Table A.)
117. Editor's Note: Columns 4 through 16 of Table A, which contain area, yard and height
requirements for residence districts, are found in the chart entitled "City of Rye Table of
Regulations: Table A Residence Districts Area, Yard, Height and Miscellaneous
Regulations," included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 197-86 RYE CODE § 197-86
187:984
(2) Banks on properties fronting on Boston Post Road between
Purchase Street and Peck Avenue. [Amended 7-20-2005 by
L.L. No. 2-2005; 12-14-2005 by L.L. No. 6-2005]
(3) Full-service restaurants: an establishment whose principal
business is the selling of unpackaged food to the customer in
a ready-to-consume state, in individual servings or in
nondisposable containers where the customer consumes these
foods while seated at tables or counters located within the
building, orders are generally taken at the customer's table and
are generally served to a customer by a restaurant employee and
on a lot having frontage on an arterial highway or a county road
as designated on September 1, 1958, and more than 150 feet
from a residence district. See § 197-86, Uses Permitted Subject
to Additional Standards and Requirements in B-1 Districts for
fast-food restaurants. [Amended 5-20-1992 by L.L. No.
11-1992]
(4) Offices for clerical, administrative, professional and agency
uses, subject to the following limitations:
(a) In new and existing buildings, to include permitted
additions thereto, on properties fronting on Cottage Street,
Purchase Street north of Blind Brook Lane, North Street
west of the New York State Thruway and Theodore Fremd
Avenue southwest of its intersection with Hammond Road.
[Amended 4-21-1993 by L.L. No. 3-1993]
(b) In existing buildings only, to include permitted additions
thereto, on properties fronting on High Street, Theodore
Fremd Avenue northeast of Orchard Avenue, Locust
Avenue, Elm Place, Smith Street, Boston Post Road north
of Central Avenue, the southerly side of Blind Brook Lane
and Purchase Street south of Blind Brook Lane.
(c) Any existing building to be converted shall conform to all
requirements of residential structures.
(5) Retail business and services conducted solely within a building
and dealing directly with the ultimate consumer on the
premises, except those subject to additional standards and
requirements in Column 2.
(6) Garages and parking lots for not more than five motor vehicles.
(7) Electric substations for local service only.
(8) In B-1 Neighborhood Business Districts completely surrounded
by residentially zoned property or abutting residentially zoned
property and a City recreational facility, business operation is
limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:30 p.m., except where
such regulation is preempted by state law or regulation. [Added
10-18-1989 by L.L. No. 9-1989]
§ 197-86 TREES § 197-86
187:985
(9) Second-floor dwellings. Dwelling units on the second floor of a
building where the first floor contains a nonresidential main
use, subject to the following requirements and limitations:
[Added 6-15-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
(a) The residentially used portion of the building shall have an
entrance or entrances which do not require access
through any nonresidentially used area, other than a lobby
or other common area.
(b) Parking for the underlying permitted nonresidential main
use shall comply with the off-street parking requirements
specified in § 197-28. If the underlying nonresidential main
use complies with the parking requirements of § 197-28,
and if two or fewer dwelling units are provided on the
second floor, then no additional parking shall be required,
but if more than two dwelling units are provided on the
second floor, then one parking space shall be provided for
each dwelling unit in excess of two dwelling units.
(c) The buildings and structures housing a mixed use pursuant
to this Subsection (9) shall follow the regulations for "All
other main buildings" in the Table of Regulations: Table B,
Business Districts, Area, Yard, Height and Miscellaneous
Regulations.
B-2 Central Business Districts [Amended 1-21-1959; 6-16-1976 by
Ord. No. 8-1976; 8-21-1985 by L.L. No. 7-1985; 7-15-1987 by L.L.
No. 7-1987]
(1) Nonresidence main uses permitted in B-1 Districts without
restrictions as to location and conversions of existing buildings,
except that offices for clerical, administrative, professional and
agency uses shall not be located on the first floor of a building
within the A Parking District, and banks shall not be permitted
on the first floor of a building in the B-2 Central Business
District, except where approved by the City Council pursuant
to § 197-15. [Amended 7-20-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005;
12-14-2005 by L.L. No. 6-2005; 10-22-2014 by L.L. No.
7-2014]
(2) Lodging houses and hotels, excluding motels.
(3) Dwelling units. Any number of dwelling units, except on the
first floor, unless the Planning Commission finds that the firstfloor
units are in an existing building currently with first-floor
dwelling units; located on Purchase Street; in the A Parking
District; and at least 55 feet from Purchase Street; and provided
that a structure with six or more dwelling units shall be subject
to the requirements of § 197-7. [Amended 2-15-1995 by L.L.
No. 2-1995]
§ 197-86 RYE CODE § 197-86
187:986
(4) Amusement places entirely indoors, including theaters, clubs,
billiard rooms and places of assembly, except those subject to
additional standards and requirements in Column 2.
B-3 Beach Business Districts
(1) Main uses permitted in RT Districts and as limited therein (see
Column 1 of Table A).
(2) Restaurant or lunchroom excluding window-counter stands,
drive-in car service stands and any outdoor service, except table
service back to the required front yard line.
B-4 Office Building Districts
(1) Nonresidence main uses permitted in R-2 Districts and as
limited therein (see Column 1 of Table A). [Amended
7-20-1960]
(2) Physical fitness facility. This use shall be limited to properties
having frontage on Theall Road. [Added 7-17-2019 by L.L. No.
4-2019]
B-5 Interchange Office Building Districts [Amended 9-18-1957;
7-20-1960; 4-7-1982 by L.L. No. 6-1982]
(1) Nonresidence main uses permitted in R-2 Districts and as
limited therein (see Column 1 of Table A).
B-6 General Business Districts [Amended 2-20-1957; 1-21-1959;
5-20-1987 by L.L. No. 4-1987]
(1) Automotive uses. Garages, parking lots for not more than five
motor vehicles and repair garages.
(2) Storage establishments enclosed within a roofed building.
(3) Public transportation and utilities. Railroad yards and freight
stations, bus storage and repair garages and open storage of
equipment, coal, wood, lumber, new building materials or other
similar storage yards, excluding storage of junked or salvaged
materials, wrecking or dismantling of motor vehicles or storage
of inoperable motor vehicles, and provided that such permitted
storage operations are effectively screened from view of
adjoining property in a residence district and are operated with
reasonable regard for order and sightliness, and all dust, dirt
and noise incident to such storage and handling are effectively
confined to the premises.
(4) Service business, such as plumbing, roofing or electrical shops,
provided that all operations and materials are enclosed within a
roofed building.
(5) Similar uses. Any other building, use or service similar to the
uses herein specified in the type of operations performed, in the
number of cars, trucks or persons attracted to the premises and
in the effect upon adjacent areas in more restrictive districts.
B-7 Waterfront Business Districts
§ 197-86 TREES § 197-86
187:987
(1) Nonresidence main uses permitted in R-5 Districts and as
limited therein (see Column 1 of Table A). [Added 3-18-1964
by Ord. No. 2-1964]
TABLE OF REGULATIONS: TABLE B
BUSINESS DISTRICTS-USE REGULATIONS
Column 2
Uses Permitted Subject to Additional
Standards and Requirements
(Subject to the requirements and provisions of § 197-10)
B-1 Neighborhood Business Districts [Amended 2-20-1957; 7-21-1965
by Ord. No. 2-1965; 3-5-1986 by L.L. No. 3-1986; 7-15-1987 by L.L.
No. 7-1987]
(1) Garages for more than five motor vehicles and filling stations
without canopies, subject to limitations as to maximum size or
capacity.
(2) Garages and parking lots for more than five motor vehicles and
filling stations without canopies.
(3) Accessory electric motors exceeding three horsepower per
motor.
(4) Government-owned and -operated outdoor amusement places
only if at least 200 feet from any residence district and other
government-owned and -operated indoor amusement activities,
provided that soundproofing is deemed by the Commission
adequate to eliminate adverse effect.
(5) Lodging houses.
(6) Uses permitted subject to additional standards and
requirements in RT Districts, without the special limitations
and requirements specified in Table A, to the extent that the
Commission finds such requirements to be unnecessary, except
private recreational uses, nursery schools, agricultural uses,
railroad passenger stations and electric substations, temporary
real estate sales offices and religious headquarters offices.
(7) Outdoor sales of seasonal goods other than motor vehicles,
under temporary permits.
§ 197-86 RYE CODE § 197-86
187:988
(8) Service business offices, such as woodworking, plumbing,
roofing or electrical, including necessary shop and material
storage facilities, provided that all materials and all operations,
including loading of trucks for service calls and overnight truck
parking, are enclosed within a building, provided that the
building exterior conforms to the character of retail business
and other permitted uses and structures in the vicinity and
provided that the operations are conducted at a level of noise
and other effects consistent with such character.
(9) Social clubs and lodges, except where a chief activity is
conducted primarily for gain.
(10) In B-1 Neighborhood Business Districts completely surrounded
by residentially zoned property or abutting residentially zoned
property and a City recreational facility, business operation is
limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:30 p.m., except where
such regulation is preempted by state law or regulation. [Added
10-18-1989 by L.L. No. 9-1989]
(11) Fast-food restaurants: an establishment that offers quick service
of packaged foods for consumption in the building and for carryout,
which is accomplished through a limited menu of items
already prepared and held for service or prepared, fried or
griddled quickly or heated in a device such as a microwave oven.
In addition, orders are not generally taken at the customer's
table and not generally served to a customer by a restaurant
employee at the same table or counter where the items are
consumed, and where food is generally served in disposable
wrapping or containers and on a lot having frontage on an
arterial highway or a county road as designated on September
1, 1958, and more than 150 feet from a residence district. This
category of restaurants also includes any restaurant with driveup
or drive-through service facilities. [Added 5-20-1992 by
L.L. No. 11-1992]
(12) (Reserved)118
(13) (Reserved)119
(14) Dwelling units housing three or more families on one lot fronting
on Boston Post Road between Purchase Street and Purdy
Avenue, except for those properties also fronting on Purdy
Avenue. [Added 7-17-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
118. Editor's Note: Former Subsection (12), Retail use seasonal outdoor customer seating
annual permit, as amended, was repealed 7-15-2009 by L.L. No. 6-2009. See now Column
3, Permitted Accessory Uses, B-2 Central Business Districts, Subsection (4), Seasonal
outdoor customer seating annual permit.
119. Editor's Note: Former Subsection (13), Restaurant use seasonal outdoor customer seating
annual permit, was repealed 7-15-2009 by L.L. No. 6-2009. See now Column 3, Permitted
Accessory Uses, B-2 Central Business Districts, Subsection (4), Seasonal outdoor
customer seating annual permit.
§ 197-86 TREES § 197-86
187:989
(15) Physical fitness facility. This use shall be limited to properties
having frontage on the west side of Boston Post Road between
Orchard Avenue and Library Lane. [Added 7-17-2019 by L.L.
No. 4-2019]
B-2 Central Business Districts [Amended 7-15-1987 by L.L. No.
7-1987]
(1) Uses permitted subject to additional standards and
requirements in B-1 Districts and as limited therein, except
that physical fitness facilities shall not be permitted in the B-2
District. [Amended 7-17-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
(2) Terminals for buses or other transportation of persons, for
community service only.
(3) Outdoor amusement places only if at least 200 feet from any
residence district: bowling alleys and other noisy indoor
amusement activities, provided that soundproofing is deemed by
the Commission adequate to eliminate adverse effect.
(4) Uses permitted subject to additional standards and
requirements in RT Districts and as limited therein.
(5) Social clubs and lodges, except where a chief activity is
conducted primarily for gain.120
B-3 Beach Business Districts
(1) Uses permitted subject to additional standards and
requirements in RA-3 Districts and as limited therein (see
Column 2 of Table A). [Amended 7-20-1960]
(2) Parking lots. A commercial parking lot back of the required
front yard line, after approval of the layout, the design of access
drives, the proposed method of surfacing and drainage and such
other conditions as it may in the public interest impose, such
permit to be revocable by the Building Inspector upon failure
of the operator to maintain the premises in accordance with its
provisions.
120. Editor's Note: Former Subsection (6), Retail use seasonal outdoor customer seating
annual permit, as amended, and Subsection (7), Restaurant use seasonal outdoor
customer seating annual permit, as amended, both of which immediately followed, were
repealed 7-15-2009 by L.L. No. 6-2009. See now Column 3, Permitted Accessory Uses, B-2
Central Business Districts, Subsection (4), Seasonal outdoor customer seating annual
permit.
§ 197-86 RYE CODE § 197-86
187:990
(3) Apartments. A detached residence for three or more families
or housekeeping units or a group of buildings housing three
or more families or housekeeping units on one lot, subject to
the provisions of §§ 197-7 and 197-8 and all &her applicable
apartment use regulations of this chapter, and subject to the
density and dimensional regulations that apply to apartments
in RA-2 Districts, except that for dwelling units containing only
one bedroom, the minimum lot area per dwelling unit may be
reduced to 3,000 square feet, and for dwelling units containing
three or more bedrooms, it shall be increased to 4,000 square
feet, and that the maximum percentage of the lot that may be
covered by buildings, parking areas and vehicular drives shall
be 35% and the minimum lot size shall be six acres. [Amended
5-1-1969 by Ord. No. 1-1969]
B-4 Office Building Districts
(1) Uses permitted subject to additional standards and
requirements in R-2 Districts and as limited therein (see Column
2 of Table A).
(2) Office buildings to accommodate, as principal users, executive,
administrative, clerical, professional or scientific staffs of
business or professional organizations, together with accessory
uses incident thereto.
B-5 Interchange Office Building Districts [Added 9-18-1957; amended
4-7-1982 by L.L. No. 6-1982; 11-6-1985 by L.L. No. 14-1985;
5-17-1989 by L.L. No. 7-1989]
(1) Uses permitted subject to additional standards and
requirements in B-4 Districts and limited therein.
(2) Hotels, excluding motels.
B-6 General Business Districts
(1) Limited manufacturing. Treatment, converting, altering,
cooking, processing, finishing or assembling use, subject to the
following requirements:
(a) A finding that the proposed use in the specific location
contemplated will have no material adverse effect on
adjoining property or upon good use of land in nearby
areas or upon desirable living conditions in such residence
districts as might be affected.
(b) No power except electric motive power shall be used, and
no single motor shall exceed three horsepower without
specific authorization.
(c) No use prohibited in § 197-22 shall be permitted as a main
use.
(2) Garages and parking lots for more than five motor vehicles and
filling stations. [Amended 2-20-1957]
§ 197-86 TREES § 197-86
187:991
(3) Small boat facilities. Structures, docks, wharves, piers and boat
basins for the berthing of recreational small craft, and
boatyards, storage and repair facilities for the storage,
maintenance and servicing of recreational small craft.
[Amended 1-21-1959; 6-29-1960]
(4) Kennels and veterinary hospitals. Animal hospitals, offices of
veterinarians, kennels for dogs and other pets. [Amended
1-21-1959]
(5) Accessory uses. Uses accessory to uses subject to additional
standards and requirements and retail uses accessory to other
permitted uses, exclusive of sale of food or drink for
consumption on the premises other than in an accessory dining
room limited to employees of the main use. [Amended
1-21-1959; 7-20-1960]
B-7 Waterfront Business Districts [Added 3-18-1964 by Ord. No.
2-1964]
(1) Small boat facilities. Structures, docks, wharves, piers and boat
basins for the berthing of recreational small craft, and
boatyards, storage and repair facilities for the storage,
maintenance and servicing of recreational small craft.
(2) Marine hardware, fuel and supply sales and services, furnishing
commodities or services for recreational small craft or other
recreational activities.
(3) Public recreational uses. Municipal recreation buildings,
playgrounds, parks and reservations.
(4) Private recreational uses. Private boating, fishing or game club
and appurtenant clubhouses.
TABLE OF REGULATIONS: TABLE B
BUSINESS DISTRICTS-USE REGULATIONS
Column 3
Permitted Accessory Uses
B-1 Neighborhood Business Districts
(1) Accessory uses customarily incident to and on the same lot with a
use permitted in this district, subject to the following limitations:
(a) Storage, packaging or fabrication only where incidental to
the preparation or handling of articles to be sold primarily
at retail on the premises, or to the performing of a service
primarily for residents of the neighborhood, provided that
not more than 25% of the floor area occupied by any
establishment shall be devoted to such uses.
§ 197-86 RYE CODE § 197-86
187:992
(b) No power except electric motive power shall be used, and no
single motor shall exceed three horsepower without Planning
Commission authorization; total power shall not exceed one
horsepower for each 1,000 square feet of floor space occupied
by the establishment.
(c) No use prohibited in B-6 Districts shall be permitted as an
accessory use.
(d) Accessory gasoline or oil storage aboveground in quantities
not exceeding 200 gallons on any lot, nor in excess of 100
gallons within 50 feet of any street or lot line; gas storage in
quantities not exceeding 500 cubic feet, or 50 cubic feet if at
over 100 pounds' pressure per square inch.
(2) The filming of movies, commercials, documentaries, serials, shows,
performances or other similar events and activities, including still
photography, subject to the following limitations: [Added
12-18-1985 by L.L. No. 17-1985]
(a) Filming shall also be subject to the requirements of Chapter
93 of this Code.
(b) The number of days of filming shall be limited to not more
than 15 days in any 12 consecutive months.
(c) Filming shall be limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(d) Filming in excess of the limitations of Subsection (2)(b) and
(c) above shall be subject to approval by the Board of Appeals
as provided for in § 197-82L of this Code.
(3) Seasonal outdoor customer seating permit. Upon application to the
City Planning Department, the Planning Commission may permit
for a period of up to three years seasonal outdoor customer seating
and tables on a property and, to a limited degree, extensions onto
abutting City property, subject to the following limitations: [Added
7-13-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016; amended 10-16-2019 by L.L.
No. 8-2019
(a) The applicant shall submit an application form, plans
detailing the area of proposed seasonal outdoor dining and
fee as set forth in the fee schedule of the City budget adopted
by the City Council.
(b) Outdoor customer seating shall only be permitted from April
through October and shall require a new permit approved by
the Planning Commission after three outdoor dining seasons.
During the months of November through March, the tables,
chairs and any related equipment must be stored inside of
the building or removed from the site.
(c) The Planning Commission shall limit the area of outdoor
customer seating such that it will not interfere in any way
with fire exits or other requirements of the Building Code of
New York State.
§ 197-86 TREES § 197-86
187:993
(d) The Planning Commission shall limit the area to be devoted
to outdoor customer seating so that it will not interfere with
access by the handicapped and shall maintain on any City
sidewalk a safe, adequate and unobstructed passageway for
pedestrians not less than five feet in clear width from the
edge of the outdoor seating area to the nearest obstruction.
(e) The outdoor area to be devoted to seasonal outdoor customer
seating shall not be considered for the purpose of determining
on-site parking requirements.
(f) The Planning Commission may impose conditions and
requirements as it deems appropriate, including, but not
limited to, size and configuration of the outdoor seating area;
maximum number of tables and chairs; permitted hours of
outdoor seating; type, size and color of tables and chairs;
requirements for the daily removal of tables and chairs;
limitations on the placement of tables during City-approved
outdoor events, and/or standards for cleanliness and removal
of debris.
(g) The Planning Commission shall not issue a permit if it finds
that the proposed outdoor seating would be incompatible
with other uses on the property or an abutting property.
(h) The Planning Commission may deny the issue of a permit if it
finds that during the prior permit period the permit holder
violated any condition of the permit, that during the prior
permit period the applicant or the property owner provided
or permitted outdoor seating without having obtained a
permit or that there are outstanding notices of violation
concerning the property or the applicant's use.
(i) Upon Planning Commission approval and prior to the start of
each outdoor dining season, the applicant shall file with the
City Building Department an outdoor dining application form
and fee as set forth in the fee schedule of the City budget
adopted by the City Council. Filing with the Building
Department shall only be permitted if there have been no
enforcement actions against the applicant in the preceding
season for failure to comply with the original permit
approved by the Planning Commission. If such seasonal
outdoor dining involves use of City property, an insurance
certificate naming the City as an additional insured in the
amount of at least $2,000,000 and a signed and notarized
indemnification and hold harmless agreement shall also be
provided to the City Building Department.
§ 197-86 RYE CODE § 197-86
187:994
(j) For properties located in the B-1 Neighborhood Business
District, the applicant shall notify the neighbors by sending
out a public notification provided by the City. The applicant
shall prepare a notification list, based on the most current
City of Rye Tax Maps and Tax Assessment roll, showing the
Tax Map sheet, block and lot number, the owner's name and
owner's mailing address for each property located, wholly or
partially, within 300 feet of the subject property. If a property
on the public notification list is also listed as a cooperative or
an apartment, the notice shall be mailed to the property
owner of record. These mailing requirements must be
performed in accordance with the following requirements:
[1] The mailing shall be limited solely to the notice
provided by the City.
[2] The notice shall be mailed to all property owners at a
post office or official depository of the Postal Service at
least 10 days prior to the submission of the outdoor
dining application to the City. The applicant must obtain
a certificate of mailing for every notice mailed.
[3] The applicant must provide to the City a copy of the
notice that was circulated and a copy of the certificate
of mailings.
B-2 Central Business Districts [Amended 11-17-1993 by L.L. No.
10-1993; 9-18-1996 by L.L. No. 8-1996]
(1) The same accessory uses as are permitted in B-1 Districts.
(2) Residence for caretaker or watchman necessary for protection of
main use.
(3) Indoor customer seating at tables or counters, subject to the
requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, and a sign setting forth the maximum permitted
seating capacity shall be posted in the seating area. The floor space
devoted to customer seating shall not be considered a restaurant
use for the purpose of determining on-site parking requirements,
except that the floor space devoted to customer seating shall be
included in the calculation of required on-site parking for the
underlying permitted retail use.
(4) Seasonal outdoor customer seating. Upon application to the City
Planning Department, the Planning Commission may permit for
a period of up to three years seasonal outdoor customer seating
and tables on a property and, to a limited degree, extensions onto
abutting City property, subject to the following limitations: [Added
7-15-2009 by L.L. No. 6-2009; amended 10-16-2019 by L.L.
No. 8-2019]
§ 197-86 TREES § 197-86
187:995
(a) The applicant shall submit an application form, plans
detailing the area of proposed seasonal outdoor dining and
fee as set forth in the fee schedule of the City budget adopted
by the City Council.
(b) Outdoor customer seating shall only be permitted from April
through October and shall require a new permit approved by
the Planning Commission after three outdoor dining seasons.
During the months of November through March, the tables,
chairs and any related equipment must be stored inside of
the building or removed from the site.
(c) The Planning Commission shall limit the area of outdoor
customer seating such that it will not interfere in any way
with fire exits or other requirements of the Building Code of
New York State.
(d) The Planning Commission shall limit the area to be devoted
to outdoor customer seating so that it will not interfere with
access by the handicapped and shall maintain on any City
sidewalk a safe, adequate and unobstructed passageway for
pedestrians not less than five feet in clear width from the
edge of the outdoor seating area to the nearest obstruction.
(e) The outdoor area to be devoted to seasonal outdoor customer
seating shall not be considered for the purpose of
determining on-site parking requirements.
(f) The Planning Commission may impose conditions and
requirements as it deems appropriate, including, but not
limited to, size and configuration of the outdoor seating area;
maximum number of tables and chairs; permitted hours of
outdoor seating; type, size and color of tables and chairs;
requirements for the daily removal of tables and chairs;
limitations on the placement of tables during City-approved
outdoor events, and/or standards for cleanliness and removal
of debris.
(g) The Planning Commission shall not issue a permit if it finds
that the proposed outdoor seating would be incompatible
with other uses on the property or an abutting property.
(h) The Planning Commission may deny the issue of a permit if it
finds that during the prior permit period the permit holder
violated any condition of the permit, that during the prior
permit period the applicant or the property owner provided
or permitted outdoor seating without having obtained a
permit or that there are outstanding notices of violation
concerning the property or the applicant's use.
§ 197-86 RYE CODE § 197-86
187:996
(i) Upon Planning Commission approval and prior to the start of
each outdoor dining season, the applicant shall file with the
City Building Department an outdoor dining application form
and fee as set forth in the fee schedule of the City budget
adopted by the City Council. If such seasonal outdoor dining
involves use of City property, an insurance certificate naming
the City as an additional insured in the amount of at least
$2,000,000 and a signed and notarized indemnification and
hold harmless agreement shall also be provided to the City
Building Department.
B-3 Beach Business Districts
(1) The same accessory uses as are permitted in RT Districts.
[Amended 6-18-1968 by Ord. No. 3-1968]
(2) Parking area accessory to permitted main use, provided it is back
of the required front yard line and accessible from the street by
not more than one twenty-foot-wide surfaced driveway for each 70
feet of street frontage. Any such accessory parking area existing
on March 22, 1951, shall be brought into conformity with these
regulations not later than three years from such date, unless such
time is extended by the Board of Appeals.
B-4 Office Building Districts
(1) The same accessory uses as permitted in R-2 Districts and such
others as are specifically permitted as provided in § 197-10.
[Amended 7-20-1960]
(2) Child-care facilities, subject to the following conditions: [Added
10-19-1989 by L.L. No. 10-1989]
(a) To the extent that restrictions exist or are placed on the
number of persons permitted to be employed on the site,
employees serving the child-care facility shall be counted as
employees for the purposes of said restrictions.
(b) The Planning Commission may limit the amount of indoor and
outdoor space devoted to the child-care facility and may limit
the specific location of outdoor space.
(c) The number of children served by the child-care facility shall
be limited as provided for by state law.
(d) The children served by the child-care facility shall be limited
to children of the employees of permitted tenants of the
building, and such employees shall be regularly employed at
this location.
(e) The child-care facility shall be managed or supervised by a
permitted tenant of the building or its employees.
B-5 Interchange Office Building Districts [Added 9-18-1957; amended
4-7-1982 by L.L. No. 6-1982; 11-6-1985 by L.L. No. 14-1985;
12-18-1985 by L.L. No. 17-1985; 5-17-1989 by L.L. No. 7-1989]
§ 197-86 TREES § 197-86
187:997
(1) Accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the same lot with
a permitted use, except as provided by § 197-86, Table of
Regulations: Table B, Business Districts, Notes to Area, Yard,
Height and Miscellaneous Regulations, Note (1), and approved as
provided by §§ 197-10 and 197-12.
(2) Parking structures, provided that they are adjacent in whole or in
part to a rear yard, but in no case within a required front yard, and
provided that the top of the highest parapet wall is at least five feet
lower than the height of the highest roof of the office buildings to
which they are accessory.
(3) Hotel accessory uses may include meeting rooms, banquet
facilities, restaurants, bars, cabarets for consumption of food and
beverages, or either of them, on the premises, boutiques, travel
services, barbershops, newspaper stands, open or enclosed
swimming pools, open or enclosed tennis courts, platform tennis,
paddle ball courts and other court games, putting greens, tot-lots,
play grounds, health clubs and convention facilities.
(4) The filming of movies, commercials, documentaries, serials, shows,
performances or other similar events and activities, including still
photography, as regulated in B-1 Districts.
(5) Child-care facilities, subject to the following conditions: [Added
10-19-1989 by LL. No. 10-1989; amended 9-12-1990 by L.L.
No. 15-1990]
(a) The floor area in the building occupied by the child-care
facility shall continue to be counted as gross floor area for the
purpose of determining on-site parking requirements.
(b) To the extent that restrictions exist or are placed on the
number of persons permitted to be employed on the site,
employees serving the child-care facility shall be counted as
employees for the purpose of said restrictions.
(c) The Planning Commission may limit the amount of indoor and
outdoor space devoted to the child-care facility and may limit
the specific location of outdoor space.
(d) The number of children served by the child-care facility shall
be limited as provided for by state law.
(e) The child-care facility shall be managed or supervised by a
permitted tenant of the building or its employees.
B-6 General Business Districts
(1) Other accessory uses customarily incident to and on the same lot
with a use permitted in this district, except that no use prohibited
in § 197-22 shall be permitted as an accessory use.
(2) The filming of movies, commercials, documentaries, serials, shows,
performances or other similar events and activities, including still
photography, as regulated in B1 Districts. [Added 12-18-1985 by
L.L. No. 17-1985]
§ 197-86 RYE CODE § 197-86
187:998
B-7 Waterfront Business Districts
(1) Accessory uses customarily incident to and on the same lot with
a permitted use and approved as provided by § 197-10, but not
including any use customarily conducted as a main use of land
not requiring waterfront access, nor any restaurant or bar except
accessory to a membership club not open to the general public.
[Added 3-18-1964 by Ord. No. 2.1964]121
(2) The filming of movies, commercials, documentaries, serials, shows,
performances or other similar events and activities, including still
photography, as regulated in B-1 Districts. [Added 12-18-1985 by
L.L. No. 17-1985]
TABLE OF REGULATIONS: TABLE C
COASTAL ZONE DISTRICTS — USE REGULATIONS [Added
6-19-1991 by L.L. No. 13-1991]
Column 1
Permitted Main Uses
MC Districts
(1) Membership clubs, such as beach, yacht and other similar
water-related and water enhanced clubs, except those where a
chief activity is carried on primarily for gain.
(a) A minimum site of 7.5 acres shall be provided.
(b) The floor-area-to-lot-area-ratio shall not exceed 0.10.
(c) Fifty percent of any such site shall be natural ground
cover, to include but not be limited to grass, trees, shrubs,
plants and natural surfaces such as rock outcroppings and
sand.
(d) Any building, parking lot or other recreational use shall
be subject to the same regulations as specified for
educational uses in residence districts and shall not be
located in the specified distance of any lot line.
WR Districts
(1) Public recreational uses. Municipal recreation buildings,
playgrounds, parks, reservations, beaches, boating facilities and
other similar water-related and water-enhanced recreational
uses, provided that no building, parking area or grounds for
picnicking or organized games or sports shall be located within
the specified distance of any lot line, subject to the same
regulations as for educational uses in residence districts.
121. Editor's Note: Columns 4 through 14 of Table B, which contain area, yard and height
requirements for Business Districts, are found in the chart at the end of this chapter
entitled "City of Rye Table of Regulations:" Table B Business Districts Area, Yard, Height
and Miscellaneous Regulations."
§ 197-86 TREES § 197-86
187:999
(2) Private recreational uses. Outdoor and indoor recreational uses,
including but not limited to golf, badminton, tennis, bathing,
swimming, boating and other water-related and water-enhanced
recreational uses, with appurtenant clubhouses, except those
where a chief activity is carried on primarily for gain, provided
that:
(a) A minimum site of 7.5 acres shall be provided.
(b) The floor-area-to-lot-area-ratio shall not exceed 0.10.
(c) Fifty percent of any such site shall be natural ground
cover, to include but not be limited to grass, trees, shrubs,
plants and natural surfaces such as rock outcroppings and
sand.
(d) No green or fairway shall be located within the specified
distance from any lot line.
(e) Any building, parking lot or other recreational use shall
be subject to the same regulations as specified for
educational uses in residence districts.
C Districts
(1) Nature preserves, wildlife conservation areas and natural areas.
TABLE OF REGULATIONS: TABLE C
COASTAL ZONE DISTRICTS — USE REGULATIONS
Column 2
Uses Permitted Subject to Additional
Standards and Requirements
(Subject to the requirements and provisions of § 197-10)
MC Districts
(1) Main uses permitted in R-1 Districts, as limited therein and
subject to the following:
(a) Residential lots created by a subdivision after June 28,
1991, shall be lot grouped as permitted by § 197-39 of
this chapter at an R-3 standard.
(b) The open space to be reserved shall be equal to or greater
than 50% of the total area of the land to be subdivided
and shall include all lands shown on the approved
subdivision plat as building lots, public and private rightsof-
way created as part of the subdivision and land, if any,
reserved for conventional park and playground purposes.
§ 197-86 RYE CODE § 197-86
187:1000
(c) The open space to be reserved in the subdivision shall
include wetlands and floodplains; scenic, natural and
ecological features; and views of the shoreline from
public streets. If the foregoing does not require the full
50% of the required open space, then the remaining
required open space to be reserved shall be located
between the shoreline and an inland line essentially
parallel to the shoreline.
WR Districts
(Reserved)
C Districts
(Reserved)
TABLE OF REGULATIONS: TABLE C
COASTAL ZONE DISTRICTS — USE REGULATIONS
Column 3
Permitted Accessory Uses
(Subject to the requirements and provisions of § 197-9)
MC Districts
(1) Any accessory building or accessory use permitted in an R-1
District customarily incidental to and located on the same lot
with a on-family residence.
(2) The following accessory uses when associated with a
membership club or public recreational use:
(a) Tennis courts, paddle tennis courts, swimming pools,
beaches, boat docks, boat launching ramps and facilities,
basketball courts and other similar outdoor recreation
uses. Lighting of recreation facilities for night use is
prohibited except as permitted by § 197-14 of this chapter.
(b) Boathouses, gymnasiums, health and fitness club
facilities, racquetball courts, squash courts, locker rooms,
cabanas and other similar types of recreation facilities.
(c) Dining, entertainment and bar facilities not primarily open
to the public.
(d) Club administrative offices, auxiliary facilities for
providing related educational and instructional services,
maintenance facilities, storage buildings, boat storage,
fuel and oil sales to members and guests only, laundry
facilities, facilities for the pumping out of marine holding
tanks, facilities for waste oil collection and other similar
types of club support facilities.
§ 197-86 TREES § 197-86
187:1001
(e) Residences for caretakers and staff; seasonal residences
for club members and guests.
(f) Fences, walls or retaining walls not exceeding six feet
in height above the average natural grade, except that
fences not less than three-fourths-inch open construction
shall be permitted up to 12 feet in height around tennis
courts and other similar facilities, sea walls to the
minimum height necessary to provide for adequate
protection against flooding.
(g) Navigational lights.
(h) Other accessory buildings and accessory uses customarily
incidental to the principal club use of the premises.
WR Districts
(1) Restaurants and lunchrooms, excluding drive-in car service
stands, and any other service, except window counter service
stands and table service in the required front yard.
C Districts
(1) Appurtenant service buildings including caretaker's and
equipment housing, pavilions, auxiliary facilities for providing
related educational and instructional services, walkways,
bridges, service and access roadways or other accessory
transportation facilities which may be required as accessory to
the permitted main use.
§ 197-86 RYE CODE § 197-86
187:1002
Appendix
Chapter A201
(RESERVED)
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
5-18-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
1-2005
6-15-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 197
L.L. No.
2-2005
7-20-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 197
L.L. No.
3-2005
10-6-2005 Landmarks preservation
amendment
Ch. 117
L.L. No.
4-2005
11-30-2005 Trees amendment Ch. 187
L.L. No.
5-2005
11-30-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 197
L.L. No.
6-2005
12-14-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 197
L.L. No.
1-2006
1-18-2006 Charter amendment § C16-1
L.L. No.
2-2006
2-1-2006 Charter amendment;
architectural review
amendment
§ C19-1; Ch. 53
L.L. No.
3-2006
2-1-2006 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 180
L.L. No.
4-2006
3-1-2006 Committees Ch. 10
4-5-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
5-2006
6-14-2006 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 68
§ 197-86 TREES § DL-1
187:1003
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
6-2006
6-14-2006 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 81
L.L. No.
7-2006
6-14-2006 Rules adopted by Building
Inspector with consent of
Council amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2009
L.L. No.
8-2006
7-19-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 197
L.L. No.
9-2006
10-4-2006 Taxation: room occupancy
tax
Ch. 177, Art. IX
L.L. No.
10-2006
10-4-2006 Parking Districts Map
amendment
NCM
L.L. No.
11-2006
11-29-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 3
3-14-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
1-2007
4-11-2007 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 98
L.L. No.
2-2007
4-11-2007 Noise amendment Ch. 133
L.L. No.
3-2007
5-30-2007 Floodplain Emergency
Relief Board
Temporary
measure
L.L. No.
4-2007
7-19-2007 Storm sewer system Ch. 162
L.L. No.
5-2007
9-5-2007 Floodplain management Ch. 100
L.L. No.
6-2007
12-12-2007 Surface water, erosion and
sediment control
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2013
L.L. No.
7-2007
12-12-2007 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 170
L.L. No.
8-2007
12-12-2007 Stormwater management:
erosion and sediment
control
Ch. 174, Art. I
12-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
1-2008
4-2-2008 Noise amendment Ch. 133
L.L. No.
2-2008
4-16-2008 Cold War veterans tax
exemption
Superseded by
L.L. No. 5-2010
§ DL-1 RYE CODE § DL-1
187:1004
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
3-2008
5-7-2008 Noise amendment Ch. 133
L.L. No.
4-2008
5-7-2008 Noise amendment Ch. 133
9-3-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
10-15-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
11-19-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
5-2008
12-3-2008 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 108
L.L. No.
1-2009
2-11-2009 Building construction
amendment; rules adopted
by Building Inspector with
consent of Council
repealer
Chs. 68; A201,
reference only
L.L. No.
2-2009
4-15-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
3-2009
4-15-2009 Charter amendment § C22-1
L.L. No.
4-2009
4-15-2009 Sanitary regulations
amendment
Ch. 157
L.L. No.
5-2009
6-10-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 2
L.L. No.
6-2009
7-15-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 197
L.L. No.
7-2009
7-15-2009 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
8-2009
8-17-2009 Taxation: Abatement for
rent-controlled and rentregulated
property
occupied by senior citizens
or persons with disabilities
Ch. 177, Art. XI
L.L. No.
9-2009
12-16-2009 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
1-2010
1-20-2010 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
§ DL-1 TREES § DL-1
187:1005
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
2-2010
2-24-2010 Charter amendment §§ C20A-1 and
C20A-2
L.L. No.
3-2010
3-10-2010 Architectural review
amendment; building
construction amendment
Chs. 53; 68
L.L. No.
4-2010
3-10-2010 Subdivision of land
amendment; wetlands and
watercourses amendment;
wireless
telecommunications
facilities amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 170; 195;
196; 197
L.L. No.
5-2010
5-5-2010 Cold War veterans tax
exemption
Ch. 177, Art. X
L.L. No.
6-2010
9-15-2010 Peddling and soliciting Ch. 144
L.L. No.
7-2010
9-15-2010 Environmental quality
review repealer; escrow
provisions
Ch. 87
L.L. No.
8-2010
10-6-2010 Vehicles and traffic:
commuter parking
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 3
L.L. No.
9-2010
10-20-2010 Vehicles and traffic:
metered parking
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 2
L.L. No.
10-2010
12-15-2010 Dogs amendment Ch. 76
L.L. No.
11-2010
12-15-2010 Sidewalks amendment;
vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Chs. 167, Art.
III; 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
1-2011
3-16-2011 Architectural review
amendment
Ch. 53
L.L. No.
2-2011
3-30-2011 Filming amendment Ch. 93
L.L. No.
3-2011
6-15-2011 Excavation in streets
amendment
Ch. 167, Art. II
L.L. No.
4-2011
8-10-2011 Fences and walls
amendment
Ch. 90
L.L. No.
5-2011
8-10-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 197
§ DL-1 RYE CODE § DL-1
187:1006
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
6-2011
10-5-2011 Floodplain management
amendment
Ch. 100
L.L. No.
7-2011
12-7-2011 Retail checkout bags Ch. 154
L.L. No.
8-2011
12-7-2011 Charter amendment § C21-9
L.L. No.
1-2012
2-29-2012 Charter amendment §§ C13-1 through
C13-5
L.L. No.
2-2012
2-29-2012 Vehicles and traffic:
commuter parking
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 3
L.L. No.
3-2012
4-4-2012 Fences and walls
amendment
Ch. 90
L.L. No.
4-2012
6-13-2012 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 180
L.L. No.
5-2012
9-12-2012 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 98
10-10-2012 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
6-2012
10-24-2012 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 31
7-10-2013 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
(footnote only)
8-5-2013 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
1-2013
9-11-2013 Surface water, erosion and
sediment control repealer;
stormwater management:
erosion and sediment
control amendment
Ch. 173
(reference only);
Ch. 174, Art. I
L.L. No.
2-2013
9-11-2013 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 15
L.L. No.
3-2013
10-24-2013 Architectural review
amendment
Ch. 53
L.L. No.
4-2013
12-18-2013 Tax exemption for historic
districts
Ch. 177, Art. XII
§ DL-1 TREES § DL-1
187:1007
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
5-2013
12-18-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 197
L.L. No.
1-2014
3-26-2014 Committees amendment Ch. 10
6-11-2014 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
2-2014
7-9-2014 Charter amendment § C6-2
L.L. No.
3-2014
9-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
4-2014
9-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
5-2014
9-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
6-2014
10-9-2014 Charter amendment §§ C6-2, C8-2
and C12-1
L.L. No.
7-2014
10-22-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 197
L.L. No.
8-2014
10-22-2014 Dogs amendment Ch. 76
L.L. No.
9-2014
11-19-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No.
10-2014
12-3-2014 Energy conservation Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2020
L.L. No.
11-2014
12-3-2014 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
1-2015
1-28-2015 Landmarks preservation
amendment
Ch. 117
L.L. No.
2-2015
2-11-2015 Energy conservation
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2020
L.L. No.
3-2015
2-25-2015 Taxation: Exemption for
historic districts
amendment
Ch. 177, Art XII
L.L. No.
4-2015
6-10-2015 Moratorium on mechanical
rock removal
NCM
§ DL-1 RYE CODE § DL-1
187:1008
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
5-2015
7-8-2015 Taxation: exemption for
historic districts
amendment
Ch. 177, Art. XII
L.L. No.
6-2015
7-8-2015 Noise amendment Ch. 133
10-21-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
1-2016
12-2-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 197
4-27-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
2-2016
7-13-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 197
10-5-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 191, Part 1
L.L. No.
3-2016
11-2-2016 Charter amendment § C21-9
L.L. No.
4-2016
7-13-2016 Charter amendment §§ C12-1 through
C12-4; Article 13
repealer
L.L. No.
1-2017
12-21-2016 Charter amendment §§ C12-1 through
C12-4
L.L. No.
2-2017
12-21-2016 Tax levy limit override
2017
NCM
L.L. No.
3-2017
2-15-2017 Water supply emergencies Ch. 194
L.L. No.
4-2017
10-4-2017 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 161, Art. II
L.L. No.
5-2017
11-8-2017 Landmarks preservation
amendment
Ch. 117
L.L. No.
1-2018
3-28-2018 Energy Conservation
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2020
L.L. No.
2-2018
4-11-2018 Boats and Harbors
amendment
Ch. 64
L.L. No.
3-2018
4-11-2018 Zoning amendment Ch. 197
§ DL-1 TREES § DL-1
187:1009
Enactment
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
4-2018
4-25-2018 Vehicles and Traffic:
General Regulations
amendment
Ch. 191, Pt. 1
L.L. No.
5-2018
7-26-2018 Streets and Sidewalks:
Excavation in Streets
Amendment
Ch. 167, Art. II
L.L. No.
6-2018
11-7-2018 Community Choice
Aggregation (Energy)
Program
Ch. 74
L.L. No.
7-2018
11-7-2018 Taxation: Real Property
Assessment of Converted
Condominiums
Ch. 177, Art. XIII
L.L. No.
8-2018
11-7-2018 Procurement Policy:
Award of Contracts on
Basis of Best Value
Ch. 32, Art. I
L.L. No.
1-2019
1-9-2019 Noise Amendment Ch. 133
L.L. No.
2-2019
1-9-2019 Wireless
Telecommunications
Facilities Amendment
Ch. 196
L.L. No.
3-2019
3-27-2019 Floodplain Management
Amendment
Ch. 100
L.L. No.
4-2019
7-17-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 197
L.L. No.
5-2019
7-17-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 191
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject
Disposition
Supp.
No.
L.L. No.
6-2019
9-18-2019 Charter
Amendment
§ C21-9 208
L.L. No.
7-2019
10-16-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 167 209
L.L. No.
8-2019
10-16-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 197 209
L.L. No.
1-2020
12-18-2019 Energy
Conservation
Repealer
Ch. 176,
reference
only
210
§ DL-1 RYE CODE § DL-1
187:1010
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject
Disposition
Supp.
No.
L.L. No.
2-2020
12-18-2019 Energy
Conservation
Financing: PACE
Program
Ch. 83 210
L.L. No.
3-2020
12-18-2019 Energy
Conservation
Financing: Open CPACE
Program
Ch. 84 210
§ DL-1 TREES § DL-1
187:1011

ZONING
197 Attachment 1
City of Rye
Table A: Residence Districts
Area, Yard, Height and Miscellaneous Regulations
[Amended 4-17-1957; 7-17-1957; 7-20-1960; 3-21-1962 by Ord. No. 2-1962; 10-24-1963 by Ord. No. 7-1963; 11-15-1967 by Ord. No. 4-1967; 6-18-1968 by Ord. No. 3-1968; 10-18-1972 by Ord. No. 4-1972;
11-18-1981 by L.L. No. 9-1981; 4-12-1982 by Ord. No. 2-1982; 6-15-1983 by L.L. No. 4-1983; 6-15-1983 by L.L. No. 5-1983; 11-21-1984 by Ord. No. 1-1984; 2-3-1988 by L.L. No. 2-19-1988; 7-16-2003 by L.L. No. 6-20031
;
12-2-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2016]

Zone Standards
District 
Floor Area Ratio
Minimum Lot Size 
Minimum Lot Width
Front Yard
Side Yard
Feet
Rear Yard
Feet
Stories
Maximum Height 
Rear Yard
Feet

RFWP Single-family house - 10 acres 250 85 (g) (g) (g) - 2½ 35 - - 
R-1 0.15 1 acre 150 35 20 50 60 100 2½ 32 20% 20
R-2 0.20 ½ acre 115 35 15 40 50 80 2½ 32 20% 15 
R-3 special flood hazard 0.25 ½ acre 100 30 12 30 40 70 2½ 28 35% 10
R-3 All other areas 0.25 1/3 acre 100 30 12 30 40 70 2½ 28 35% 10
R-4 special flood hazard 0.30 ½ acre 85 30 10 25 30 60 2½ 28 25% 10
R-4 All other areas 0.30 10,000 85 30 10 25 30 60 2½ 28 25% 10
R-5 special flood hazard 0.35 ½ acre 75 30 8 20 30 50 2½ 28 30% 5
R-5 All other areas 0.35 7,000 75 30 8 20 30 50 2½ 28 30% 5
R-6 special flood hazard 0.40 ½ acre 60 25 8 20 25 40 2½ 28 30% 5
R-6 All other areas 0.40 6,000 60 25 8 20 25 40 2½ 28 30% 5
RS Single-family house 0.40 ½ acre 100 30 12 30 40 - 2½ 28 25% 10
RS Other permitted use 0.40 1/3 acre 100 50 12 40 40 - 2½ 35 10% 12
RT Single-family house 0.45 5,000 50 25 8 20 30 40 2½ 28 30% 5
RT Two-family house 0.45 3,000 60 25 8 20 30 - 2½ 28 30% 5
RA-1 Single-family house 0.40 5,000 50 25 8 20 30 40 2½ 35 30% 5
RA-1 Two-family house 0.40 5,000 60 25 8 20 30 - 2½ 35 30% 5
RA-1 Apartment house 0.40 5,000 100 70 50 100 50 - 2½ 35 30% 10
RA-2 Single-family house 0.45 5,000 50 25 8 20 30 30 2½ 35 30% 5
RA-2 Two-family house 0.45 3,500 60 25 8 20 30 - 2½ 35 30% 5
RA-2 Apartment house 0.45 3,500 100 25 20 50 40 - 2½ 35 30% 10
RA-3 Single-family house 0.50 5,000 50 25 8 20 30 20 2½ 35 35% 5
RA-3 Two-family house 0.50 3,000 60 25 8 20 30 - 2½ 35 35% 5
RA-3 Apartment house 0.50 2,500 80 25 20 40 40 - 2½ 40 35% 10
RA-4 Single-family house 0.50 5,000 50 25 8 20 30 - 2½ 35 35% 5
Two-family house 0.50 3,000 60 25 8 20 30 - 2½ 35 35% 5
Apartment house 0.50 2,500 80 25 20 40 40 - 2½ 35 35% 10
RA-5 Apartments for senior citizens
and handicapped persons 1.00 1 acre 80 25 40 - 4 50 35% 10
RA-6 Apartments for active senior
citizens 0.75 2,500 400 150 50 100 50 - 4 45 35% 10
LPD-A (h) 0.15 22 acres (h) (h) (h) (h) (h) — (h) (h) (h) (h)

Notes:
(a) Equivalent to one family in computing minimum lot sizes.
[1] Hotels and lodging houses, each two guest sleeping rooms.
[2] Hospitals and similar institutions, each two hospital beds.
[3] Medical offices, each two doctors plus three other employees.
[4] Other nonresidential main uses not specifically provided for in this Table of Regulations or elsewhere in this chapter, each 1,500 square feet of floor space.
(b) [1] Wherever a required yard abuts a street less than 50 feet in width, the minimum yard dimension(s) shall be measured from a line of 25 feet from and parallel to the center line of said street.
[2] No building shall be nearer than 100 feet to center line of Post Road between Mamaroneck Town line and Central Avenue.
(c) For corner lots, corner side yards at least 1/5 of the lot width at the location of the building, but need not be more than front yard minimum, except as provided in § 197-62. Permitted nonresidential main uses shall have minimum side yard
1½ times width specified for a single-family house. (See § 197-52.)
(d) Twenty-five feet for any side yard containing a driveway serving more than six parking spaces. For a one- , two- or three-family structure existing on the effective date of the chapter (August 9, 1956) and proposed for conversion for up to
four (4) families, the Board of Appeals may reduce side yard requirement to eight feet. For side yard requirements for other apartments, see § 197-54. For spacing between buildings on the same lot, see § 197-70. For the rear and side yards
of apartment houses adjoining the right-of-way of a railroad, a parkway or a limited access highway, see § 197-64.
(e) For usable open space requirement, see § 197-68.
(f) For buildings in variable-height apartment groups (a use permitted in RA-4 Districts subject to additional standards and requirements), see § 197-13.
(g) See § 197-13.1 for requirements and additional comments.
(h) See § 197-13.2 for requirements and additional procedures.
(i) These requirements shall not apply to existing or future lots, provided that the lot is not substantially located in an area of special flood hazard, or to any lot in a subdivision which received tentative approval of a preliminary layout, pursuant
to Chapter 170 of this Code, prior to February 17, 1988, that conforms to the requirements for a lot not located in an area of special flood hazard. For the purpose of this exemption, an existing or proposed lot having 90% or more of its area
located outside of an area of special flood hazard shall not be considered to be substantially located in an area of special floor hazard. See § 197-37.1 for additional exemptions.
(j) See § 197-43.1 for floor area ratio reductions for single-family residences on oversized properties in one-family districts.
(k) The required front yard setback can be reduced to no less than 100 feet, provided that the maximum permitted area of the encroachment of the structure into this reduced setback shall be less than 15% of the total area between the front yard
line and the standard 150-foot setback.
197 Attachment 1:2 04 - 01 - 2016