Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-4-1990 by L.L. No. 8-1990]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Town of Smithtown
shall be known collectively as the "Code of the Town of Smithtown,"
hereafter termed the "Code." Whenever reference is made in any of the
local laws, ordinances or resolutions contained in the Code of the Town
of Smithtown to any other local law, ordinance or resolution appearing in
said Code, such reference shall be changed to the appropriate chapter title,
chapter number, Article number or section number appearing in the Code
as if such local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to
so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are
hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown, and it is the
intention of said Town Board that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions
of former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Town of Smithtown in force on the date of the adoption of this local law
and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provisions of the Town of Smithtown prior to the effective
date of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
B. An offense or act committed on or before or done on or before the
effective date of this local law in violation of any legislative provisions of
the Town of Smithtown or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which
may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provisions of the Town of
Smithtown.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Town of Smithtown.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Smithtown providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Town of Smithtown or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Smithtown appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance of any delivery of any bond of the
Town of Smithtown or any other instruments or evidence of the Town's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map of the Town of
Smithtown.
L. Any legislation adopted subsequent to June 12, 1990.
§ 1-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 1-6
1:4
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk of the Town of Smithtown and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and,
if this local law shall be adopted, such a copy shall be certified to by the
Town Clerk of the Town of Smithtown by impressing thereon the Seal of the
Town of Smithtown, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office
of said Town Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine
the same during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and
publication of this local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the
Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to
be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the Town of Smithtown" or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Town Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Town Board deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk of the Town of Smithtown to keep
up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code of the Town
of Smithtown required to be filed in the office of the Town Clerk for use
by the public. All changes in said Code and all local laws, ordinances and
resolutions adopted by the Town Board subsequent to the enactment of this
local law in such form as to indicate the intention of said Town Board to be
part of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein
by temporary attachments of copies of such changes, local laws, ordinances
or resolutions until such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions are
printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements
shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code of the Town of Smithtown may be purchased from the
Town Clerk of the Town of Smithtown upon the payment of a fee to be set by
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
resolution of the Town Board, which Board may also arrange by resolution
for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Town of Smithtown or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Town of Smithtown to be
misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local law
shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Town of Smithtown, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13 inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect on January 1, 1991.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Town of Smithtown, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances or resolutions have
been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition,
certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes
were made in one or more said pieces of legislation. It is the intention of
the Town Board that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as
if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this local law.
(Chapter and section number references are to the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear
in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-11B, the following sections were amended at time of
adoption of Code: §§ 9-2, 36-1, 36-3, 75-3A, 154-5B(6) and 322-82C(22)(a). In addition, the
term "Fire Inspector" was changed to "Fire Marshal" throughout the Code. A complete
description of all changes is on file in the office of the Town Clerk and may be examined
there during regular office hours.
§ 1-9 SMITHTOWN CODE § 1-13
1:6
Chapter 9
APPEARANCE TICKETS
§ 9-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize public servants of the Town
of Smithtown to issue and serve appearance tickets in connection with
violations of state statutes, local laws, ordinances or rules and regulations
of the Town which the public servants are authorized or required to enforce.
§ 9-2. Authorized public servants. [Amended 5-10-1983 by L.L. No.
2-1983; 9-20-1983 by L.L. No. 5-1983; 5-22-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984;
8-14-1984 by L.L. No. 9-1984; 10-9-1984 by L.L. No. 11-1984;
12-4-1984 by L.L. No. 14-1984; 12-27-1984 by L.L. No. 17-1984;
2-5-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985; 2-11-1986 by L.L. No. 1-1986;
9-22-1987 by L.L. No. 3-1987; 12-4-1990 by L.L. No. 8-1990]
The following public servants of the Town of Smithtown are hereby
authorized to issue and/or serve an appearance ticket with respect to
violation of a state statute or a local law, ordinance, rule or regulation of the
Town of Smithtown that such public servants are, respectively, required or
authorized to enforce:
A. Animal Shelter Supervisor, Animal Control Officer I and Animal Control
Officer II will be able to write an appearance ticket under Chapter 101,
§ 101-13J, Chapter 135, Chapter 207, § 207-2, Chapter 322, § 322-12J,
and the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York.
[Amended 7-14-1992 by L.L. No. 3-1992; 2-29-2000 by L.L. No.
3-2000]
B. The Director of Facilities Management, Superintendent of Sanitation,
Sanitation Site Foreman, Superintendent of Highways, Building
Director, their designated agents or deputies and the Ordinance
Inspectors under Chapter 177 of the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
[Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
C. The Director of the Department of Public Safety and his or her
designees under Chapters 94, 101, 108, 138, 160, 170, 177, 215, 233,
285, 288, 296, 303 and 318. [Amended 7-14-1992 by L.L. No.
3-1992; 10-4-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
D. Park Rangers and Guards under Chapters 94, 101, 108, 160, 177, 181,
207, 215, 233, 259, 281, 285, 288, 293, 296 and 303. [Amended
7-14-1992 by L.L. No. 3-1992; 10-28-1997 by L.L. No. 6-1997]
E. The Superintendent of Highways and the Deputy Superintendent of
Highways under Chapter 108.
F. The Building Director, Building Inspectors and Chief Fire Marshal,
Assistant Chief Fire Marshal, Fire Marshals II and Fire Marshal I under
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-2
1:7
§ 9-3. Service.
An appearance ticket other than for a parking violation shall be served
personally.
Chapter 112, Chapter 164, Chapter 119, Chapter 273, the Smithtown
Uniform Traffic Code and Chapter 322. Additionally, all Building
Inspectors, Ordinance Inspectors, Fire Marshals and Sign Inspectors
are authorized to serve appearance tickets which are issued by the
Building Director, Building Inspectors and/or the Chief Fire Marshal,
Assistant Chief Fire Marshal, Fire Marshals II and/or Fire Marshal I
and/or all other persons duly authorized to issue appearance tickets
pursuant to this section of this chapter. [Amended 10-28-1997 by
L.L. No. 6-1997; 2-29-2000 by L.L. No. 3-2000; 5-8-2007;
5-17-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
G. The Town Engineer, Assistant Town Engineer, Senior Civil Engineer and
Engineering Inspectors in the Engineering Department under Chapters
153 and 154. [Amended 11-21-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
H. The Town Planning Director in the Planning Department under
Chapters 285 and 322.
I. The Town Investigator under all chapters.
J. The Director of Traffic Safety under the Smithtown Uniform Traffic
Code. [Amended 10-27-1992 by L.L. No. 7-1992]
K. The Director of Public Safety, Deputy Director of Public Safety,
Applicant and Complaint Investigator, Sanitation Inspector, and
Ordinance Inspectors under all chapters. [Amended 10-28-1997 by
L.L. No. 6-1997; 12-30-2002 by L.L. No. 8-2002; 6-25-2009 by L.L.
No. 3-2009]
L. The Supervisor of Environment and Waterways, the Environmental
Analyst and the Planning Director under Chapters 138, 170, 233, 285
and 315.
M. The Town Attorney, the Senior Assistant Town Attorney, Assistant Town
Attorneys, and Town Attorney Applicant and Complaint Investigator
under all chapters. [Amended 8-13-2019 by L.L. No. 3-2019]
N. The Building Director in the Building Department, the Director of
Public Safety in the Department of Public Safety and their designated
deputies, the Building Inspectors and Ordinance Inspectors, under
Chapter 181. [Amended 9-7-1993 by L.L. No. 3-1993; 5-8-2007 by
L.L. No. 5-2007]
O. The Harbormaster and the personnel of the Department of Public
Safety Marine Division under Chapter 108. [Amended 7-14-1992 by
L.L. No. 3-1992; 9-7-1993 by L.L. No. 3-1993]
§ 9-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 9-3
1:8
Chapter 13
BUILDING PERMIT REVIEW BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
§ 13-1. Legislative intent.
The Town Board finds herewith that as the population of our Town rapidly
increases, the development of residential areas by single building permit
applications should proceed along the lines of good order and with due
regard to the public interest involved and that a reasonable degree of
control should be exercised over the physical improvement of the individual
sites requiring the establishing of special conditions on all sites within
the Town of Smithtown. The neglect to consider surface water drainage,
adequate width of roadways and the relationship of the building lot to
existing public improvements, as well as the consideration of long-range
desired standards for individual building permits which will inure to the
benefit of all the people of the Town of Smithtown, adversely affects the real
property in the area where the building permit is requested, affects the cost
and also destroys the effectiveness of municipal services provided in the
general area and its relation to all the people of a particular section of the
Town. Therefore, for these reasons and others, the following is proposed to
prevent these harmful effects and thus:
A. Protect the established character of the adjoining properties, both
public and private, and of the neighborhood in which they are located.
B. Prevent the depreciation of the value of adjoining properties, both
public and private, and of the neighborhood in which they are located.
C. Lessen and, where possible, prevent traffic congestion on the streets
and highways upon which the site fronts or which provide vehicular or
pedestrian access thereto.
D. Prevent overcrowding of land or buildings.
E. Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers and provide adequate
light, air and convenience of access.
F. Provide standardization in all areas of the Town of Smithtown in road
width, curbing and drainage.
G. Provide for a constant and known relationship of all building lots to
existing public improvements.
H. Provide that all roadways in the Town will eventually be curbed and
uniform in width, meeting the requirements of state law.
§ 9-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1
1:9
§ 13-2. Board established. [Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
There is hereby created a Building Permit Review Board. The Building
Permit Review Board shall consist of seven members, being more
specifically a member of the Town Board assigned by the Supervisor, the
Town Attorney, the Town Engineer, the Highway Superintendent, the
Highway Engineer, the Chairman of the Planning Board and the Building
Director.
§ 13-3. Powers and duties.
The Building Permit Review Board shall have the following powers and
duties:
§ 13-4. Approval required. [Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
No building permit shall be issued for any individual building permit
application which has been referred to the Building Permit Review Board
by the Town Engineer, Highway Superintendent, Chairman of the Planning
Board or Building Director until the Building Director has received approval
from the Building Permit Review Board, except that, if such Board shall
fail to report within 45 days of the filing of the building permit application
to the Building Director, the proposed building permit shall be considered
approved by said Board.
§ 13-5. Procedure for applications. [Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No.
5-2007]
The Building Director shall submit copies of all building permit applications
to the Superintendent of Highways, the Chairman of the Planning Board
and the Town Engineer within five days of the application to him, and those
department heads shall make inspections and report on forms approved by
the Building Director. Upon rejection of an application from any department
head, the Building Director is to withhold issuance of a building permit
until such time as a meeting of the Building Permit Review Board can be
convened and agree to a resolution.
I. Promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
community in which the proposed building is to be located.
A. To examine and review all individual building permit applications
submitted to the Board by the Chairman of the Planning Board,
Department of Engineering, Highway Department or Building
Department, after review by those departments in the normal course of
Town business.
B. To apply in its examination and review the standards established under
§ 13-1 of this chapter and based thereon to approve or disapprove such
building permits or to require changes, widenings, curbing or additions
therein as conditions of approval.
§ 13-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § 13-6
1:10
§ 13-6. Inspections; fee.
No certificate of occupancy is to be issued until reinspection is made
by the department initially noting an objection, in writing, to see if the
specific conditions established by the Building Permit Review Board have
been complied with. Therefore, building permit applicants shall meet the
requirements for improvements established in this chapter and shall include
the following specific items in accordance with the noted regulations and
good building practice:
§ 13-7. Board's decision to be final.
The decision of the Building Permit Review Board shall be administratively
final.
Chapter 17
CLASSIFICATION OF TOWN
A. The road serving the property must meet the minimum requirements
for emergency vehicular access and meet the minimum width
requirements described by state law, and dedication of necessary
footage to accomplish this will be required to accomplish the road
widening where necessary.
B. The proposed building plot must be so located that it is not within the
bounds of a pond, marsh or other area exhibiting surface water which
cannot be drained. The proposed building lot is to be so located as not
to be below the high watermark of the Nissequogue River. Sites located
within the Nesconset area system require a fee of $100 per lot payable
to the Nesconset Area Drainage Fund.
C. Concrete monuments of all angle points on Town highways at the
building plot are to be installed.
D. A concrete curb, or a cash sum in lieu of the curb to be used toward
eventual installation of the same, must be provided for the frontage of
the building plot.
E. Precast drainage basins must be installed as a standard requirement
for all basement garages below the grade of the existing roadway.
F. Lots may not be split if a violation of the Town Building Zone Ordinance
will be created for either the parcel which is the subject of the
application or the parcel directly adjacent thereto.2
G. The location of the proposed structure shall be such as to comply with
the Building Zone Ordinance of the Town of Smithtown in relation to
zoning requirements.
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Zoning.
§ 13-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1
1:11
§ 17-1. Classification.
Chapter 19
COMPUTER POLICY
§ 19-1. Purpose.
Any employee ("users") using the Town of Smithtown's ("the Town's")
computer systems, Internet technologies and/or e-mail system must adhere
to the rules contained in this policy. By utilizing such computer systems,
internet technologies and/or e-mail system, users agree to abide by the
terms of this policy.
§ 19-2. Use of Town property outside the Town.
All data and programs on the Town's computers, network stations and file
servers are the property of the Town. Such Town property shall not be
copied, except for Town purposes, and shall not be moved or used outside
of the Town, except for Town-related purposes, without prior notification to
and approval by the employee's department head or his/her designee.
§ 19-3. Computer system usage.
All electronic and telephonic communications systems and all
communications and information transmitted by, received from or stored in
the Town's computer systems are to be used solely for job-related purposes.
Use of Town Internet technologies to access any Web site for the purpose of
personal gain of a sexually explicit nature or otherwise inappropriate in a
professional environment or for any illegal purpose is strictly prohibited.
§ 19-4. E-mail communications. [Amended 6-13-2006]
The Town's e-mail system is to be used for business purposes only. The email
system should not be used to send messages of a personal nature.
Use of the Town's e-mail systems to transmit, harass, intimidate, annoy or
make available to others information containing sexually explicit, profane,
obscene, harassing, offensive or otherwise discriminatory material is
strictly prohibited. The Town's e-mail systems are not to be used for
personal financial gain or profit.
A. Pursuant to § 12 of the Town Law of the State of New York and subject
to a motion for a permissive referendum, the classification of the Town
of Smithtown be and is hereby changed from Town of the Second Class
to Town of the First Class.
B. Adopted by resolution of the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown May,
21, 1991, effective January 1, 1992, and filed with the Secretary of State
January 6, 1992, the Town of Smithtown changed its classification to
Suburban Town. [Added 5-21-1991]
§ 17-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § 19-4
1:12
§ 19-5. Privacy.
Users cannot and should not attempt to use the Town's e-mail and/or
other computer systems to send, receive or store any messages or data
they wish to keep private. By using the Town's e-mail and/or computer
systems, all users waive any right to privacy in e-mail messages or other
data transmitted. The Town reserves the right to access, review, copy and/
or delete any message, file, data or document on its e-mail or computer
systems, including matter stored on individual computers and related
media.
§ 19-6. Confidential information.
Confidential information of or concerning the Town shall never be
forwarded to others who are not authorized to receive such information
and shall not be transmitted to anyone who does not need to know such
information. In order to further guard against dissemination of confidential
Town information, employees shall not disclose their passwords and
information in the computer system. No employee shall enter the e-mail files
of another employee without the prior consent of the other employee unless
authorized by the department head or his/her designee.
§ 19-7. Copyright infringement prohibited.
Use of the Town's computer systems to copy and/or transmit any
documents, software or other matter that is otherwise protected by the
copyright laws is strictly prohibited.
§ 19-8. Authorization required for download or installation of
software.
Personal copies of software (not Town-owned) shall not be loaded/installed
or run on Town computers without prior written authorization from the
department head or his/her designee. Town-owned software shall not be
copied or downloaded from a Town computer to a floppy disk or other
electronic media for personal use or purpose without prior written
authorization from the employee's department head or his/her designee.
A. All Town departments will recognize e-mail as an extension of
interoffice and public mail and as a form of correspondence, whether
submitted by the public or another Town department.
B. Each Town department will be assigned a general e-mail address.
Department heads shall ensure that their department's e-mail box is
checked regularly, but no less than once each business day.
Departments shall ensure that their e-mail address is included on all
new orders of printed material (letterhead, forms, business cards,
brochures, mailings, etcetera).
C. Departments shall establish internal procedures for logging,
responding to, filing, and retention of e-mail correspondence.
§ 19-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-9
1:13
§ 19-9. Security; integrity of Town's computer systems.
Users must not attempt to circumvent or subvert computer system security
measures or to access unauthorized resources or entities. Users must not
do anything to harm the Town's computer systems or the information stored
on them. This includes, but is not limited to, creating or spreading viruses,
degrading system performance, disrupting services, damaging files, or
vandalizing or otherwise compromising the data of another user.
§ 19-10. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this policy may result in access privileges being revoked
and/or appropriate legal or disciplinary action being pursued against the
user.
§ 19-11. Waiver of responsibility.
Users of the Town's computer systems for personal use do so at their own
risk, even if the employee has received prior authorization for such use
by the user's department head or his/her designee. The Town makes no
warranties with respect to network or computer service, and it specifically
assumes no responsibility for:
Chapter 21
CONSERVATION BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Environment and
Waterways — See Ch. 27.
Recycling Committee — See Ch. 61.
Environmental and coastal quality
review — See Ch. 151.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 170.
A. The content of any information received by a user, whether for personal
or Town business purposes from a source outside of the Town, or any
costs or charges incurred as a result of receiving or accepting such
information.
B. Any costs, liability or damages caused by the way the user chooses to
use his/her Town computer system access for personal purposes, even if
done with prior authorization of such personal use by the user's
department head or his/her designee.
C. Any consequences of service interruption or changes, even if these
disruptions arise from circumstances under the control of the Town.
§ 19-9 SMITHTOWN CODE § 21-1
1:14
§ 21-1. Legislative findings. [Amended 1-2-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990]
The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown hereby finds and declares it to
be in the best interest of the citizens of the Town of Smithtown to create
and provide for the appointment of a Conservation Board to advise in the
protection and wise use of the town's natural resources.
§ 21-2. Composition; terms of office; Chairman; removal and
vacancies. [Amended 1-2-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990]
The Board shall be known as the "Conservation Board of the Town of
Smithtown" and shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by
the Town Board for terms not exceeding two (2) years. The presiding officer
or Chairman of the Board shall be designated by the Town Board, from
among the members so appointed to the Board. The Town Board shall have
authority to remove any member of said Board so appointed, for cause, after
a public hearing if requested. A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired
term in the same manner as an original appointment.
§ 21-3. Powers and duties.
The Conservation Board of the Town of Smithtown shall conduct researches
into the land area of the town and shall seek to coordinate the activities of
unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes and may advertise, prepare,
print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which, in
its judgment, it deems necessary for its work. The Board shall keep an
index of all open areas within the Town of Smithtown, with the plan of
obtaining information pertinent to proper utilization of such open areas,
including lands owned by the state or lands owned by a village within the
town or lands owned by the town. The Board shall further keep an index of
all open marshlands, swamps and all other wetlands in a like manner and
may recommend to the Town Board a program for the better promotion,
development or utilization of such areas. The Board shall further keep
accurate records of its meetings and actions and shall file an annual report
which shall be printed in the annual town report.
§ 21-4. Compensation; appropriation of funds.
A. The Chairman of the Conservation Board of the Town of Smithtown
shall receive compensation in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.)
per year. All other members of the Conservation Board of the Town of
Smithtown shall serve without compensation. [Amended 2-26-1985
by L.L. No. 4-1985]
B. The Town Board shall also appropriate in the annual budget of the town
a sum of money for the purpose of providing to the Conservation Board
funds to defray the costs and expenses incurred by it in the
performance of its duties set forth hereinabove, such appropriation to
be a charge upon the taxable property of that part of the Town of
Smithtown outside the incorporated villages contained therein.
§ 21-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-4
1:15
Chapter 24
DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 53. Substance Abuse Prevention Council — See
Ch. 71.
§ 24-1. Prohibited acts; penalties for offenses.
The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or use of
a controlled substance is prohibited in the workplace and any employee
who unlawfully manufactures, distributes, dispenses, possesses or uses a
controlled substance shall be subject to disciplinary action, including such
penalties as reprimand, a fine not to exceed $100 to be deducted from
the salary or wages of such employee, suspension without pay for a period
not exceeding two months, demotion in grade and title, dismissal from
the service and referral and participation in a drug abuse assistance or
rehabilitation program.
§ 24-2. Compliance and notification required.
All employees, as a condition of employment pursuant to the Antidrug Abuse
Act of 1988 and Drug-Free Workplace Act, shall abide by the above terms
and shall notify the Town of any criminal drug statute conviction or violation
occurring in the workplace no later than five days after such conviction.
Chapter 27
ENVIRONMENT AND WATERWAYS, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Board — See Ch. 21.
Historical Advisory Board — See Ch. 39.
Beaches and parks — See Ch. 101.
Dredging — See Ch. 138.
Environment and coastal quality review — See
Ch. 151.
Excavations and regrading — See Ch. 154.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 170.
Shellfish — See Ch. 233.
Trees — See Ch. 285.
Water pollution — See Ch. 315.
§ 27-1. Legislative declaration.
It is the intent of the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown to create
a Department of Environment and Waterways to further the following
purposes and objectives:
§ 21-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 27-1
1:16
§ 27-2. Department created.
There is hereby created, as a separate Department in the Town of
Smithtown, the Department of Environment and Waterways, and there is
hereby established the office of Environment and Waterways Supervisor.
§ 27-3. Environment and Waterways Supervisor.
§ 27-4. Powers and duties.
A. To assure for all the people of the Town of Smithtown safe, healthful,
productive and aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings.
B. To attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment without
degradation, risk to health or safety or other undesirable
consequences.
C. To preserve important historic, cultural and natural aspects of our
heritage and maintain an environment which supports diversity and
variety of individual choices.
D. To achieve a balance between population and resource use which will
permit high standards of living and a wide sharing of life amenities
among all the residents of the Town of Smithtown, not only during this
generation but in each succeeding generation.
E. To protect the people of the Town of Smithtown against such activities
as would tend to impair, damage, destroy or otherwise infringe upon the
natural resources of the Town of Smithtown.
F. To manage all uses of the wetlands, waterways and shellfish resources
of the Town of Smithtown so as to maintain and, wherever possible,
improve the long-term ecological health and environmental quality of
these resources for the benefit and enjoyment of all the residents of the
Town of Smithtown, not only during this generation but in each
succeeding generation.
G. To administer and ensure the wise, safe and efficient use of the
wetlands, waterways and related facilities of the Town of Smithtown for
boating, shellfishing and all other appropriate recreational, educational
and commercial pursuits.
A. The Environment and Waterways Supervisor shall be vested with
authority, jurisdiction and control over the Department of Environment
and Waterways.
B. The Environment and Waterways Supervisor shall be appointed by the
Town Board of the Town of Smithtown.
A. The Department of Environment and Waterways shall have cognizance,
jurisdiction and control over and shall be charged with the protection of
the people of the Town of Smithtown against such activities as would
§ 27-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-4
1:17
tend to impair, damage, destroy or otherwise infringe upon the natural
resources and environment of the Town of Smithtown or on their
enjoyment of the present or future people of the Town of Smithtown.
These powers include but are not limited to the sections of the Code
of the Town of Smithtown dealing with pesticides, marine conservation,
waterways (including oil spillage control), shellfish and any other
environmental ordinances which may from time to time be passed by
the Town Board.
B. The following departments and boards shall consult with the
Department of Environment and Waterways on all matters within their
jurisdiction which may have an ecological impact:
(1) Sanitation Department.
(2) Engineering Department.
(3) Building Department.
(4) Highway Department.
(5) Department of Parks and Recreation.
(6) Town Historian and Historical Advisory Board.
(7) Conservation Board.
(8) Planning Board.
(9) Planning Department. [Added 3-20-1990 by L.L. No. 5-1990]
(10) All other boards, councils and committees concerned with
environmental matters that shall be from time to time constituted
and approved by the Town Board.
C. The Department of Environment and Waterways shall advise the abovementioned
departments or boards and all of their subdivisions, either
on the initiative of the authorized department head making the request
or on the initiative of the Department of Environment and Waterways,
when and if it is determined that such advice would foster the policy
and purpose of this chapter.
D. The Department of Environment and Waterways shall be authorized to
render reports, advice and recommendations to the Planning Board, the
Planning Department, the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Board of Site
Plan Review, the Conservation Board and any other Town departments,
boards or council as necessary to implement the policy and purpose of
this chapter with respect to the environment and natural resources of
the Town of Smithtown.
§ 27-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 27-4
1:18
Chapter 28
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handicap Advisory Board — See Ch. 36.
Human Rights Commission — See Ch. 42.
Anti-Bias Task Force — See Ch. 43.
Sexual and Other Harassment Policy — See
Ch. 68.
Workplace Violence Prevention Policy — See
Ch. 83.
§ 28-1. Policy statement.
The Town of Smithtown is an equal opportunity employer. The Town is
committed to making all personnel and employment decisions without
regard to age, race, creed, religion, color, sex, national origin, disability,
marital status, citizenship, pregnancy, veterans status, genetic
predisposition, sexual orientation, or any other category protected by law.
Anyone who believes that he or she has been discriminated against on the
basis of any of these characteristics, or who believes he or she has been
retaliated against for making a complaint, should immediately report the
incident in accordance with the following procedures.
§ 28-2. Complaint procedures.
A. Any employee who feels that he or she has been the victim of
discrimination in violation of this Equal Employment Opportunity Policy
or has witnessed such activity must immediately report the incident to
his/her department head. Applicants for employment with the Town
should also contact the head of the department in which he/she is
applying for a position. If you feel uncomfortable speaking to the
department head or if you feel your complaint has not been adequately
addressed, please speak to the Town Attorney or the Town Personnel
Officer.
B. All complaints will be investigated in a timely manner.
C. Confidentiality will be maintained to the maximum extent possible,
consistent with the Town's obligation to conduct a thorough
investigation. All individuals who become involved in the investigation
are required and directed to treat the matter confidentially.
D. Investigation of a complaint will normally include conferring with the
parties involved and any named or apparent witnesses. Should the
Town determine it necessary to interview the employee alleged to be
committing the discrimination, where the employee is a member of a
union recognized by the Town, the employee shall be notified of his/her
right to be accompanied by a union representative at such interview.
The particular facts of the allegation will be examined individually, with
§ 27-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2
1:19
§ 28-3. Applicability; penalties for offenses.
Chapter 30
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 53. Town Attorney escrow account — See Ch. 75.
a focus upon the nature of the behavior, the pattern of such conduct, if
any, and the context in which the incident(s) occurred.
E. Individuals who believe they have been unjustly charged with acts of
discrimination will be afforded every opportunity to offer and present
information in their defense.
F. Anyone who participates in this procedure may do so without fear of
retaliation. Retaliation against anyone, because he or she has filed a
complaint, is illegal and grounds for disciplinary action.
G. An individual who is found to have violated this policy will be subject to
the Town's disciplinary procedures.
A. This policy applies to all current employees and applicants for
employment with the Town.
B. Anyone who knowingly makes a false complaint of discrimination (as
opposed to a complaint which, even if erroneous, is made in good faith)
shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary action.
§ 28-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 28-3
1:20
Part 1
[Adopted 4-25-S1t9a8n9dBarydLs.L. No. 1-1989]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 30-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Code of Ethics of the Town of
Smithtown."
§ 30-2. Purpose; interpretation.
§ 30-3. Definitions. [Amended 2-11-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS ACTIVITY — Any private interest, activity or transaction.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST — Includes any action or omission which is in
conflict or gives the appearance of conflict with the performance of official
Town business or government.
EMPLOYEE — Persons who are not officers but whose salaries are paid, in
whole or in part, by the Town of Smithtown.
FAMILY — Includes a spouse and unemancipated minor children residing in
the same household with their parents.
LOCAL POLITICAL PARTY OFFICIAL — The leader or Chairperson of any
Town committee or a party as the term "party" is defined in § 1-104 of the
Election Law. The term "Chairperson" or "leader" is intended to refer to the
person who performs the functions and duties of the chief official of a party
in the Town by whatever title designated.
OFFICER — Includes every officer who is elected by electors of the Town of
Smithtown, every Town officer as defined in the Town Law and other Town
officials and members of committees or boards of the Town of Smithtown
created by virtue of the Town Law and appointed by the Town Board,
whether compensated or uncompensated.
A. The proper administration of the government of the Town of Smithtown
requires its officers and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid
or unpaid, to be independent, impartial and free from conflicts of
interest in fulfilling their public responsibilities so that the public will
have confidence in the integrity of its Town government. Therefore, the
public interest requires that this Code of Ethics be adopted as a
standard of conduct, in addition to the standards prescribed in Article
18 of the General Municipal Law, for the officers and employees of the
Town of Smithtown.
B. This chapter shall be given its broadest possible interpretation under
law, so as to implement its stated purpose.
§ 30-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:21
POLICYMAKER — Any employee who:
RELATIVE — Any person living in the same household as the individual and
any person who is a direct descendent of the individual's grandparents or
the spouse of such descendent.[Added 7-7-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
§ 30-4. Conflicts of interest. [Amended 2-11-1992 by L.L. No.
1-1992]
Is designated as managerial under Civil Service Law § 201, Subdivision
7;
A.
Is in the noncompetitive class and has been designated by the State
Department of Civil Service, or local equivalent, as performing
functions influencing policy; or
B.
Exercises responsibilities of a broad scope in the formulation of plans
for the implementation of goals or policy for the Town of Smithtown or
acts as an advisor to an individual in such a position.
C.
A. No official or employee shall engage in any act which is in conflict or
gives the appearance of conflict with the performance of the official's or
employee's duties. An official or employee shall be deemed to have a
conflict of interest if:
(1) The person willfully engages in any business transaction or
professional activity or shall have a financial or other private
interest, direct or indirect, or incurs any obligation of any nature
which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of the
official's or employee's duties, unless such officer or employee
abstains from voting or otherwise officially acting with respect to
the subject matters affected.
(2) The person receives or has any financial interest in any sale to or by
the Town of any service or property when such financial interest
was received with the proper knowledge that the Town intended to
purchase such property or obtain such service.
(3) The person uses or attempts to use his or her official position to
secure unwarranted privileges or exemptions for himself or herself
or others, including members of his or her family.
(4) The person engages in or accepts private employment or engages
in any business transaction or professional activity or makes any
investment which will impair his or her independence of judgment
in the exercise of his or her official duties or will interfere in any
manner whatsoever with the discharge of his or her official duties.
B. The foregoing acts are listed by way of example and are by no means to
be deemed all-inclusive. Every officer and employee of the Town of
Smithtown shall endeavor to pursue a course of conduct which will not
raise suspicion among the public that he or she is likely to be engaged
in acts that are in violation of his or her trust.
§ 30-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 30-4
1:22
§ 30-5. Disclosure of confidential information; representation of
private interests. [Amended 2-11-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; 6-9-2009
by L.L. No. 1-2009]
§ 30-6. Specific officers. [Amended 2-11-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992;
6-7-1994 by L.L. No. 6-1994; 5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007; 6-9-2009
by L.L. No. 1-2009]
C. No elected official, officer or employee of the Town shall participate in
any decision to hire, promote, discipline or discharge a relative or
family member for or in any position in the Town government. [Added
7-7-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
A. No officer or other employee shall disclose, without proper authority,
confidential information concerning the property or affairs of the Town
of Smithtown nor shall the officer or employee use such information to
advance the financial or other private interest of said officer or
employee or others.
B. No officer or employee of the Town of Smithtown shall accept
employment or engage in any business or professional activity which
will require the official or employee to disclose confidential information
which the official or employee has gained by reason of the official's or
employee's position or authority.
C. No former officer or employee shall disclose any confidential
information learned or acquired during the period of his or her Town
service concerning the affairs of the Town of Smithtown, nor shall any
former officer or employee use such information, directly or indirectly,
to advance the financial or other private interest of said former officer
or employee or of any others.
D. No former officer or employee may appear at any time before any Town
board or agency on any case, application or specific matter on which
he/she participated or obtained privileged or confidential information
during his/her service with the Town.
E. No Town officer or employee of the Town of Smithtown shall represent,
directly or indirectly, any private interest, person or entity before any
Town board or any court in any matter involving the Town or any board
or agency thereof. He or she shall not, after his or her termination of
service or employment with the Town, appear before any board or
agency of the Town of Smithtown in relation to any matter or
proceeding which was commenced or pending during his or her
employment for a period of two years from the date of termination.
F. Waiver. Upon application to the Board of Ethics, any person may be
granted a waiver of any of the aforementioned subsections (§ 30-5C, D
and E) for good cause shown.
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-6
1:23
§ 30-7. Board of Ethics.
A. Office of the Town Attorney. The Town Attorney or special counsel to the
Town is prohibited from exercising any discretion in any matter of Town
interest which shall involve any person, firm or corporation that has
been a client of the Town Attorney or special counsel or of the Town
Attorney's or special counsel's firm within a one-year period of the time
that said matter is handled by the office of the Town Attorney. This,
however, shall not prevent the assignment by the Town Board of such a
matter to another attorney, as special counsel, who has had no interest
in such matter.
B. Office of the Building Department. Neither the Building Director, the
Building Inspector nor any assistant shall engage in the real estate,
insurance or building contracting business or building materials
business, directly or indirectly, in the Town of Smithtown during the
course of the Building Director's, Building Inspector's or assistant's
employment.
C. Office of the Assessor. Neither the Assessor nor any of the Assessor's
assistants shall engage in the real estate, construction, building,
contracting or building materials business or have any financial interest
in firms engaging in such business during the course of the Assessor's
or assistant's employment by the Town.
D. Office of the Town Engineer. Neither the Town Engineer nor any of the
Town Engineer's assistants shall have any interest in or accept any
compensation in any form from any engineering firm which has an
interest in matters coming before any Town agency.
E. Office of the Director of Planning. Neither the Director of Planning nor
the Director's assistants shall have any interest in or accept
compensation from any planning and/or consulting firm which is
interested in matters coming before any Town agency.
A. A local Board of Ethics is hereby established, pursuant to Article 18 of
the General Municipal Law, to ensure compliance with the
requirements of the Code of Ethics and to review all claims of conflict of
interest.
B. The Board of Ethics shall render advisory opinions regarding conflicts
of interest to officers and employees of the Town of Smithtown with
respect to Article 18 of the General Municipal Law and this Code of
Ethics. Such advisory opinions shall be rendered pursuant to the
request of any member of the Town Board or any Town employee.
[Amended 6-9-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
C. The Board of Ethics shall review, pursuant to the procedure outlined in
§ 30-9, all claims of confidentiality or privilege and/or requests for
exemptions.
§ 30-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § 30-7
1:24
§ 30-8. Conflicts with other codes of conduct.
D. The Board of Ethics shall receive and hear all complaints alleging
violations of this Code of Ethics upon the written request of any
individual. This request must be signed by the individual complainant
and must include his or her address. Upon receipt, a copy of any such
complaint shall be provided to the Town Board by the Board of Ethics.
E. The Board of Ethics shall act as a repository for completed financial
disclosure forms filed pursuant to § 30-9 and shall review the same for
possible conflicts of interest.
F. The Board of Ethics shall consist of three members appointed by the
Town Board of the Town of Smithtown to serve without compensation
for terms of three years. The original members selected shall serve at
staggered terms of three years, two years and one year. The members
of the Board of Ethics should be qualified by temperament to carry out
the duties of the Board of Ethics and, preferably, should have
appropriate legal and/or financial background. In no event shall any
employee and/or officer of the Town be eligible for membership.
Furthermore, no recognized political party, as defined in the Election
Law of the State of New York, shall be represented by more than one
enrollee as a member of the Board of Ethics.
G. The Town Attorney shall serve as counsel to the Board of Ethics except
when the Town Attorney shall exclude himself or herself in any matter
in which it appears the Town Attorney has or may have a conflict of
interest, in which case the Board of Ethics may hire special counsel.
[Amended 2-11-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; 6-9-2009 by L.L. No.
1-2009]
H. Advisory opinions regarding conflicts of interest and adjudicatory
decisions with a finding of a violation of this Code of Ethics shall be
made available for public inspection in accordance with procedures
established by the Board of Ethics. The aforesaid procedures shall be
reviewed by the Town Attorney for consistency and legality prior to
adoption by the Board of Ethics. [Amended 2-11-1992 by L.L. No.
1-1992; 6-9-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
I. The Board of Ethics shall have such other powers and duties as shall be
provided by or pursuant to Article 18 of the General Municipal Law.
[Amended 6-9-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
A. Recognizing the need for professional integrity and the fact that various
professional associations have set down standards of conduct for their
members, the Town of Smithtown hereby requires that each officer or
employee who is affected by a professional Code of Ethics be bound, in
addition to the within chapter, by their respective Codes of Ethics. Any
conflict between the provisions of this chapter and a given officer or
employee's professional code of conduct is to be resolved by the Board
of Ethics pursuant to the provisions as set forth in § 30-9. However, the
§ 30-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-8
1:25
§ 30-9. Disclosure of financial status. [Amended 2-11-1992 by L.L.
No. 1-1992]
Board of Ethics must at all times give the greatest latitude to said
individual's professional code of conduct and, whenever possible,
reconcile the within chapter to complement and respect the individual's
professional code of conduct.
B. Substantial consideration shall be given to the effect that deviation
from an individual's professional code of conduct will have on that
individual's ability to practice his or her profession. If need be, the
Board of Ethics is authorized and required to obtain advisory opinions
from the appropriate professional association to clarify any given
situation.
A. Any individual who holds a title as outlined in Appendix A3 of this
chapter and any policymaker or local political party official shall file
with the Board of Ethics of the Town of Smithtown, within 30 days after
taking office or commencing employment or of taking the position of
local political party official or whenever they become affected by the
provisions of this chapter and annually on or before May 15 of every
following year during their terms of office or employment, a financial
disclosure statement. The time for filing such statements may be
extended, pursuant to the rules of the Board of Ethics, for justifiable
cause and/or undue hardship, upon application to the Board of Ethics.
Candidates for local elected office shall file a financial disclosure
statement with the Board of Ethics within seven days after the date of
the meeting of the party committee at which they are nominated.
[Amended 6-9-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
B. Any individual required to file a financial disclosure statement pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter shall file with the Board of Ethics a
disclosure statement answering each and every question. This
statement shall be in the form prescribed by the Board of Ethics as
approved by Town Board resolution.
C. Every such statement filed with the Board of Ethics shall be subject to
public inspection; provided, however, that an employee may request
confidentiality with regard to parts of his financial statement that have
no relationship to his official duties. An employee may also request an
exemption from any requirement to report items of information which
pertain to such person's spouse and/or unemancipated children.
Confidentiality and/or an exemption may be granted by the Board of
Ethics with regard to such parts that, in the opinion of the Board of
Ethics, pose no conflict of interest and/or have no relationship to the
official duties of the employee. Parts of the statement that are granted
confidential and/or exempt status by the Board of Ethics and categories
of amounts of value shall not be disclosed to the public. [Amended
6-9-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
3. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 30-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 30-9
1:26
D. Any part of a financial disclosure statement that has been granted
confidential and/or exempt status by the Board of Ethics pursuant to the
employee's request as well as categories of amounts of value shall be
maintained by the Board of Ethics as confidential information. It shall
be a violation for any Board of Ethics member or any other individual,
except the employee who filed the statement, to disclose any
information that has been granted confidential and/or exempt status or
any category of amounts of value. Such violation shall be punishable by
a fine of not more than $500, as determined by the Board of Ethics.
E. If information granted confidential or exempt status is intermixed with
parts of the statement that will be subject to public inspection, such
confidential or exempt information shall be deleted by the Board of
Ethics from a copy to be made available for any such inspection, and the
original information shall be retained by the Board of Ethics pursuant to
§ 30-9C. [Amended 6-9-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
F. If a person required to file a financial disclosure statement with the
Board of Ethics has failed to file a disclosure statement or has filed a
deficient statement, the Board of Ethics shall, without undue delay,
notify the reporting person in writing stating the person failed to file
the required statement or detailing the deficiency, provide the person
with a fifteen-day period to cure the deficiency and advise the person of
the penalties for failure to comply with the reporting requirements.
Such notice shall be confidential. If the person fails to make such filing
or fails to cure the deficiency within a specified time period, the Board
of Ethics shall send a notice of delinquency to the reporting person and
to the Town Board. Any such person shall be subject to the adjudicatory
provisions hereof. [Amended 6-9-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
G. Violations; notice and hearing. [Amended 6-9-2009 by L.L. No.
1-2009]
(1) If a reporting person has filed a statement which reveals a possible
violation of this Code of Ethics or the Board of Ethics receives a
sworn complaint alleging such a violation, or if the Board of Ethics
determines on its own initiative to investigate a possible violation,
the Board of Ethics shall notify the reporting person in writing,
describe the possible or alleged violation of such Code of Ethics
and provide the person with a fifteen-day period in which to submit
a written response setting forth information relating to the
activities cited as a possible or alleged violation of law. If the Board
of Ethics thereafter makes a determination that further inquiry is
justified, it shall give the reporting person an opportunity to be
heard. The Board of Ethics shall inform the reporting individual of
its rules regarding the conduct of adjudicatory proceedings and
appeals and the due process procedural mechanisms available to
such individual. If the Board of Ethics determines at any stage of
the proceeding that there is no violation or that any potential
conflict of interest violation has been rectified, it shall so advise the
§ 30-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-9
1:27
reporting person and the complainant, if any. All of the foregoing
proceedings shall be confidential.
(2) If the Board of Ethics determines that there is reasonable cause to
believe that a violation has occurred, it shall send a notice of
reasonable cause to the reporting person, to the complainant, if
any, and to the Town Board. Any such person shall be subject to the
adjudicatory provisions hereof.
(3) A reporting individual who knowingly and willfully fails to file an
annual statement of financial disclosure, or who knowingly and
willfully has filed a deficient statement, or who knowingly and
willfully with intent to deceive makes a false statement or gives
information which such individual knows to be false on such
statement of financial disclosure filed pursuant to this chapter shall
assessed a civil penalty in the amount not to exceed $10,000. Such
individual shall also be subject to suspension and/or other
disciplinary action, as the Town Board considers advisable, and/or
upon recommendation of the Board of Ethics. Assessment of a civil
penalty hereunder shall be made by the Board of Ethics with
respect to persons subject to its jurisdiction. The Board of Ethics
may, in lieu of any civil penalty, refer a violation to the District
Attorney for prosecution, and upon such conviction, but only after
such referral, such violation shall be punishable as a Class A
misdemeanor. A civil penalty for false filing may not be imposed
hereunder in the event that a category of value or amount reported
hereunder is incorrect, unless such reported information is falsely
understated. Assessment of a civil penalty shall be final unless
modified, suspended or vacated within 30 days of imposition. With
respect to the assessment of such penalty, upon becoming final,
such penalty shall be subject to review pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
H. Policymakers.4
(1) The following are factors to consider in determining whether a
person holds a policy-making position:
(a) Whether the position permits meaningful input into the
governmental decisionmaking process or issues where there is
room for principled disagreement on goals or their
implementation.
(b) Whether the powers and duties of the position are broadly
defined and require more than the exercise of simple
ministerial competence.
(c) Whether the position permits the person to exercise control
over other officers or employees.
4. Editor's Note: Former Subsection H was redesignated as Subsection G(3) 6-9-2009 by L.L.
No. 1-2009. This local law also redesignated former Subsection I as Subsection H.
§ 30-9 SMITHTOWN CODE § 30-9
1:28
§ 30-10. Use of Town property.
No Town officer or employee shall use or permit the use of Town property
(including land, vehicles, equipment, materials and any other property) for
personal convenience or profit, except when such use is available to Town
citizens generally or is provided as a matter of Town policy.
§ 30-11. Treatment of the public. [Amended 2-11-1992 by L.L. No.
1-1992]
A Town officer, employee or appointee of the Town of Smithtown shall
treat all members of the public, whether a person, firm, corporation or
other organization, with equal consideration and without special advantage.
Every such employee shall also endeavor to pursue a course of conduct
which will not raise suspicion among the public that he or she is likely to be
engaged in acts that are in violation of his or her trust.
§ 30-12. Distribution and public inspection of provisions. [Amended
6-9-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
The Supervisor of the Town of Smithtown shall cause a copy of this Code of
Ethics to be made available to every officer and employee of the Town and
post a copy of § 800 through § 809 of the General Municipal Law in every
Town building. The Town Clerk of the Town of Smithtown shall cause a copy
of this Code of Ethics to be made available for public inspection at the Town
Clerk's office.
(d) Whether the position involves the establishment of priorities or
the development of programs.
(e) Whether the position requires or authorizes the conducting of
studies or entails a significant degree of involvement in the
preparation of budgets or budget requests for the Town of
Smithtown.
(f) Whether the position authorizes the person to speak on behalf
of the Town's elected officials or other policymakers.
(g) Whether the position entails frequent contact with
Smithtown's elected officials or their principal deputies.
(2) The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown shall use both an
objective test and a subjective test in applying the factors set forth
above in determining whether or not an individual holds a policymaking
position.
(3) The Town Board on its own initiative or at the request of the Board
of Ethics shall determine whether a particular position is a policymaking
position.
(4) The Town Board shall notify, in writing, each employee designated
as "policy-making."
§ 30-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-13
1:29
§ 30-13. Violators subject to suspension. [Amended 2-11-1992 by
L.L. No. 1-1992; 6-9-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
A violation of Article 18 of the General Municipal Law or any provision of
this Code of Ethics shall be grounds for suspension and/or other disciplinary
action, as the Town Board considers advisable, and/or upon
recommendation of the Board of Ethics.
§ 30-13 SMITHTOWN CODE § 30-13
1:30
Part 2
[Adopted 2-11-P1r9o9c2edBuyreLs.L. No. 1-1992]
ARTICLE II
Adjudicatory Proceedings
§ 30-14. Adjudicatory proceedings.5
A. In the event that the Board of Ethics convenes a hearing pursuant to
§ 30-9G(1) above or any other applicable provision of law, the following
procedures shall be followed:
(1) All concerned parties shall be given reasonable notice of such
hearing, which notice shall include:
(a) A statement of the time, place and nature of the hearing.
(b) A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which
the hearing is to be held.
(c) A reference to the particular sections of laws, ordinances,
statutes, rules or resolutions involved, wherever possible.
(d) A short and plain statement of matters asserted.
(e) Information concerning circumstances under which an
adjournment may be granted and the result of failure to appear
for a scheduled hearing or proceeding.
(f) Information for the parties and their representatives of the
right of each party to be represented to testify, to produce
witnesses, to present documentary evidence and to examine
opposing witnesses and evidence.
(2) Upon application of any party a more definite and detailed
statement shall be furnished whenever the Board of Ethics finds
that the statement is not sufficiently definite or not sufficiently
detailed. The finding of the Board of Ethics as to the sufficiency of
the definitiveness or detail of the statement or its failure or refusal
to furnish a more definite or detailed statement shall not be subject
to judicial review. Any statement furnished shall be deemed in all
respects to be a part of the notice of hearing.
(3) All parties shall be afforded an opportunity to present a written
argument on issues of law and an opportunity to present evidence
in such argument of issues of fact; provided, however, that nothing
contained herein shall be construed to prohibit an agency from
allowing parties to present oral argument within a reasonable time.
In fixing the time and place for hearings and oral arguments, the
convenience of the parties and witnesses, the subject matter of the
5. Editor's Note: Former § 30-14, Penalties for offenses, was superseded 2-11-1992 by L.L.
No. 1-1992; see now § 30-27, Penalties for offenses.
§ 30-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-14
1:31
§ 30-15. Record.
§ 30-16. Evidence.
hearings and the public welfare sought to be protected shall be
considered.
B. Unless precluded by statute, local law or ordinance, disposition may be
made of any adjudicatory proceeding by stipulation, agreed settlement,
consent order, default or other informal method.
A. The record in the adjudicatory proceedings shall include:
(1) All notices, pleadings, motions and intermediate rulings.
(2) Evidence presented.
(3) A statement of matters officially noticed, except matters so obvious
that a statement of them would serve no useful purpose.
(4) Questions and offers of proof, objections thereto and rulings
thereon.
(5) Proposed findings and exceptions, if any.
(6) Any findings of fact, conclusions of law or other recommendations
made by the Board of Ethics.
(7) Any decision, determination, opinion, order or report rendered.
B. The Board of Ethics shall make a complete record of all adjudicatory
proceedings conducted before it. For this purpose, unless otherwise
required by statute, the Board of Ethics may use whatever means it
deems appropriate, including but not limited to the use of stenographic
transcriptions or electronic recording devices. Upon request made by
any party upon the Board of Ethics within a reasonable time but prior to
the time for the commencement of judicial review giving notice of
decision, determination, opinion or order, the Board of Ethics shall
prepare the record, together with any transcript of proceedings, within
a reasonable time and furnish a copy of the record and transcript or any
part thereof to any party as he or she may request. Except when
prohibited by law, the Board of Ethics is authorized to charge not more
than its actual cost for the preparation and furnishing of such record or
transcript, or any part thereof, or the rate specified in the contract
between the Board of Ethics and a contractor, if prepared by a private
contractor.
C. Findings of fact shall be based exclusively on the evidence and on
matters officially noticed.
A. Irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence or cross-examination may be
excluded. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the burden of proof
shall be on the party who initiated the proceeding. No decision,
§ 30-14 SMITHTOWN CODE § 30-16
1:32
§ 30-17. Oaths.
§ 30-18. Conduct of hearings.
The Board of Ethics, exercising discretion, may elect to conduct any hearing
or proceeding under this chapter ex parte after a showing that the party
who is the subject of the hearing and its representative of record have been
notified by certified mail of the pending hearing or proceeding or otherwise
served with notice of a hearing. The party who is the subject of the hearing
shall at no time be deprived of the opportunity to appear. However, if a party
has been served with two written notices of a hearing and fails to appear
after each notice, the Board of Ethics, upon proof of service, shall have
the authority to proceed with the scheduled hearings. Proof of service shall
consist of a signed certified mail receipt or affidavit.
determination or order shall be made except upon consideration of
the record as a whole or such portion thereof as may be cited by
any party to the proceeding and supported by and in accordance with
substantial evidence. Unless otherwise provided by statute, the Board
of Ethics need not observe the rules of evidence observed by courts but
shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized by law. Objections
to evidentiary offers may be made and shall be noted in the record.
Subject to these requirements, the Board of Ethics, for the purpose
of expediting hearings and when the interest of parties will not be
substantially prejudiced thereby, may adopt procedures for the
submission of all or part of the evidence in written form.
B. All evidence, including records and documents in the possession of the
Board of Ethics of which it desires to avail itself, shall be offered and
made a part of the record, and all such documentary evidence may be
received in the form of copies or excerpts or by incorporation by
reference. In case of incorporation by reference, the materials so
incorporated shall be available for examination by the parties before
being received in evidence.
C. A party shall have the right of cross-examination.
D. Official notice may be taken of all facts of which judicial notice could be
taken and of other facts within the specialized knowledge of the Town of
Smithtown or Board of Ethics. When official notice is taken of a material
fact not appearing in the evidence in the record and of which judicial
notice could not be taken, every party shall be given notice thereof and
shall on timely request be afforded an opportunity prior to decision to
dispute the fact or its materiality.
A. All oaths required may be taken before any person authorized to
administer oaths within the State of New York.
B. Oaths shall be administered to all witnesses who testify or appear in
any hearing or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter.
§ 30-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-19
1:33
§ 30-19. Hearing officer.
All hearings and proceedings under this chapter shall be conducted by the
Board of Ethics sitting en masse or, at the discretion of the Chairman of the
Board of Ethics, may be conducted by the Chairman of the Board of Ethics,
hereinafter referred to as "hearing officer," who shall have the power and
authority of presiding officers or hearing officers as defined by the State
Administrative Procedure Act (SAPA) and any other pertinent statute, local
law, ordinance or resolution and regulations promulgated therefrom.
§ 30-20. Powers and duties of hearing officer.
A hearing officer is authorized to do the following in any hearing or
proceeding to which he or she is assigned.
§ 30-21. Decisions, determinations and orders; fines and penalties.
A. Administer oaths and affirmations.
B. At the request of any party, sign and issue subpoenas in the name of the
Board of Ethics requiring the attendance and giving of testimony by
witnesses and the production of books, papers, documents and other
evidence. Subpoenas shall be regulated by the Civil Practice Law and
Rules. Nothing herein contained shall effect the authority of an attorney
for a party to issue such subpoenas under the provisions of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules.
C. Provide for the taking of testimony by deposition.
D. Regulate the course of the hearing, set the time and place for continued
hearings and the time for filing of briefs and other documents.
E. Direct the parties to appear and confer and to consider the
simplification or settlement of the issues by consent of the parties.
F. Prepare findings of fact recommendations.
A. At the close of the hearing or proceeding, the hearing officer, if said
hearing officer is not the Board of Ethics sitting en masse, shall make
findings of fact and a recommendation as to the appropriate penalty or
fine to be assessed or any other action to be taken. The proposed
findings of fact and the recommendation shall be transmitted to the
Board of Ethics en masse for approval and simultaneously mailed or
delivered to the parties to the proceeding. The parties shall have an
opportunity to respond, in writing, in the form of a brief to the findings
of fact and the recommendation of the hearing officer, and such written
response shall be directed to the Board of Ethics for its consideration
within 15 days after the submission of the hearing officer's
recommendation to the Board of Ethics. In their brief submitted in
response to the findings of fact and the recommendation of the hearing
officer, the parties may not submit or discuss evidence which is not a
part of the official record of the hearing or proceeding. The Board of
§ 30-19 SMITHTOWN CODE § 30-21
1:34
Ethics shall expeditiously act on the findings of fact and the
recommendation. The Board of Ethics may affirm or reverse the
findings of fact and the recommendation of the hearing officer in whole
or in part, or it may remand and/or dismiss the proceeding based upon
the record produced at the hearing. [Amended 6-9-2009 by L.L. No.
1-2009]
B. In the event that the Board of Ethics sits or presides at any hearing or
proceeding en masse, then the provisions of § 30-21A above shall not be
applicable. In that event, the Board of Ethics shall make findings of fact;
render a decision; and assess an appropriate penalty or fine, or take any
other appropriate action, based upon the record. [Amended 6-9-2009
by L.L. No. 1-2009]
C. The assessment of civil penalties under the applicable law and
procedures shall not preclude the referral of an appropriate violation to
a prosecutor for a prosecution of criminal charges, except where the
violation is imposed under the General Municipal Law § 812,
Subdivision 6, for failure to file or a false filing of an annual statement.
D. If the alleged violation has been established and the Board determines
in light of all the circumstances that assessment of the civil penalty is
not appropriate or if the imposition of civil penalties is not otherwise
authorized by law, the Board of Ethics, in its discretion, may take such
other action as appropriate, including but not limited to a written
admonition or a recommendation that disciplinary action be taken or a
referral to a prosecutor for prosecution of criminal charges. The Board
of Ethics shall forward a copy of such admonition or recommendation
for disciplinary action to the Town Board. [Amended 6-9-2009 by L.L.
No. 1-2009]
E. A final decision, determination or order adverse to a party in an
adjudicatory proceeding of the Board of Ethics shall be in writing or
stated in the record and shall include findings of fact and conclusions of
law or reasons for the decision, determination or order. Findings of fact,
if set forth in statutory language, shall be accompanied by a concise and
explicit statement of the underlying facts supporting the findings. If in
accordance with the Board of Ethics' rules a party submitted proposed
findings of fact, the decision, determination or order shall include a
ruling upon each proposed finding. A copy of the decision,
determination or order shall be delivered or mailed forthwith to each
party, the attorney of record and the Town Board.
F. The Board of Ethics shall maintain an index by name and subject matter
of all written final decisions, determinations and orders rendered by the
Board of Ethics in adjudicatory proceedings. Such index and the text of
any such written final decision, determination or order with a finding of
a violation of this Code of Ethics shall be available for public inspection.
The Board of Ethics may delete from any such index, decision or
determination any information that, if disclosed, would constitute an
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy under the provisions of
§ 30-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-21
1:35
Subdivision 2 of § 89 of the Public Officers Law and may also delete at
the request of the Town Board all references to secrets or privileged or
confidential matters that, if so disclosed, would cause substantial injury
to the Town of Smithtown. Information which would reveal confidential
material protected by federal, state or local law, rule, ordinance or
regulation shall be deleted from any such index, decision,
determination or order. [Amended 6-9-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
§ 30-21 SMITHTOWN CODE § 30-21
1:36
ARTICLE III
Disclosure of Information
§ 30-22. Disclosure of information.
§ 30-23. List of annual statements of financial disclosure.
The Board of Ethics shall maintain and make available for public inspection
a current list of those annual statements of financial disclosure which are
available for public inspection. The list shall be sufficiently detailed to
permit the requester to identify the annual statement sought. The list shall
be updated periodically as required to add any additional annual statements
that have been filed.
§ 30-24. Request for public inspection. [Amended 6-9-2009 by L.L.
No. 1-2009]
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, and notwithstanding the
provisions of Article 6 of the Public Officers Law, the only records of the
Board of Ethics which shall be available for public inspection are:
[Amended 6-9-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
(1) The information set forth in an annual statement of financial
disclosure filed pursuant to this chapter, except the categories of
value or amount which shall remain confidential and any other item
of information deleted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, as
the case may be.
(2) Notices of delinquency sent under § 30-9F of this chapter.
(3) Notices of reasonable cause sent under § 30-9G(2) of this chapter.
(4) Notices of civil assessment imposed under this chapter.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 7 of the Public Officers Law,
no meeting or proceeding of the Board of Ethics shall be opened to the
public, except at the discretion of the Board of Ethics.
C. Information which would reveal confidential material protected by
federal, state or local law, ordinance, resolution, or regulation shall be
deleted from any filed decision, order, determination or declaration
issued by the Board of Ethics.
A. No member of the public shall be permitted to inspect an annual
statement of financial disclosure unless he or she has first submitted a
request for public inspection of annual statements. A request for public
inspection of annual statements shall be in writing in accordance with
Article 6 of the Public Officers Law, known as the "Freedom of
Information Law."
§ 30-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-24
1:37
§ 30-25. Retention of original annual statements of financial
disclosure. [Amended 6-9-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
Annual statements of financial disclosure shall be maintained for a period
of seven years. No original annual statement of financial disclosure shall be
removed from the custody of the Board of Ethics. Every copy of an annual
statement of financial disclosure shall contain a watermark indicating that
said copy is not an original.
§ 30-26. Notification of subjects of requests for public inspection.
[Amended 6-9-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
Any person who wishes to know if he or she has been the subject of
a request for public inspection may request from the Board of Ethics
notification of whether such request has been filed.
B. The request shall be filed with the Board of Ethics or the Board's duly
authorized agent as the Board of Ethics shall designate from time to
time.
C. The Board of Ethics shall verify that any outstanding request for
confidentiality and/or an exemption has been or will be reviewed prior
to approving any request for public inspection.
D. The Board of Ethics shall respond to a request for public inspection
within five business days after the day of the receipt of the request.
E. A request for public inspection shall contain the name of the individual
whose statement is sought to be inspected and the department by
which the officer or employee is employed or which he or she is
affiliated, the local elected office held, the local political party office
held or the local elected office for which the individual is a candidate.
§ 30-24 SMITHTOWN CODE § 30-26
1:38
ARTICLE IV
Penalties
§ 30-27. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-9-2009 by L.L. No.
1-2009]
Any person who knowingly and willfully violates this Code of Ethics shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall also be subject to civil penalties for any
such violation.
A. In addition to the sanctions for aiding, abetting, seeking or requesting a
violation of this chapter, any person or organization that willfully
attempts to secure preferential treatment in its dealings with the Town
by offering any valuable gifts, whether in the form of a service, loan,
thing or promise, in any form to any Town official or employee shall
have its current contracts with the Town cancelled and shall not be able
to bid on any other Town contract for a period of two years.
B. Members of boards and commissions found guilty of a negligent
violation of this chapter shall be subject to immediate removal from
such appointment.
§ 30-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-27
1:39
Chapter 33
FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CODE REVIEW BOARD
§ 33-1. Applicability; jurisdiction.
§ 33-2. Establishment.
§ 33-3. Office establishment.
There shall be established in the Town of Smithtown the Office of the
Smithtown Fire Prevention and Building Code Review Board, which shall
be held in the Building Department in Smithtown on an as-needed basis.
The principal executive officer and administrative head of such office shall
be the Chairman. The Chairman shall have such powers as prescribed by
A. This chapter shall apply to all applicants and/or appeals to the Town of
Smithtown Fire Prevention and Building Code Review Board.
B. In no event shall the Town of Smithtown Fire Prevention and Building
Code Review Board assume jurisdiction over or interpret or modify any
provision of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code, nor shall it in any manner substitute for the Regional Boards of
Review with respect to the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
A. There is hereby established in the Town of Smithtown the Town of
Smithtown Fire Prevention and Building Code Review Board, which
may be known and hereinafter referred to as the "Board." The Board
shall be composed of five members appointed by the Town Board, each
of whom shall have, whenever feasible, separate experience or
expertise as:
(1) A New York State licensed professional engineer.
(2) A New York State registered architect licensed within the State of
New York.
(3) A fire service or prevention official.
(4) A business person with expertise in building construction.
(5) An attorney.
B. The Town Board shall appoint one member of the Town of Smithtown
Fire Prevention and Building Code Review Board to the position of
Chairman of said Board, who shall be its chief officer. Membership will
be on a voluntary basis. Compensation will be paid to clerks and a
secretary and provided for such other expenses as shall be necessary
and proper pursuant to Chapter 62 of the Consolidated Laws, Article
16, Section 267.6
6. Editor's Note: See Town Law § 267.
§ 30-27 SMITHTOWN CODE § 33-3
1:40
law as shall be necessary for the proper administration of said office and
of this chapter. The Chairman or his/her designee shall assist in answering
questions regarding the appeal process by helping to fill out applications
and answering telephone inquiries.
§ 33-4. Powers and duties.
§ 33-5. Appeal procedure.
A. The Board shall have the power to vary or modify, in whole or part, any
provision or requirement of the Town of Smithtown Fire Prevention and
Building Ordinances where the party seeking the variance or
modification has shown by the weight of the evidence that in the
particular case before the Board that strict compliance with the
particular provision or requirement would:
(1) Create an excessive and unreasonable economic burden;
(2) Not achieve the code's intended objective;
(3) Inhibit achievement of some other important public policy;
(4) Be physically or legally impracticable;
(5) Be unnecessary in light of alternatives which ensure the
achievement of the code's intended objective or in light of
alternatives, which without a loss in the level of safety, achieve the
code's intended objective more efficiently, effectively or
economically; or
(6) Entail a change so slight as to produce a negligible additional
benefit consonant with the purposes of the code.
B. Any such variance or modification shall not substantially or adversely
effect the provisions for health, safety and security and that any
variance or modification shall provide for equally safe and proper
alternatives.
C. In cases before the Board, the Board may fashion suitable remedies so
as to do justice between the parties, including but not limited to where
an order or determination has been made sustaining, reversing or
modifying, in whole or in part, such order or determination.
A. The Board shall perform all the duties and have all the powers
prescribed by the Town Law and as herein more particularly provided.
B. The Board shall adopt such rules of procedure, not inconsistent with the
provisions of Town Law and local ordinances, as it may deem necessary
to the proper performance of its duties and the proper exercise of its
powers.
C. All the meetings of the Board shall be opened to the public. A quorum
shall consist of three members.
§ 33-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-5
1:41
§ 33-6. Limitations on members of the Board.
Any member of the Town of Smithtown Fire Prevention and Building Code
Review Board who is involved in a family business or in a professional
D. Appeals to the Board concerning the interpretation, administration or
enforcement of the Smithtown Fire Prevention and Building Code may
be taken by any aggrieved person affected by the decision of the
administrative or enforcement official within 60 days of such decision.
E. All appeals and applications made to the Board shall be in writing on
forms prescribed by the Board. All such appeals and applications shall
be complete setting forth the nature of the grievance and the relief
sought in sufficient detail as would permit the Board to make a
reasoned determination on the appeal before it and shall be
accompanied by the payment of the appropriate fees as specified in this
chapter, and/or any other applicable provision of law.
F. The Board shall require petitioners to serve copies of the petition on
interested parties and involved governmental officials or agencies as
determined by said Board. Said notice and petition shall be served by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to each person, official or
agency as the Board shall determine.
G. The Board shall fix a reasonable time and place for a public hearing of
the appeal and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the
applicant, as follows:
(1) By publishing a notice in the official paper or papers in accordance
with provisions of Town Law.
(2) Such a notice shall be given not less than 15 days prior to the date
of hearing. The Board may request advisory reports from either the
Department of Public Safety or the Building Department, but in no
event shall it exceed 45 days from the date of the public hearing.
H. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of
each member upon every question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact. The Board shall keep the records of all
examinations and official actions, all of which shall be filed in the Town
Clerk's Office and shall be a public record.
I. The Department of Public Safety and the Building Department shall be
notified, in writing, of the Board's decision on each application for an
interpretation of an appeal.
J. In every case in which the Board reserves decision, said Board shall
send written notice to all persons who receive notice pursuant to this
section of said decision. Failure of the Board to comply with this
subsection shall not render any such decision void nor such failure
constitute grounds upon which to attack said decision.
§ 33-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 33-6
1:42
manner with the applicant must excuse him or herself from any portion of
the proceeding involving said applicant.
§ 33-7. Decisions.
§ 33-8. Final determinations.
All decisions of the Board shall be deemed administratively final and shall
be reviewable pursuant to the provisions of Article 78 of the CPLR.
§ 33-9. Fees.
All applications or appeals to the Board shall be accompanied by the
following fees:
§ 33-10. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon filing with the
Secretary of State of the State of New York.
Chapter 36
HANDICAP ADVISORY BOARD
A. The decision of the Board shall be in writing, subscribed to by the
Chairman, and shall set out the Board's findings, facts and conclusions
and the relief granted, if any. Decisions of the Board shall be rendered
within 60 days of the date of the public hearing unless a longer period is
required for good cause shown.
B. Copies of the decision shall be provided to the parties within 30 days of
the date of the decision of record. A copy shall be filed with the Fire
Marshal Division of the Department of Public Safety, the Building
Department, the Department of State and the Town Clerk's Office. The
Town Clerk's Office shall maintain a record of all decisions which shall
be properly indexed.
A. Application involving maintenance or use of buildings or materials and
all other applications or appeals not involving construction, alteration
or renovation of buildings or structures: $200.
B. Applications involving construction, alteration or renovation of
residential or agricultural occupancies involving no more than two
dwellings: $200.
C. Applications involving construction, alteration or renovation of other
buildings or structures, not more than 10,000 square feet: $500.
D. Applications involving construction, alteration or renovation of other
buildings or structures, more than 10,000 square feet: $1,000.
§ 33-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-1
1:43
§ 36-1. Legislative declaration.7
The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown hereby finds and declares it to be
in the best interest of the citizens of the Town of Smithtown to create and
provide for the appointment of a Handicap Advisory Board to advise and
recommend to the Town Board such policies and programs which may aid
the disabled people of the Town of Smithtown.
§ 36-2. Appointment of members. [Amended 2-25-1986 by L.L. No.
2-1986]
The Board shall be known as the "Handicap Advisory Board of the Town
of Smithtown" and shall consist of 15 members who shall be appointed by
the Town Board for terms not exceeding two years. The Chairman of the
Board shall be designated by the Town Board from among the members so
appointed to the Board. A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in
the same manner as an original appointment.
§ 36-3. Powers and duties of Board.8
The Handicap Advisory Board of the Town of Smithtown shall conduct
surveys of all Town buildings and parks and keep an index of all such
buildings and parks which may have barriers and obstacles that make
portions of said buildings and parks unavailable for the use of disabled
persons. The Board shall study such barriers and obstacles and recommend
how these can be removed or how portions of such buildings or parks can
be made available to disabled persons.
§ 36-4. Compensation.
The members of the Handicap Advisory Board of the Town of Smithtown
shall serve without compensation. The Town Board, however, may
appropriate in the annual budget of the Town a sum of money for the
purpose of providing to the Handicap Advisory Board funds to defray the
costs and expenses incurred by it in the performance of its duties set forth
hereinabove, such appropriation to be a charge upon the taxable property
of that part of the Town of Smithtown outside the incorporated villages
contained therein.
Chapter 37
HEARING CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Industrial Advisory Board — See Ch. 45. Officers and employees — See Ch. 53.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 36-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § 36-4
1:44
§ 37-1. Policy.
The Town of Smithtown is complying with OSHA Occupational Noise
Standard, Title 29 Code of Federal Regulations 1910.95, by administering a
continuing, effective hearing conservation program for all Town employees
who are exposed to time-weighted average noise levels of 85 decibels (dB)
or greater during an eight-hour workday or, equivalently, a dose of 50%
measured on the A scale (slow response). Exposures at or above this level
are determined by monitoring the actual noise levels in each workplace area
and estimating the noise exposure or dose received by employees during
that workday.
§ 37-2. Administration.
The Town-wide Hearing Conservation Program is administered and
maintained by the Department of Environment and Waterways. Department
of Environment and Waterways staff have been trained and certified in
community noise control by the New Jersey Rutgers Noise Technical
Assistance Center. The training course consisted of classroom and field
exercises with particular emphasis on the adverse health effects of
excessive noise, noise control and reduction, noise measuring and the
instruction on the proper operation and care of noise-monitoring sound
level meters, dosimeters and octave band analyzers.
§ 37-3. Monitoring.
A. All work operations in the Town which involve noisy conditions and
make normal conversation difficult will be monitored for excessive
noise levels. If the results of preliminary sound level monitoring
indicates that any employee's exposure may equal or exceed an eighthour
time-weighted average of 85 decibels, the Town will develop and
implement a monitoring program. The sampling strategy of the
monitoring program will be designed to identify employees for inclusion
into the Hearing Conservation Program. All continuous, intermittent
and impulsive sound levels from 80 decibels to 130 decibels will be
integrated into any noise measurements taken.
B. Where circumstances such as high worker mobility, significant
variances in sound level or a significant component of impulse noise
make area monitoring generally inappropriate, the Town will use
representative personal sampling to comply with the monitoring
requirements as defined in the OSHA Occupational Noise Standard.
The monitoring of Town workplace areas will be repeated whenever a
change in production, process, equipment or controls increase noise
exposures to the extent that additional employees may be exposed at or
above the action level; or the attenuation provided by hearing
protectors being used by employees may be rendered inadequate to
meet the new increased noise levels.
§ 36-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-3
1:45
§ 37-4. Controls.
In the event that employees are subjected to sound levels in excess of OSHA
permissible noise exposures limits, the Town will attempt to reduce the
noise by utilizing feasible administrative or engineering controls. If such
controls are not a viable option or fail to reduce sound levels within the
permissible noise exposure limits, personal protective equipment will be
provided to reduce sound levels to acceptable levels.
§ 37-5. Audiometric testing program.
§ 37-6. Annual audiogram.
§ 37-7. Hearing protectors.
C. The Town will notify each employee exposed at or above an eight-hour
time-weighted average of 85 decibels of the results of monitoring. In
addition, the Town will provide employees or their designated
representatives with an opportunity to observe any noise
measurements conducted.
A. The Town has established and maintains an audiometric testing
program by making audiometric testing available to all employees
whose exposures equal or exceed an eight-hour time-weighted average
of 85 decibels. Audiometric testing is provided at no cost to Town
employees.
B. The audiometric tests are performed by a licensed or certified
audiologist, otolarynogologist or other physician, or by a technician
who is certified by the Council of Accreditation in Occupational Hearing
Conservation. All audiograms are performed in accordance with the
standards set forth in Appendix C and Section (h) of OSHA 29 CFR
1910.95 (Audiometric Testing Requirements).
A. At least annually after obtaining the baseline audiogram, the Town will
obtain a new audiogram for each employee exposed at or above an
eight-hour time-weighted average of 85 decibels.
B. Each employee's annual audiogram will be compared to that employee's
baseline audiogram to determine if the audiogram is valid and if a
standard threshold shift has occurred. OSHA defines a standard
threshold shift as a change in hearing threshold relative to the baseline
audiogram of an average of 10 dB at more than 2,000, 3,000 and 4,000
hertz (Hz) in either ear. Evaluations and follow-up procedures of
audiograms will be performed in accordance with Section (g)(7) and (8)
of OSHA 29 CFR 1910.95.
A. The Town will make hearing protectors available to all employees
exposed to an eight-hour time-weighted average of 85 decibels or
greater at no cost to the employees. Hearing protectors are replaced as
necessary. The supervisors of the affected employees will ensure that
§ 37-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 37-7
1:46
§ 37-8. Hearing protector attenuation.
The program managers will evaluate hearing protector attenuation for the
specific noise environments in which the protector will be used. This will
be accomplished by using one of the evaluation methods as described
in Appendix B of OSHA 29 CFR 1910.95 (Methods for Estimating the
Adequacy of Hearing Protector Attenuation). The adequacy of hearing
protector attenuation will be re-evaluated whenever employee noise
exposures increase to the extent that the hearing protectors provided may
no longer provide adequate attenuation. The Town will provide more
effective hearing protectors where necessary.
§ 37-9. Training.
hearing protectors are worn by all employees who are included in the
Hearing Conservation Program and by any employee who has not yet
had a baseline audiogram.
B. Town employees are given the opportunity to select their hearing
protectors from a variety of suitable hearing protectors provided by the
Town. The Town provides training in the use and care of all hearing
protectors provided to all employees.
A. Employees who are exposed to noise at or above an eight-hour timeweighted
average of 85 decibels will receive training on the health
hazards associated with excessive noise exposure, the use of hearing
protection equipment and an explanation of their rights under OSHA 29
CFR 1910.95. A program that uses both audiovisual materials and
informational handouts has been prepared for this purpose.
Information provided in the training program will be updated to be
consistent with changes in protective equipment and work processes.
The training program includes the following elements:
(1) The detrimental health effects of excessive noise levels.
(2) The physical reasons for hearing loss.
(3) The effects of short-term and long-term exposure.
(4) Sound measuring and a description of exposure and action levels
and acceptable noise levels.
(5) The purpose of the hearing protectors, the disadvantages,
attenuation of various types and instructions on selection, fitting,
use and care.
(6) The purpose of audiometric testing, and an explanation of the test
procedures.
(7) Hearing Conservation Program recordkeeping requirements.
B. Additional training will be provided whenever a change in production,
process, equipment or controls increase noise exposures to the extent
§ 37-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-9
1:47
§ 37-10. Recordkeeping.
§ 37-11. Access to information and materials.
A copy of this written program and OSHA 29 CFR 1910.95 is posted in
each workplace of all affected Town departments. In addition, all affected
employees or their representatives can obtain further information on this
written policy, the Hearing Conservation Program and a copy of the OSHA
Occupational Noise Standard by contacting the Department of Environment
and Waterways, 124 West Main Street, Smithtown, New York (360-7514).
Chapter 39
HISTORICAL ADVISORY BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic districts — See Ch. 185. Zoning — See Ch. 322.
that additional employees may be exposed at or above the action level;
or the attenuation provided by hearing protectors being used by
employees may be rendered inadequate to meet the new increased
noise levels. In any event, training will be provided at minimum on an
annual basis as required under the OSHA Occupational Noise Standard.
As part of the assessment of the training program, the program
coordinator will obtain input from employees regarding the training
they have received, and their suggestions for improving it.
A. The Town will maintain an accurate record of all employee exposure
measurements and audiometric test records. Records of audiometric
testing on each employee will include the following:
(1) The name and job classification of the employee.
(2) The date of the audiogram.
(3) The examiner's name.
(4) The date of the last acoustic or exhaustive calibration of the
audiometer.
(5) The employee's most recent noise exposure assessment.
(6) Records of the measurements of the background sound-pressure
levels in audiometric test rooms.
B. Records of noise exposure measurements will be retained for two years,
and audiometric test records will be retained for the duration of the
affected employee's employment. Access to these records will be
provided upon request to employees, former employees or
representatives designated by the individual employee.
§ 37-9 SMITHTOWN CODE § 37-11
1:48
§ 39-1. Legislative intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown hereby advises and declares it
to be in the best interest of the citizens of the Town of Smithtown to create
and provide for the appointment of a Historical Advisory Board to advise
and recommend to the Town Board such policies and programs which may
aid the Town Board in its policy-making decisions regarding Smithtown's
historical, cultural and architectural heritage.
§ 39-2. Membership.
The Board shall be known as the "Historical Advisory Board of the Town
of Smithtown" and shall consist of six members, who shall be appointed by
the Town Board for terms not exceeding two years, and the Town Historian,
who shall serve as an ex officio member. The Chairman of the Board shall be
designated by the Town Board from among the members so appointed to the
Board. The members appointed shall be eligible for reappointment, shall be
qualified by reason of special interest, knowledge or training in such fields
as history, architecture or other like fields of special knowledge or interest
and shall be residents of the Town of Smithtown.
§ 39-3. Powers and duties.
The Historical Advisory Board shall be charged with the following
responsibilities and duties:
§ 39-4. Compensation.
The members of the Historical Advisory Board of the Town of Smithtown
shall serve without compensation. The Town Board, however, may
appropriate in the annual budget of the Town a sum of money for the
A. To serve as an advisory board to the Town of Smithtown Town Board
and to meet upon request of the Town Board, Town Historian and/or the
Chairman of the Historical Advisory Board to discuss any matter of
importance relating to the preservation of the historical, architectural
and cultural heritage.
B. To discuss, find and advise the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown on
a course of action regarding these matters.
C. To present written recommendations for the Town Board members to
consider when making final determinations involving these matters.
D. To serve as the guardians of any historical items that have been or will
be donated to the Town of Smithtown by its citizenry.
E. To safeguard these items in the public interest by depositing them in a
Town building designated by the Town Board as an historical
depository.
§ 37-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-4
1:49
purpose of providing to the Historical Advisory Board funds to defray the
cost or expenses incurred by it in the performance of its duties as
hereinabove set forth. Such appropriations shall be a charge upon the
taxable property of that part of the Town of Smithtown outside the
incorporated villages contained therein.
Chapter 40
RECORDS
§ 39-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 39-4
1:50
ARTICLE I
Public Access to Records
§ 40-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to set forth the methods and procedures
governing the availability, location and nature of those records of the Town
of Smithtown subject to the provisions of Article 6 of the Public Officers
Law, known as the "Freedom of Information Law."
§ 40-2. Designation of records officer.
§ 40-3. Location of records.
Records shall be available for public inspection and copying at the Town
Clerk's office, 99 West Main Street, Smithtown, New York, and/or other
designated locations of retention.
§ 40-4. Hours for public inspection.
Requests for public access to records shall be accepted and records shall
be produced during the hours that Town offices are regularly opened for
business.
§ 40-5. Request for access to records.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown is responsible for ensuring
compliance with the regulations herein and has designated the Town
Attorney as the records access officer.
B. The records access officer is responsible for ensuring appropriate
agency response to public request for access to records pursuant to the
provisions of the Freedom of Information Law. All requests for records
shall be forwarded to the records access officer for processing.
A. A written request for access to records is required.
B. A written response shall be given within five business days of the
receipt of any request reasonably describing the record or records
sought.
C. A request shall reasonably describe the record or records sought.
Whenever possible, a person requesting records shall supply
information regarding dates, file designations or other information that
may help to describe the records sought.
D. If the records access officer does not provide or denies access to the
records sought within five business days of receipt of a request, he or
she shall furnish a written acknowledgment of the receipt of the request
and a statement of the approximate date when the request will be
granted or denied, which date shall not exceed 30 days from the date of
acknowledgment.
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-5
1:51
§ 40-6. Fees.
The fee for copies of records shall be $0.25 per page not exceeding nine
by 14 inches in size or the maximum fee permitted under the Freedom of
Information Law as it may from time to time be amended. The fees for other
types of copies or transcripts and for certificates shall be the reasonable
amounts as the records access officer shall establish. The fees charged by
the records access officer for any type of records shall not exceed the actual
cost of reproducing such record, except when a different fee is otherwise
described by statute.
§ 40-7. Grant or denial of access to records.
The records access officer shall, in accordance with this Article, make
available for public inspection all records, except that the records access
officer may deny access to records or portions thereof which are not subject
to disclosure in accordance with the provisions of Subdivision 2 of § 87 of
the Public Officers Law or any other applicable state or federal statute.
§ 40-8. Denial of access to records; appeals.
E. If the request is granted, the records access officer shall provide a copy
of such record to the person requesting the same upon payment of the
fee prescribed therefor and shall certify to the correctness of such copy
if requested to do so. Alternatively, the records access officer shall
certify that the Town does not have possession of such record or that
such record cannot be located by use of the description given or by use
of the name or other identifier of the subject sought without
extraordinary search methods being employed by the agency or access
of such record is not required to be provided pursuant to § 95 of the
Public Officers Law.
A. Denial of access to records shall be in writing.
B. Within 30 business days after the written denial of access, any person
denied access to a record may appeal, in writing, such denial to the
Town Board, who shall hear such appeals under the Freedom of
Information Law.
C. Within seven business days of the receipt of such appeal, the Town
Board shall explain, in writing, to the person requesting the record the
reasons for further denial or provide access to the record sought.
§ 40-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 40-8
1:52
ARTICLE II
Records Management
§ 40-9. Intent.
Records are essential to the administration of local government. They
contain the information that keeps government programs functioning. It is
the intent of this Article that a records management program be established
which will assist officials in making decisions, administering programs and
providing administrative continuity with past operations. The program is
intended to document the delivery of services, show the legal
responsibilities of government and protect the legal rights of citizens. It will
contain information on taxation and on the management and expenditure
of funds. These records will also document the historical development of
government itself, the community and the people of the Town.
§ 40-10. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARCHIVES — Those official records which have been determined by the
records management officer and Advisory Committee to have sufficient
historical or other value to warrant their continued preservation by the local
government.
RECORDS — Any documents, books, papers, photographs, sound records,
microforms or any other materials, regardless of physical form or
characteristics, which are the property of the Town of Smithtown or which
are made or received pursuant to law or in connection with the transaction
of official Town of Smithtown business.
RECORDS CENTER — An establishment maintained by the Town of
Smithtown primarily for the storage, servicing, security and processing of
records which must be preserved for varying periods of time and need not
be retained in office equipment or space.
RECORDS DISPOSITION —
The removal by the Town of Smithtown, in accordance with approved
records control schedules, of records no longer necessary for the
conduct of business by such agency through removal methods which
may include:
(1) The disposal of temporary records by destruction or donation.
The transfer of records to the record center/archives for temporary
storage of inactive records and permanent storage of records
determined to have historical or other sufficient value warranting
continued preservation.
(2)
A.
The transfer of records from one village agency to any other village
agency.
B.
§ 40-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-10
1:53
RECORDS MANAGEMENT — The planning, controlling, directing,
organizing, training, promotion and other managerial use and records
disposition, including records preservation, records disposal and records
centers or other storage facilities.
SERVICING — Making information in records available to any Town of
Smithtown agency for official use or to the public.
§ 40-11. Program established; records management officer.
There shall be a records management program established under the aegis
of the Town Clerk and headed by the records management officer. The Town
Clerk is designated as the records management officer (RMO) and will be
responsible for administering the current and archival public records in
storage areas for the Town in accordance with local, state and federal laws
and guidelines.
§ 40-12. Powers and duties.
The records management officer shall have the necessary powers to carry
out the efficient administration and determination of value, use,
preservation, storage and disposition of the noncurrent and archival public
records kept, filed or received by the offices and departments of the Town
of Smithtown. The records management officer shall:
A. Continually survey and examine public records to recommend their
classification so as to determine the most suitable method to be used for
maintaining, storing and servicing them under the following guidelines:
(1) Records deemed obsolete and unnecessary according to the New
York State Retention and Disposition Schedule are subject to
disposition.
(2) Information containing administrative, legal, fiscal, research,
historical or educational value which warrant their permanent
retention.
(3) Records not yet subject to disposition according to state law.
B. Establish guidelines for proper records management in any department
or agency of the Town of Smithtown in accordance with local, state and
federal laws and guidelines.
C. Report annually to the chief executive official and the governing body
on the powers and duties herein mentioned, including but not limited to
the cost/benefit ratio of programs effectuated by the department.
D. Operate a records management center for the storage, processing and
servicing of all noncurrent and archival records for all Town of
Smithtown departments and agencies.
E. Establish a Town of Smithtown archives and perform the following
functions:
§ 40-10 SMITHTOWN CODE § 40-12
1:54
§ 40-13. Records Advisory Board established; duties.
There shall be a Records Advisory Board designated to work closely with
and provide advice to the records management officer. The Board shall
consist of no more than five members to be appointed by the Town Clerk.
The Board shall meet periodically and have the following duties:
§ 40-14. Custody and control of records.
(1) Advise and assist Town of Smithtown departments in reviewing and
selecting material to be transferred to the Town of Smithtown
archives for preservation.
(2) Continually survey and examine public records to determine the
most suitable methods to be used for the creating, maintaining,
storing and servicing of archival materials.
(3) Establish and maintain an adequate repository for the proper
storage, conservation, processing and servicing of archival records.
(4) Promulgate rules governing public access to and use of records in
the archives, subject to the approval of the Records Advisory
Board.
(5) Develop a confidentiality policy for archival records designated
confidential, provided that such policy does not conflict with any
federal or state statutes.
(6) Provide information services to other Town of Smithtown offices.
(7) Collect archival materials which are not official Town of Smithtown
records but which have associational value to the Town of
Smithtown or a close relationship to the existing archival
collection. Such collecting shall be subject to archive space, staff
and cost limitations and to the potential endangerment of such
materials if they are not collected by the archives.
(8) Develop a procedure whereby historically important records are to
be identified at the point of generation.
A. To provide advice to the records management officer on the
development of the records management program.
B. To review the performance of the program on an ongoing basis and
propose changes and improvements.
C. To review any changes in retention period proposed by the records
management officer for records not covered by the state archives
schedules.
D. To provide advice on the appraisal of records for archival value.
§ 40-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-14
1:55
§ 40-15. Disposition of records.
No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by a department of
the Town until it has met the time limit on the State Records Retention and
Disposition Schedule.
A. Active records. The originating department has full custody (legal and
physical) over records still in active use.
B. Inactive records. The originating department is the legal custodian of
its records and shall retain the power to retrieve and use records
deposited in inactive storage in the records center. The RMO will have
physical custody of inactive records and will determine the method and
design of storage.
C. Archival records. Records transferred to or acquired by the archives
shall be under the full custody (legal and physical) of the archives, as
directed by the RMO, rather than the department which created or held
them immediately prior to being transferred to the archives.
(1) Records shall be transferred to the archives upon the
recommendation of the RMO, with the approval of the head of the
department which had custody of the records and the approval of
the Records Advisory Board.
(2) Records may be removed (temporarily or permanently) from the
archives at the request of the RMO or the head of the department
which had custody of the records immediately prior to the transfer
of those records to the archives, subject to the approval of the
Records Advisory Board.
A. The State Records Retention and Disposition Schedule is a schedule
developed and adopted by the Commissioner of Education which
establishes minimum legal retention periods for public records.
B. Such schedules shall be reviewed and adopted by formal resolution of
the Town of Smithtown prior to the disposition of any records.
C. If any law specifically provides a retention period longer than
established by the records retention and disposition schedule
established herein, the retention period established by such law shall
govern.
D. In the event that the Town of Smithtown intends to destroy or otherwise
dispose of a record which has met the minimum retention period
pursuant to the State Records Retention and Disposition Schedule,
approval must be received from the records management officer with
the express written consent of the department head having actual
authority over said record.
E. Following required consents and prior to actual destruction, the
records management officer will allow the Town Historian to review
§ 40-14 SMITHTOWN CODE § 40-15
1:56
and/or remove any single document or sampling of documents that are
of historic value to the community.
§ 40-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-15
1:57
Chapter 42
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
§ 42-1. Legislative purpose.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town of Smithtown, State of
New York, that in order to help secure equal opportunity in housing within
the unincorporated area of the Town of Smithtown to all, irrespective of
race, creed, color, religion or national origin, it is in the best interest of the
citizens of the Town of Smithtown to create and provide for the appointment
of a Commission on Human Rights.
§ 42-2. Membership.
The Commission shall be known as the "Town of Smithtown Commission on
Human Rights" and shall consist of the Supervisor, the Town Attorney and
two Councilmen to be appointed by the Supervisor to serve for a period of
six months. The Supervisor shall be the Chairman and presiding officer of
the Commission.
§ 42-3. Compensation.
The members of the Town of Smithtown Commission on Human Rights shall
serve without compensation. The Town Board, however, may appropriate in
the annual budget of the Town a sum of money for the purpose of providing
to the Commission on Human Rights funds to defray the costs and expenses
incurred by it in the performance of its duties set forth hereafter, such
appropriation to be a charge upon the taxable property of that part of the
Town of Smithtown outside the incorporated villages contained therein.
§ 42-4. General duties.
It shall be the duty of the Commission to:
A. Foster mutual respect and understanding among all racial, religious
and nationality groups in the community.
B. Make such studies in any field of human relationship in the community
as in the judgment of the Commission will aid in effectuating its general
purposes and, where desirable, to make such studies public.
C. Inquire into incidents of tension and conflict among or between various
racial, religious and nationality groups and to take such action as may
be designed to alleviate such tensions and conflict.
D. Conduct and recommend such educational programs as in the judgment
of the Commission will increase goodwill among inhabitants of the
community and open new opportunities into all phases of community
life for all inhabitants.
§ 40-15 SMITHTOWN CODE § 42-5
1:58
§ 42-5. General obligations.
The Commission on Human Rights shall discharge the following obligations:
Chapter 43
ANTI-BIAS TASK FORCE
§ 43-1. Title; short title.
A. Receive complaints of alleged discrimination because of race, creed,
color or national origin, seek the active assistance of the State Division
on Human Rights in the solution of complaints which fall within the
jurisdiction of the State Division and prepare its own plans in the case
of other complaints with a view to reducing and eliminating such
alleged discrimination through the process of conference, conciliation
and persuasion.
B. Hold conferences and other public meetings in the interest of the
constructive resolution of racial, religious and nationality group
tensions and the prejudice and discrimination occasioned thereby.
C. Issue such publications and reports of investigation as in its judgement
will tend to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
D. Enlist the cooperation and participation of the various racial, religious
and nationality groups, community organizations, industry and labor
organizations, media or mass communication, fraternal and benevolent
associations and other groups in an educational campaign devoted to
fostering among the diverse groups of the community mutual esteem,
justice and equity and, further, devoted to informing all of the Town of
Smithtown's firm commitment to the principle of equal opportunity for
all.
E. Encourage and stimulate all departments of Town government to take
such action as will fulfill the purposes of this chapter.
F. Report complaints to the Division of Human Rights alleging unlawful
discriminatory practices under Article 15 of the Executive Law.
G. Receive, accept and use and expend public grants and private gifts,
donations or bequests and other payments, goods and services.
A. The title of this chapter shall be as follows: "A local law authorizing the
establishment of the Anti-Bias Task Force to provide advice and make
recommendations to the Town Board."
B. Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Anti-
Bias Task Force Law."
§ 42-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-2
1:59
§ 43-2. Declaration of purpose.
The Anti-Bias Task Force shall identify and respond to all forms of bias
through a program of education, legislative activism and cultural initiatives
that promote both the diversity and unity of the people within the Town of
Smithtown.
§ 43-3. Word usage; definitions.
§ 43-4. Establishment of Anti-Bias Task Force.
Chapter 45
INDUSTRIAL ADVISORY BOARD
§ 45-1. Legislative declaration.
The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown hereby finds and declares it to be
in the best interest of the citizens of the Town of Smithtown to create and
A. Scope and meaning of certain words and terms.
(1) The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
(2) The word "may" is permissive.
B. Definition of terms. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown, County of
Suffolk, State of New York.
TOWN OF SMITHTOWN — A municipal corporation incorporated
pursuant to the laws of the State of New York.
A. An Anti-Bias Task Force is hereby established which shall consist of not
more than 25 members. All members of the Anti-Bias Task Force shall
be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Town Board. A
Chairperson(s) shall be appointed by the Town Board from among the
members appointed to the Task Force. A vacancy shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment. All members of the Anti-Bias
Task Force shall serve without compensation.
B. The Anti-Bias Task Force shall meet quarterly and as otherwise
necessary. Meetings shall be at the call of the Chairperson(s). A
majority of the members present shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. All decisions of the Anti-Bias Task Force shall
be by majority vote of members present at a given meeting. [Amended
5-7-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
C. The Town Board shall retain final authority and jurisdiction over all
matters involving appropriations, legislation and policy for the Town of
Smithtown.
§ 43-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 45-1
1:60
provide for the appointment of an Industrial Advisory Board to advise and
recommend to the Town Board such policies and programs which may aid
both the people of the Town of Smithtown and the planning, development
and improvement of industry within the Town of Smithtown.
§ 45-2. Membership; vacancies.
The Board shall be known as the "Industrial Advisory Board of the Town
of Smithtown" and shall consist of not more than 13 members who shall
be appointed by the Town Board for terms not exceeding two years. The
Chairman of the Board shall be designated by the Town Board from among
the members so appointed to the Board. A vacancy shall be filled for the
unexpired term in the same manner as an original appointment.
§ 45-3. Powers and duties. [Amended 6-10-1986 by L.L. No. 4-1986]
The Industrial Advisory Board of the Town of Smithtown shall study
industrial development within the Town of Smithtown and recommend and
advise the Town on safeguarding industrial development and advancing job
opportunities in harmony with the legislative declaration of this chapter.
§ 45-4. Compensation.
The members of the Industrial Advisory Board of the Town of Smithtown
shall serve without compensation. The Town Board, however, may
appropriate in the annual budget of the Town a sum of money for the
purpose of providing to the Industrial Advisory Board funds to defray the
costs and expenses incurred by it in the performance of its duties set forth
hereinabove, such appropriation to be a charge upon the taxable property
of that part of the Town of Smithtown outside the incorporated villages
contained therein.
Chapter 46
INVESTMENT POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 30. Procurement Policy — See Ch. 57.
§ 46-1. Scope.
This investment policy applies to all moneys and other financial resources
available for investment by the Town of Smithtown (Town) on its own behalf
or on behalf of any other entity or individual.
§ 45-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-2
1:61
§ 46-2. Objectivies.
The primary objectives of the Town's investment activities are, in priority
order:
§ 46-3. Delegation of authority.
The Town Board's responsibility for administration of the investment
program is delegated to the Supervisor of the Town of Smithtown
(Supervisor) as the Chief Fiscal Officer, who shall establish written
procedures for the operation of the investment program consistent with
these investment guidelines. Such procedures shall include an adequate
internal control structure to provide a satisfactory level of accountability
based on records incorporating the description and amounts of investments
and transaction dates. In addition, the internal control procedures shall
describe the responsibilities and levels of authority for key individuals
involved in the investment program.
§ 46-4. Prudence.
§ 46-5. Diversification.
A. To conform with all applicable federal, state and other legal
requirements (legal);
B. To adequately safeguard principal (safety);
C. To provide sufficient liquidity to meet all operating requirements
(liquidity); and
D. To obtain a reasonable rate of return (yield).
A. All participants in the investment process shall seek to act responsibly
as custodians of the public trust and shall avoid any transaction that
might impair public confidence in the Town to govern effectively.
B. Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion
and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not
for speculation, but for investment, considering the safety of the
principal as well as the probable income to be derived.
C. All participants involved in the investment process shall refrain from
any personal business activity that could conflict with proper execution
of the investment program, or which could impair their ability to make
impartial investment decisions.
A. It is the policy of the Town to diversify its deposits and investments by
financial institution, by investment instrument and by maturity
scheduling.
§ 46-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 46-5
1:62
§ 46-6. Internal controls.
§ 46-7. Designation of depositories.
The banks and trust companies authorized for the deposit of moneys are:
§ 46-8. Securing of deposits and investments.
B. As financial conditions change, diversification may be reduced, in
careful consideration of the safeguarding of investments, in an effort to
obtain higher yields or more favorable collateralization terms.
A. It is the policy of the Town for all moneys collected by any officer or
employee of the government to immediately deposit funds into accounts
controlled by the Supervisor, or within the time period specified in law,
whichever is shorter.
B. The Town Comptroller of the Town of Smithtown (Comptroller), at the
direction of the Supervisor, is responsible for establishing and
maintaining an internal control structure to provide reasonable, but not
absolute, assurance that deposits and investments are safeguarded
against loss from unauthorized use or disposition, that transactions are
executed in accordance with management's authorization and recorded
properly and are managed in compliance with applicable laws and
regulations.
A. JP Morgan Chase Bank.
B. First National Bank of Long Island.
C. Capital One Bank.
D. Bridgehampton National Bank.
E. Empire National Bank.
A. All deposits of the Town, including all demand deposits, certificates of
deposit and special time deposits (hereinafter, collectively, "deposits"),
made by officers of the Town that are in excess of the amount insured
under the provisions of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act shall be
secured by:
(1) A pledge of "eligible securities" (See Appendix A of this policy for a
listing of "eligible securities".9) with an aggregate "market value"
as provided by General Municipal Law § 10, equal to at least 105%
of the aggregate amount of deposits; and/or
(2) An "irrevocable letter of credit" issued in favor of the Town of
Smithtown by a federal home loan bank whose commercial paper
and other unsecured short-term debt obligations are rated in the
highest rating category by at least one nationally recognized
9. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 46-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-8
1:63
§ 46-9. Safekeeping and collateralization.
statistical rating organization, as security for the payment of 100%
of the aggregate amount of deposits and agreed-upon interest, if
any.
B. The Comptroller's office is tasked with keeping deposits below the
established maximum with a particular bank, if one exists. During
periods when tax or other receipts are deposited in large amounts that
may cause balances to exceed these limits, the Comptroller's office
shall take steps necessary to eliminate any overage as quickly as
possible to ensure that deposits in any one bank or trust company are
maintained in conformity with this policy. Further, the Comptroller's
office will endeavor to diversify deposits as noted in § 46-5 of this policy.
C. Pursuant to General Municipal Law § 10 (and any amendments
thereto), banks or trust companies, as authorized in § 46-7 of this policy,
may arrange for the redeposit of Town funds in one or more banking
institutions, as defined pursuant to § 9-r of the New York State Banking
Law, for the account of the Town, through a deposit placement program
that meets all of the following conditions:
(1) On or after the date that the Town's funds are received, the
designated bank or trust company:
(a) Arranges for the redeposit of such funds into deposit accounts
in one or more banking institutions; and
(b) Serves as custodian for the Town with respect to the funds
redeposited into such accounts.
(2) The Town's funds deposited in a designated bank or trust company
in accordance with this subsection and held in the designated bank
or trust company in excess of the amount insured by FDIC
coverage, pending redeposit of the funds, pursuant to this
subsection, shall be secured in accordance with Subsection C(1).
(3) The full amount of the Town's funds redeposited by the designated
bank or trust company into deposit accounts in banking institutions
pursuant to this subsection (plus accrued interest, if any) shall be
insured by the FDIC.
(4) At the same time that the funds of the Town are redeposited
pursuant to this subsection, the selected depository receives an
amount of deposits from customers of other financial institutions
pursuant to the deposit placement program that are at least equal
to the amount of the Town's funds redeposited by the designated
bank.
A. Eligible securities used for collateralizing deposits made by the officers
of the Town shall be held by the depository or a third-party bank or trust
company subject to security and custodial agreements.
§ 46-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 46-9
1:64
§ 46-10. Permitted investments.
B. The security agreement shall provide that eligible securities are being
pledged to secure local government deposits together with agreed-upon
interest, if any, and any costs or expenses arising out of the collection of
such deposits upon default. It shall also provide the conditions under
which the securities may be sold, presented for payment, substituted or
released and the events which will enable the Town to exercise its
rights against the pledged securities.
C. In the event that the securities are not registered or inscribed in the
name of the Town, such securities shall be delivered in a form suitable
for transfer or with an assignment in blank to the Town or its custodial
bank or trust company. Whenever eligible securities delivered to the
custodial bank or trust company are transferred by entries on the books
of a Federal Reserve Bank or other book-entry system operated by a
federally regulated entity without physical delivery of the evidence of
the obligations, then the records of the custodial bank or trust company
shall be required to show, at all times, the interest of the Town in the
securities as set forth in the security agreement.
D. The custodial agreement shall provide that securities held by the bank
or trust company, as agent of and custodian for the Town, will be kept
separate and apart from the general assets of the custodial bank or
trust company and will not, in any circumstances, be commingled with
or become part of the backing for any other deposit or other liability.
The agreement should also describe that the custodian shall confirm
the receipt, substitution or release of the collateral and it shall provide
for the frequency of revaluation of eligible securities and for the
substitution of securities when a change in the rating of a security may
cause ineligibility. The security and custodial agreements shall also
include all other provisions necessary to provide the Town with a
perfected security interest in the eligible securities and to otherwise
secure the Town's interest in the collateral, and may contain other
provisions that the Town Board deems necessary.
A. As authorized by General Municipal Law § 11, the Town authorizes the
Comptroller, at the direction of the Supervisor, to invest moneys not
required for immediate expenditure for terms not to exceed its
projected cash flow needs in the following types of investments:
(1) Special time deposit accounts in or certificates of deposit issued by
a bank or trust company located and authorized to do business in
the State of New York, or in accordance with the following
conditions:
(a) The moneys are invested through a bank or trust company
located and authorized to do business in the State of New York;
(b) The bank or trust company arranges for the deposit of the
moneys in certificates of deposit in one or more banking
§ 46-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-10
1:65
institutions, as defined in § 9-r of the New York State Banking
Law, for the account of the Town;
(c) The full amount of principal and accrued interest of each such
certificate of deposit must be insured by the FDIC;
(d) The bank or trust company acts as custodian for the Town with
respect to such certificates of deposit issued for the Town's
account; and
(e) At the same time that the Town's moneys are deposited and the
certificates of deposits are issued for the account of the Town,
the bank or trust company receives an amount of deposits from
customers of other financial institutions equal to or greater
than the amount of the moneys invested by the Town through
the bank or trust company.
(2) Obligations of the United States of America;
(3) Obligations guaranteed by agencies of the United States of
America where the payment of principal and interest are
guaranteed by the United States of America;
(4) Obligations of the State of New York;
(5) Obligations issued pursuant to Local Finance Law § 24.00 or 25.00
(with approval of the State Comptroller) by any municipality, school
district or district corporation other than the Town;
(6) Obligations of the Town, but only with any moneys in a reserve fund
established pursuant to General Municipal Law § 6-c, 6-d, 6-e, 6-g,
6-h, 6-j, 6-k, 6-l, 6-m or 6-n.
B. All investment obligations shall be payable or redeemable at the option
of the Town within such times as the proceeds will be needed to meet
expenditures for purposes for which the moneys were provided and, in
the case of obligations purchased with the proceeds of bonds or notes,
shall be payable or redeemable, in any event, at the option of the Town
within two years of the date of purchase.
C. Time deposit accounts and certificates of deposit shall be payable
within such times as the proceeds will be needed to meet expenditures
for which the moneys were obtained, and shall be secured as provided
in §§ 46-8 and 46-9 herein.
D. Except as may otherwise be provided in a contract with bond holders or
note holders, any moneys of the Town authorized to be invested may be
commingled for investment purposes, provided that any investment of
commingled moneys shall be payable or redeemable at the option of the
Town within such time as the proceeds shall be needed to meet
expenditures for which such moneys were obtained, or as otherwise
specifically provided in General Municipal Law, § 11. The separate
identity of the sources of these funds shall be maintained at all times
§ 46-10 SMITHTOWN CODE § 46-10
1:66
§ 46-11. Authorized financial institutions and dealers.
§ 46-12. Purchase of Investments.
and income received shall be credited on a pro-rata basis to the fund or
account from which the moneys were invested.
E. Any obligation that provides for the adjustment of its interest rate on
set dates is deemed to be payable or redeemable on the date on which
the principal amount can be recovered through demand by the holder.
A. The Town shall maintain a list of financial institutions and dealers
approved for investment purposes and establish appropriate limits to
the amount of investments which can be made with each financial
institution or dealer.
B. All financial institutions and dealers with which the Town transacts
business shall be creditworthy and have an appropriate level of
experience, capitalization, size and other factors that make the
financial institution or dealer capable and qualified to conduct business
with the Town. Banks shall provide their most recent Consolidated
Report of Condition (Call Report). The Comptroller is responsible for
evaluation the financial position and maintaining a listing of proposed
depositaries, trading partners and custodians. Such listing shall be
evaluated annually.
A. The Comptroller, at the direction of the Supervisor, is authorized to
contract for the purchase of investments: by participation in a
cooperative investment agreement with other authorized municipal
corporations pursuant to General Municipal Law Article 5-G and in
accordance with General Municipal Law Article 3-A and the specific
program has been authorized by the Town Board.
B. All purchased obligations, unless registered or inscribed in the name of
the Town, shall be purchased through, delivered to and held in the
custody of a bank or trust company. Such obligations shall be
purchased, sold or presented for redemption or payment by such bank
or trust company only in accordance with prior written authorization
from the officer authorized to make the investment. All such
transactions shall be confirmed in writing to the Town by the bank or
trust company. Any obligation held in the custody of a bank or trust
company shall be held pursuant to a written custodial agreement as
described in General Municipal Law § 10(3)(a).
C. The custodial agreement shall provide that securities held by the bank
or trust company, as agent and the custodian for the Town, will be kept
separate and apart from the general assets of the custodial bank or
trust company and will not, in any circumstances, be commingled with
or become part of the backing for any other deposit or other liability.
The agreement shall describe how the custodian shall confirm the
receipt and release of the securities. Such agreement shall include all
§ 46-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-12
1:67
§ 46-13. Annual review and amendments.
The Town shall review this policy annually and it shall have the power to
amend it at any time it deems appropriate.
§ 46-14. Definitions.
The terms "public funds," "public deposits," "bank," "trust company" and
"eligible securities" shall have the same meaning as set forth in General
Municipal Law § 10.
Chapter 49
MEDICAL BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 49-1. Purpose.
The Town Board has established the Town of Smithtown Employees Health
Benefit Plan, hereinafter referred to as the "plan," to provide benefits for
eligible employees covered by the plan. The Town Board desires to establish
a Medical Board of Trustees, hereinafter referred to as the "Board," and
appoint members thereto, to be known as "Trustees," to hold, invest and
reinvest and otherwise to administer the funds of such plan and to interpret
the provisions of such plan as required.
§ 49-2. Establishment.
The Town Board shall appoint the members of the Board, which shall consist
of three persons, to serve terms which shall run for two years from January
1 through December 31 of the following year, without compensation.
§ 49-3. Powers and duties; advice from counsel.
provisions necessary to provide the Town a perfected interest in the
securities and any other provisions the Town Board deems necessary in
this regard.
A. The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To adjust, settle, contest, compromise and/or arbitrate any claim,
debt or damage due or owing to or from the funds of the trust and
to sue, commence or defend any legal proceedings in reference
thereto.
(2) To recommend the retention of outside services and contracts to
the Town Board for their approval for such services as claims,
adjusting, audits and procurement of insurance.
(3) To retain outside services, such as legal and accounting, for the
proper administration of the duties of the Board.
§ 46-12 SMITHTOWN CODE § 49-3
1:68
§ 49-4. Expenses.
The expenses incurred by the Board in the performance of its duties,
including fees for accounting and legal services and all other proper
charges and disbursements of the plan shall be paid from the plan unless
paid by the Town.
§ 49-5. Indemnification.
§ 49-6. Resignation or removal.
(4) To interpret the language of the plan booklet to assist the plan
administrator in determining eligibility of claims, as required.
(5) To make recommendations to the Town Board regarding proposed
amendments to the plan during the course of collective bargaining.
B. The Board or Board members may consult with counsel, who may be
counsel for the Town or for the Trustee, individually, and the Board or
Board members shall not be deemed imprudent by reason of its or their
taking or refraining from taking any action in accordance with the
opinion of counsel.
A. The Board and Board members shall be indemnified and held harmless
by the Town from any liability which may arise or is alleged to have
arisen from the faithful performance of their duties hereunder.
B. The Board and Board members shall not be responsible in any respect
for administering the plan or for the adequacy of contributions to the
fund to meet or discharge any payments or liabilities under the plan.
C. Any action required by any provision of this chapter to be taken by the
Town Board of the Town shall be evidenced by a resolution of the Town
Board certified to the Board by the Town Clerk, and the Board shall be
fully protected in relying upon any resolution so certified to it.
D. The Board or its members may accept a certificate signed by the
Supervisor of the Town as proof of any fact or matter that the Board or
its members deems necessary or desirable to have established in the
administration of the plan, and the Board and its members shall be fully
protected in relying upon the statements in said certificate.
E. The Board and its members shall be entitled conclusively to rely upon
any written notice, instruction, direction, certificate or other
communication believed by it to be genuine and to be signed by the
proper person or persons, and the Trustee shall be under no duty to
make investigation or inquiry as to the accuracy or completeness of any
statement contained therein.
A. The Trustees and their successors in trust may be removed at any time,
for any reason, by the Town Board. Any trustee hereunder may resign at
any time by giving written notice to the Town Board to that effect.
§ 49-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-6
1:69
Chapter 53
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 30. Town Attorney escrow account — See Ch. 75.
B. Upon such resignation or in the event of the removal or disqualification
of the Trustee hereunder, the Town Board shall appoint a successor
Trustee to fulfill the remainder of the term of the previous Trustee. Any
successor Trustee shall, upon his or her acceptance of the appointment,
have the same title, right, powers, duties, discretions and immunities as
an original Trustee hereunder.
§ 49-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § 49-6
1:70
ARTICLE I
Defense and Indemnification of Officers and Employees
[Adopted 2-10-1981 by L.L. No. 1-1981]
§ 53-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person holding a position by election, appointment
or employment in the service of the Town, whether or not compensated,
or a volunteer expressly authorized to participate in a Town-sponsored
volunteer program, but shall not include an independent contractor. The
term "employee" shall include a former employee, his estate or judicially
appointed personal representative.
TOWN — The Town of Smithtown.
§ 53-2. Town to provide defense; representation.
A. Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 53-3 of this
article, the Town shall provide for the defense of the employee in any
civil action or proceeding in any state or federal court arising out of any
alleged act or omission which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to
have occurred while the employee was acting or, in good faith,
purporting to act within the scope of his public employment or duties or
which is brought to enforce a provision of 42 U.S.C. § 1981 or 1983.
Such defense shall not be provided where such civil action or
proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the Town.
B. Representation.
(1) Subject to the conditions set forth in this article, the employee shall
be represented by the Town Attorney or an attorney employed or
retained by the Town for the defense of the employee. The Town
Board shall employ or retain an attorney for the defense of the
employee whenever:
(a) The Town does not have a Town Attorney;
(b) The Town Board determines based upon its investigation and
review of the facts and circumstances of the case that
representation by the Town Attorney would be inappropriate;
or
(c) A court of competent jurisdiction determines that a conflict of
interest exists and that the employee cannot be represented by
the Town Attorney.
(2) Reasonable attorney's fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by
the Town to such attorney employed or retained from time to time
during the pendency of the civil action or proceeding, subject to
§ 53-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-2
1:71
§ 53-3. Conditions for defense.
The duties to defend (indemnify and save harmless) provided in this article
shall be contingent upon:
§ 53-4. Judgments and settlements; exceptions.
certification by the Town Supervisor that the employee is entitled
to representation under the terms and conditions of this article.
Payment of such fees and expenses shall be made in the same
manner as payment of other claims and expenses of the Town. Any
dispute with respect to representation of multiple employees by
the Town Attorney or by an attorney employed or retained for such
purposes or with respect to the amount of the fees or expenses
shall be resolved by the court.
C. Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to the
Town Attorney (or, if none, then to the Town Supervisor) as required by
§ 53-3 of this article, the Town Attorney (or the Supervisor, as the case
may be) shall take the necessary steps, including the retention of an
attorney under the terms and conditions provided in Subsection B of
this section, on behalf of the employee to avoid entry of a default
judgment, pending resolution of any question relating to the obligation
of the Town to provide a defense.
A. Delivery to the Town Attorney (or, if none, to the Town Supervisor) of
the original or a copy of any summons, complaint, process, notice,
demand or pleading within five days after he is served with such
document; and
B. The full cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action or
proceeding and defense of any action or proceeding against the Town
based upon the same act or omission and in the prosecution of any
appeal. Such delivery shall be deemed a request by the employee that
the Town provide for his defense pursuant to this article, unless the
employee shall state, in writing, that a defense is not requested.
A. The Town shall indemnify and save harmless any employee whose
defense was provided pursuant to this article in the amount of any
judgment obtained against such employee or in the amount of any
settlement or compromise approved by the Town Board. The Town shall
not indemnify and save harmless the employee:
(1) Where the injury or damage resulted from intentional wrongdoing
or recklessness on the part of the employee.
(2) For any punitive or exemplary damages, fines or penalties.
(3) For money recovered from the employee pursuant to § 51 of the
General Municipal Law.
§ 53-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 53-4
1:72
§ 53-5. Limitations of benefits.
The benefits of this article will inure only to employees as defined herein
and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party, nor shall any
provision of this article be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provisions
of the Workers' Compensation Law.
§ 53-6. Extension of benefits.
The benefits of this article shall be extended to an employee of a negotiating
unit for which an agreement has been negotiated pursuant to Civil Service
Law Article 14.
§ 53-7. Effect on insurers.
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit
or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of
insurance.
§ 53-8. Construal of provisions.
As otherwise specifically provided in this article, the provisions of this
article shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify,
abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon any unit,
entity, officer or employee of the Town or any right to defense (and/or
indemnification) provided for any governmental officer or employee by, in
accordance with or by reason of any other provision of state or federal
statutory or common law.
§ 53-9. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all actions and proceedings
specified herein which have been commenced, instituted or brought on or
after the effective date of this article.
B. Any claim or compromise settlement which may be subject to
indemnification by the Town shall not be paid unless it is presented to
and approved by the Town Board.
C. Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee, or upon
settlement or compromise of a claim as approved by the Town Board,
the employee shall cause to be served upon the Town Supervisor a copy
of such judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or registered
mail, within 30 days of the date of entry or settlement. Such judgment
or settlement shall be processed and paid in the same manner as other
judgments or settlements of claims are paid by the Town.
§ 53-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-9
1:73

ARTICLE II
Terms of Office
[Adopted 9-6-1988 by L.L. No. 4-1988]
§ 53-10. Terms established.
§ 53-11. Construal of provisions.
This article shall supersede § 24 of the Town Law insofar as it is inconsistent
with such section.
§ 53-12. Referendum required.
A proposition for the approval of this article shall be submitted to the
electors of the Town of Smithtown at the general election to be held in
November 1988, and this article shall become operative only if approved by
the affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors voting upon such
proposition.10
§ 53-13. When effective.
If this article is approved by the affirmative vote of majority of the qualified
electors of the Town voting thereon at said general election, any of the Town
officers mentioned in § 53-10 hereof elected at a biennial Town election
held after this article takes effect shall hold office for a term of four years
commencing on the first day of January next succeeding such election.
A. The term of Office of the Supervisor shall be four years.
B. The term of Office of the Town Clerk shall be four years.
C. The term of Office of the Highway Superintendent shall be four years.
10.Editor's Note: This local law was approved at referendum 11-8-1988.
§ 53-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-13
1:75

ARTICLE III
Office of Comptroller
[Adopted 2-20-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
§ 53-14. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of New York State
Municipal Home Rule Law § 10 which grants to local governments the
authority to enact local laws which are not inconsistent with the New York
State Constitution or general laws. This article recognizes that New York
State Public Officers Law § 3 was rendered a special law with the respect to
the residency requirement for the Office of Comptroller by the additions of
§ 3, Subdivision 18, and § 3, Subdivision 24.
§ 53-15. Supersession.
This article shall supersede § 23 of the New York State Town Law insofar as
it is inconsistent with such section.
§ 53-16. Residency requirement for Office of Comptroller.
The person holding the Office of Comptroller in the Town need not be a
resident or elector of the Town, provided that such person resides within
the State of New York.
§ 53-17. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 53-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-17
1:77

ARTICLE IV
Offices of Purchasing Director and Budget Officer
[Adopted 7-23-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996]
§ 53-18. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of New York State
Municipal Home Rule Law § 10, which grants to local governments the
authority to enact local laws which are not inconsistent with the New York
State Constitution or general laws. This article recognizes that New York
State Public Officers Law § 3 was rendered a special law with respect to the
residency requirements for the Offices of Purchasing Director and Budget
Officer by the addition of § 3, Subdivision 24.
§ 53-19. Supersession.
This article shall supersede § 23 of the New York State Town Law insofar as
it is inconsistent with such section.
§ 53-20. Residency requirement.
The person holding the Office of Purchasing Director or the Office of Budget
Officer in the Town need not be a resident or elector of the Town, provided
that such person resides within the State of New York.
§ 53-21. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 53-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-21
1:79

ARTICLE V
Office of Town Engineer
[Adopted 10-12-2004 by L.L. No. 8-2004]
§ 53-22. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of New York State
Municipal Home Rule Law § 10, which grants to local governments the
authority to enact local laws which are not inconsistent with the New York
State Constitution or general laws. This article recognizes that New York
State Public Officers Law § 3 was rendered a special law with respect to the
residency requirements for the Office of Town Engineer by the addition of
§ 3, Subdivision 24.
§ 53-23. Supersession.
This article shall supersede § 23 of the New York State Town Law insofar as
it is inconsistent with such section.
§ 53-24. Residency requirement.
The person holding the Office of Town Engineer in the Town need not be
a resident or elector of the Town, provided that such person resides within
the State of New York.
§ 53-25. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 53-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-25
1:81

ARTICLE VI
Office of Deputy Superintendent of Highways
[Adopted 3-23-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
§ 53-26. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of New York State
Municipal Home Rule Law § 10, which grants to local governments the
authority to enact local laws which are not inconsistent with the New York
State Constitution or general laws. This article recognizes that New York
State Public Officers Law § 3 was rendered a special law with respect to
the residency requirements for the office of the Deputy Superintendent of
Highways by the addition of § 3, Subdivision 24.
§ 53-27. Supersession of state law.
This article shall supersede § 23 of the New York State Town Law insofar as
it is inconsistent with such section.
§ 53-28. Residency requirement.
The person holding the Office of Deputy Superintendent of Highways in the
Town need not be a resident or elector of the Town, provided that such
person resides within the County of Suffolk.
§ 53-29. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 53-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-29
1:83
Chapter 57
PROCUREMENT POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Best value bid awards — See Ch. 57A.
§ 57-1. Purpose.
The Procurement Policy and Procedures is developed by the Purchasing
Department and its acceptance is subject to the approval of the Town Board.
It has been crafted so as to:
§ 57-2. Statutes.
All purchases for commodities, services and public works are subject to
federal, state, county and Town laws that regulate municipal purchasing;
the fundamentals for most of these regulations are as follows:
A. Establish a system that supports objective and unbiased competition;
B. Guard against favoritism and wastefulness;
C. Ensure that the results of procurement are to the Town's benefit; and
D. Protect the best interests of the Town's residents and taxpayers.
A. New York State General Municipal Law §§ 103 and 104-b.
(1) Contained in New York State General Municipal Law Article 5A,
§§ 100 through 109-b. In particular, New York State General
Municipal Law § 103 relates to all governmental purchases of
commodities, services and technologies that are subject to the laws
of competitive procurement and are applicable for the following
monetary thresholds: commodity expenditures in excess of $20,000
and contracts for public work involving expenditures in excess of
$35,000. When using competitive bidding, contracts are awarded
to the "lowest responsible bidder" after public advertisement for
sealed bids.
(2) In January of 2012, changes were made to New York State General
Municipal Law § 103(1) which allow the Town to authorize, by local
law, the award of certain purchase contracts, including contracts
for services, subject to competitive bidding under General
Municipal Law § 103, on the basis of "best value" as defined in
§ 163 of the New York State Finance Law. The "best value" option
may be used, for example, if it is more cost efficient over time to
award the good or service to other than the lowest responsible
bidder or offeror if factors such as lower cost of maintenance,
§ 53-29 SMITHTOWN CODE § 57-2
1:84
durability, higher quality and longer product life can be
documented.11
(a) This amendment provided that purchase contracts (including
contracts for service work, but excluding any purchase
contracts necessary for the completion of a public works
contract pursuant to Article 8 of the Labor Law) shall be
awarded on the basis of best value rather than to the lowest
responsible bidder. Sections 3 through 11 amend other
subdivisions of § 103 and § 103-e of the General Municipal Law
to conform these subdivisions to allow for the awarding of
purchase contracts (including contracts for service work) on
the basis of best value.
(b) Based on these changes to GML, the Town of Smithtown's
Procurement Policy and Procedures will now allow for the use
of "best value" as a method of awarding contracts in a manner
that is in the best interest of the Town.
(c) Goods and services procured and awarded on the basis of "best
value" are those that are proven to optimize quality, cost and
efficiency, among responsive and responsible bidders/offerors.
The determination shall be based on an objective analysis of
clearly described and documented criteria as they apply to the
rating of bids or offers. Where possible, such determination
shall also be based upon and include a quantifiable analysis of
the same. The criteria may include, but shall not be limited to,
any or all of the following:
[1] Cost of maintenance;
[2] Proximity to the end user if distance or response time is a
significant term;
[3] Durability;
[4] Availability of replacement parts or maintenance
contractors;
[5] Longer product life; and
[6] Product performance criteria and quality of craftsmanship.
(d) Whenever any contract is awarded on the basis of best value
instead of lowest responsible bidder, the basis for determining
best value shall be thoroughly and accurately documented.
(3) Further amendments to General Municipal Law § 103 through the
addition of a new Subdivision (16) allow political subdivisions "to
make purchases of apparatus, materials, equipment or supplies, or
to contract for services related to the installation, maintenance or
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 57A, Procurement: Best Value Bid Awards.
§ 57-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-2
1:85
repair of apparatus, materials, equipment, and supplies, . . . as may
be required by such county, political subdivision or district therein
through the use of a contract let by the United States of America
or any agency thereof, any state or any other county or political
subdivision or district therein..."
(a) It is important to note that the use of such contracts
("piggybacking") is conditioned on the contract that is to be
utilized having been "let in a manner that constitutes
competitive bidding consistent with state law, and made
available for use by other governmental entities."
(4) Local Law No. 1-2015, passed April 23, 2015, allowed for the Town
of Smithtown Purchasing Department to utilize "best value"
procurement and "piggyback" on all contracts that were let in
compliance with NYS GML statutes.
B. Federal regulations.
(1) The GSA Cooperative Purchasing Program, authorized by statute,
allows state and local governments to purchase a variety of
commercial supplies (products) and services under specific GSA
Schedule contracts to save time, money and meet their everyday
needs and missions. The Cooperative Purchasing Program gives
state and local government entities access to:
(a) Purchase information technology products and services, as
well as law enforcement, security, first responder, and marine
craft equipment, alarm and signal systems, and special
purpose clothing (GSA Schedule 70);
(b) A centralized IT and telecommunications source (GSA
Schedule 84).
(2) Provide commodities/services for law enforcement and safety and
security purposing.
(3) In addition, there are hundreds of detailed rules and regulations
regarding the process/manner of the use of federal grant funds
specific to issuing agencies and intended usages.
C. Suffolk and other counties. Suffolk County and other county contracts
are acceptable, as permissible.
D. Town of Smithtown. Upon adoption of this Procurement Policy and
Procedures, the Town Board authorizes the award of certain purchase
contracts, including contracts for services, subject to competitive
bidding under General Municipal Law § 103, on the basis of "best value"
as defined in § 163 of the New York State Finance Law. The Town law, in
addition to requiring compliance with all applicable federal, state, and
county statutes, also has laws that have been enacted solely by the
Town. They are:
§ 57-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 57-2
1:86
(1) Apprenticeship Training Program (ATP).
(a) The Town of Smithtown requires any contractor or
subcontractor, prior to entering into a construction contract
with the Town, to have apprenticeship agreements,
appropriate for the type and scope of work to be performed,
which have been registered with and approved by the New
York Commissioner of Labor in accordance with Article 23 of
the New York Labor Law, anything in § 5103 of the New York
General Municipal Law to the contrary notwithstanding.
(b) If the amount bid for a construction contract awarded by the
Town, or the aggregate value of the individual construction
contracts on multi-prime contracts that comprise a project, is
in excess of $500,000, the contract(s) will be subject to Town
Board Resolution No. 2009-226, which requires that firms
entering into contracts with the Town for such work participate
in registered and approved apprenticeship training programs.
The contractor and his subcontractors shall provide evidence
of participation in approved apprenticeship training programs
that are appropriate for the type and scope of work to be
performed under the agreement. In addition to this policy, any
contract to be awarded by the Town shall be subject to the
requirements and conditions set forth in the bid documents.
(2) Bid submission requirement.
(a) To maintain the integrity of the bid process, the Town reserves
the right to reject any bids that are deemed incomplete,
conditional, obscure, or which contain irregularities of any
kind, including unbalanced bids. An unbalanced bid is one in
which the amount bid for one or more separate items is
substantially out of line with current market prices for the
materials and/or work covered thereby.
(b) "Tie bids" are low, responsive bids from responsible bidders
that are identical in price and which meet all the requirements
and criteria set forth in the Town's bid solicitation. As
applicable, a "tie bid" will be awarded by applying the
following tie-breaking criteria, in the order as stated:
[1] To a vendor offering the highest prompt payment discount.
[2] To a vendor with a principal place of business listed on the
bid document that is within the Township of Smithtown.
[3] To a vendor with a principal place of business listed on the
bid document that is within the County of Suffolk, New
York.
[4] To a vendor with a principal place of business listed on the
bid document that is within the State of New York.
§ 57-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-2
1:87
[5] The drawing of lots, if all prior criteria are the same for
included vendors.
[a] In the event that lots must be drawn to determine the
award, all tied bidders will be given the opportunity to
witness the drawing.
[b] Bidders will be given a minimum of five business days'
advanced written notice as to the place and time the
drawing will be conducted.
[c] The drawing will be conducted by the Purchasing
Department and witnessed by at least one
representative from the Town of Smithtown's Town
Clerk's office.
(c) If, during the term of the contract, the contractor and/or his/
her subcontractor is not in compliance with these regulations,
the Town may suspend the work and/or take whatever action is
deemed appropriate as defined in the bid terms and conditions.
(3) Determination of need for formal bid or quotation.
(a) Monetary thresholds.
[1] In accordance with General Municipal Law § 103,
competitive bidding is required where it is reasonably
anticipated that the aggregate amount of the goods or
services to be contracted for within one fiscal year will
exceed the monetary thresholds under General Municipal
Law § 103 ($20,000 for the purchase of commodities, or
$35,000 for public works or non-professional services as
defined below).
[2] No anticipated contract or purchase shall be divided or
structured with the intent of avoiding the requirements set
forth in the Town Procurement Policy and Procedures, and
statutory law.
[3] Prior to issuance of a purchase order pursuant to
acceptance of a competitive bid under an approved Town
of Smithtown contract (posted on the "R" drive), the
Purchasing Department must possess copies of
documentation of required insurance and contract
security or performance bond, as applicable. Purchases
should be made from vendors with existing Town of
Smithtown contracts, if a contract exists. In these
instances, blanket purchase orders are encouraged and
should be used to the extent permissible and practical.
[4] When submitting a purchase order for payment on any
purchase order originally issued in an amount exceeding
§ 57-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 57-2
1:88
$20,000, the originating department must submit a
Contractor Performance Report (CPR) by scanning it into
KVS, before submitting the request to the Comptroller's
office. Any questions regarding this matter should be
directed to the Purchasing Department.
[5] Any purchases exceeding $750 for non-Public Works
projects (including non-professional services) or $1,499.99
for public works projects and professional services must
adhere to the following applicable procedures (under
§§ 57-4 and 57-5) and have a Town-approved purchase
order. Exceptions to this rule requiring a purchase order
are expenditures for certain bills, including, but not
limited to, insurance, performance bond reimbursements,
snow contractors, tax bills, permit refunds, travel and
mileage reimbursements, release of escrow, Medicare
reimbursements, inter-governmental and intragovernmental
purchases, petty cash reimbursements and
invoices from outside counsel. All of these may be
processed using vouchers. For convenience, blanket
purchase orders should be used for gas, fuel oil, electric,
phones, water, office supplies, equipment leases, dumpster
fees, consultants, instructors and similar expenditures
that are likely to result in an annual aggregate vendor
expenditure exceeding $1,499.99.
[6] No purchase order or contract shall be issued for an
amount that exceeds the competitive bidding thresholds
stated above prior to undertaking the formal bid process,
except for those limited circumstances set forth under this
policy and applicable law.
(b) Annual aggregate amount.
[1] Every noncontract purchase that will require a purchase
order must be initially reviewed by the Purchasing
Department to determine whether it falls into the category
of a commodities purchase or a public works procurement
request. Once that determination is reached, a good faith
effort must be extended to determine whether it is known
or can reasonably be expected that the annual aggregate
amount to be spent on the commodity or service exceeds
the competitive bidding thresholds.
[2] Annual aggregate purchases shall be evaluated to
determine cumulative dollar amounts expected within 12
months or a given expected contract term. As necessary,
user departments' anticipated requirements will be
evaluated in an attempt to determine yearly values of
commodities and/or services. In addition, past history will
also be taken into consideration in evaluating the yearly
§ 57-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-2
1:89
§ 57-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of the Town Procurement Policy and Procedures, the
following terms shall have the meanings as set forth herein:
BLANKET PURCHASE ORDER — A blanket purchase order gives authority
to the vendor to deliver subsequently authorized goods or services, as
instructed by a Town department and approved by the Director of
Purchasing. These subsequent instructions will indicate the specific
services, goods and quantities to be delivered and the specific delivery
times, dates and locations.
COMMODITIES — Standard articles of commerce in the form of material
goods, supplies, products, equipment or similar items with no more than
incidental labor required.
NON-PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Performance of a task (labor) that may
include providing incidental materials in connection with said service.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Services requiring specialized skill, training,
knowledge, expertise and technical skill, and involving the exercise of
professional judgment and discretion.
PUBLIC WORKS — Contracts for services, labor, construction, repairs and/
or maintenance or other work, that include the furnishing of supplies or
materials incidental to the work.
PURCHASE ORDER — Official documents that evidence the expenditure as
authorized by the designee for a commodity, public work or service on a
one-time basis or multiple purchases or blanket order, as may be applicable.
PURCHASE REQUISITION — The initial document generated in the
accounts payable computer software (presently KVS) pursuant to the
process as stated in these policies and procedures in order to generate a
purchase order. It must be created before committing to a purchase.
REQUIREMENTS CONTRACT — A contract for a specified period, with
fixed unit pricing and for an indefinite amount of goods or services to be
furnished as ordered.
VOUCHER — A purchasing document that is generated subsequent to
purchase of goods or services and receipt of an invoice from a vendor. The
circumstances that make use of a voucher appropriate are stipulated in
these policies and procedures.
cost associated with the purchase of commodities and
services.
[3] If it is expected that the bid limit will be exceeded for any
one type of noncontracted commodity or service,
completion of the formal bid process shall take place. The
decision to require the formal bid process shall rest with
the designated authority appointed by the Purchasing
Department.
§ 57-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 57-4
1:90
§ 57-4. Procedures for goods and services purchases.
Department heads may not obligate funds nor enter into any agreement in
excess of these limits without prior written approval from the Purchasing
Department.
A. P-Card or voucher.
(1) $0.01 to $750 ($0.01 to $1,499.99 with P-Card): Use of a Town of
Smithtown purchasing card (P-Card) or voucher enables authorized
employees to make purchases directly from any vendor that
accepts the card or for a purchase without a purchase order. Town
departments participate in the P-Card program on a voluntary
basis. Use of the card or a voucher eliminates the need to process
individual purchase orders for most small transactions; however,
any such purchases can only be charged to budget codes having
adequate unencumbered balances to accommodate the purchase.
When using the P-Card, detailed card usage reports will be
provided to participating departments and to individual employees
authorized to use a P-Card. The P-Card may not be used for any
personal or unauthorized charges.
B. Purchase orders.
(1) $750.01 to $1,499.99: For purchases in the amount of $750.01 to
$1,499.99 (except when using a P-Card as permitted), the
department shall enter a purchase requisition into the purchasing
software. Such purchases are at the discretion of the department
head or his/her designee. A Town-approved purchase order is
required before the purchase.
(2) $1,500 to $2,999.99: For purchases in the amount of $1,500 to
$2,999.99, the department shall enter a purchase requisition into
the purchasing software. Such purchases are at the discretion of
the department head or his/her designee and will be made from the
responsive, responsible vendor offering lowest price, provided at
least one other quotation is received. Evidence of the second
quotation shall be documented in the purchasing software
(currently KVS). A Town-approved purchase order is required
before the purchase.
(3) $3,000 to $19,999.99: For purchases in the amount of $3,000 to
$19,999.99, the department shall enter a purchase requisition into
the purchasing software with attachments detailing three written/
fax/internet website price quotes from three different vendors. The
purchase requisition shall include a detailed description of the
required goods/services, the appropriate budget code(s), a "ship
to" location, a requisition number, an estimated price (including
applicable shipping charges), suggested vendor(s) and department
head's approval. The Purchasing Department shall maintain the
records of such quotes. A Town-approved purchase order is
required before the purchase.
§ 57-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-4
1:91
§ 57-5. Procedures for public works projects.
Department heads may not obligate funds nor enter into any agreement in
excess of these limits without prior written approval from the Purchasing
Department.
§ 57-6. Compliance and documentation.
(4) $20,000 and over: Purchase contracts for goods involving an
expenditure of $20,000 or greater, under General Municipal Law
§ 103 (for one purchase or multiple purchases of a particular item
within 12 months), shall require competitive bidding. A Townapproved
purchase order is required before the purchase.
A. Voucher.
(1) $0.01 to $1,500: Use of vouchers may be used as noted above
under § 57-4, Procedures for goods and services purchases. Any
such purchases can only be charged to budget codes having
adequate unencumbered balances to accommodate the purchase.
B. Purchase orders.
(1) $1,500.01 to $4,999.99: For purchases in the amount of $1,500.01
to $4,999.99, the Department shall enter a purchase requisition
into the purchasing software. Such purchases are at the discretion
of the department head or his/her designee and will be made from
the responsive, responsible vendor offering lowest price, provided
at least one other quotation is received. Evidence of the second
quotation shall be documented in the purchasing software
(currently KVS). A Town-approved purchase order is required
before the purchase.
(2) $5,000 to $34,999.99: For purchases in the amount of $5,000 to
$34,999.99, the department shall enter a purchase requisition into
the purchasing software, attaching details of three written/fax/
internet website price quotes from three different vendors. The
purchase requisition shall include a detailed description of the
required goods/services, the appropriate budget code(s), a "ship
to" location, a requisition number, an estimated price (including
applicable shipping charges), suggested vendor(s) and department
head's approval. The Purchasing Department shall maintain the
records of such quotes. A Town-approved purchase order is
required before the purchase.
(3) $35,000 and over: Public works or services involving an
expenditure of $35,000 of greater, under General Municipal Law
§ 103, for a one-time public works or service purchase shall require
competitive bidding. A Town-approved purchase order is required
before the purchase.
A. Quotations required.
§ 57-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 57-6
1:92
(1) All requests for written and/or faxed quotations shall be
documented and attached in KVS; a hard copy of the purchase
order is filed in the Town Purchasing Department.
(2) A good faith effort shall be made to obtain the required number of
quotations. If for any reason the user department purchasing staff
are unable to obtain the requisite number of quotations, the user
department or Purchasing Department shall properly document in
writing the reasons why, and the efforts made to obtain the
required written quotes. A documented inability to obtain the
requisite number of quotations shall not be an impediment to
securing the procurement.
B. Less than three quotes.
(1) For goods and services purchases exceeding $2,999.99 (but less
than $20,000) and public works projects or non-professional
services exceeding $4,999.99 (but less than $35,000), in the event
less than three quotes are received, at the request of the
Purchasing Department, a cost or price analysis (as applicable)
shall be conducted by the using department. Price analysis will be
based on comparison to other similar awards, list prices, prices
offered to the general public for similar quantities, etc. The cost
analysis will separate specific cost elements of the quote,
comparing them, as appropriate, to any pre-quote estimates
prepared by or for the Town, established industry standards or
prevailing wage rates.
(2) Under no circumstances shall a quotation that exceeds General
Municipal Law § 103 bid limits be awarded prior to a formal bid
taking place, except as set forth herein.
C. Contractor renewals and contractor performance report.
(1) Prior to renewing annual requirements contracts, the Purchasing
Department will send a partially completed Contractor
Performance Report (CPR) (copy attached as Exhibit A12) to the
contract's primary user department(s) with a request for them to
complete the evaluation questions and return the CPR to the
Purchasing Department.
(2) The Purchasing Department will upload the completed CPR into the
KVS accounting software (Purchasing Module) as an "attachment"
to the vendor's "Master Record." Uploaded CPRs are accessible for
review by all Town departments.
(3) Acting upon the recommendation of the user department, the
Purchasing Department will send a contract renewal inquiry to the
vendor/contract holder. If the vendor/contract holder expresses an
12.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Town offices.
§ 57-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-6
1:93
§ 57-7. Exceptions.
interest in renewing the contract, a resolution will be prepared for
the Town Board's consideration.
(4) Upon approval, by Town Board resolution, the Purchasing
Department will send written notification to the vendor/contract
holder and user department(s) indicating the revised contract
expiration date.
(5) Departments are encouraged to complete a CPR upon completion
of each contract for the purchase of goods, services, public works
and professional services regardless of intent to renew the
contract. Completed CPRs should be forwarded to the Purchasing
Department for uploading into KVS.
A. Exceptions to competitive bidding requirements and procurement
policies not subject to competitive bid processing as defined by NYS
GML § 103 are subject to NYS GML § 104(6).
(1) General Municipal Law § 104(b) relates to all services that are
exempt from GML § 103, including, but not limited to, such
professional services that require specialized or technical skills,
expertise or knowledge; and mandates that municipalities shall
adopt internal policies and procedures to govern the procurement
of all goods and services that are not subject to the competitive
bidding requirements of General Municipal Law § 103.
(2) The Town Procurement Policy and Procedures prescribe a method
for determining whether a procurement of goods and services is
subject to competitive bidding. These procedures provide for
methods to obtain alternative proposals and quotations for goods
and services that are not subject to competitive bidding.
(3) NYS GML § 104(b) as it relates to procurement policies not covered
by GML §§ 100 through 103:
(a) Goods and services which are not required by law to be
procured by competitive bidding must be procured in a manner
so as to assure the prudent and economical use of public
moneys in the best interests of the taxpayers of the political
subdivision. To further these objectives, the governing board of
every political subdivision and any district therein, by
resolution, shall adopt internal policies and procedures
governing all procurements of goods and services which are
not required to be made pursuant to the competitive bidding
requirements of General Municipal Law § 103.
(b) Such policies and procedures shall contain provisions which,
among other things:
§ 57-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § 57-7
1:94
[1] Prescribe a procedure for determining whether a
procurement of goods and services is subject to
competitive bidding.
[2] Provide that alternative proposals or quotations for goods
and services shall be secured by use of written requests
for proposals, written quotations, verbal quotations or any
other method of procurement which furthers the purposes
of this section.
[3] Set forth when each such method of procurement will be
utilized, taking into account which method will best
further the purposes of this section and the costeffectiveness
of the method.
[4] Require adequate documentation of actions taken in
connection with each such method of procurement.
[5] Require justification and documentation of any contract
awarded to other than the lowest responsible dollar
offeror, setting forth the reasons such an award furthers
the purpose of this section.
[6] Identify the individual or individuals responsible for
purchasing and their respective titles. Such information
shall be updated biennially.
[7] Set forth any circumstances when, or types of
procurements for which, solicitation of alternative
proposals or quotations will not be in the best interest of
the political subdivision.
B. Professional services. Contracts for services that involve specialized
skill, training, knowledge, expertise, technical skill and the use of
professional judgment are considered "professional services" contracts
which are excluded from the competitive bidding requirements of
General Municipal Law § 103. Examples of professional services
include, but are not limited to, accountants, architects, attorneys,
surveyors and engineers. The procurement of such services is subject to
General Municipal Law § 104(b). The following sets forth the
procedures and requirements for the procurement of professional
services:
(1) Professional service consultants (herein "consultants") shall be
authorized pursuant to the Town Board's authorized list of
professional services consultants adopted by resolution at the Town
Board's annual organizational meeting or pursuant to a specific
Town Board resolution. It is the intent of the Town Board to develop
this authorized list through submissions received in response to a
Town-prepared request for qualifications (RFQs). This list shall be
maintained by the Purchasing Department.
§ 57-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-7
1:95
(2) In lieu of applicants appointed via an RFQ, the Town allows for
professional consultants to submit a professional consultant
application. After review and approval by the appropriate
department and the Director of Purchasing, the application must be
submitted to the Town Board for approval and placement on the
professional services consultants' list.
(3) Professional service requisitions (PSRs) shall be prepared by the
requesting department and approved by the department head. It
shall be further approved by the Director of Purchasing.
(a) Town Board approval shall be required for any PSR issued to
an authorized professional service consultant under the
following circumstances:
[1] For either a non-capital project or a capital project in an
amount of $25,000 or greater;
[2] If a second award is made to the same consultant for a
specified project wherein the combined total of contracts
is equal to or greater than $25,000; or
[3] An award of contract to a professional services consultant
that is not on the designated list, but has been selected for
specialized expertise; the contract resolution also will
designate the Director of Purchasing to award a PSR to the
selected consultant and the Purchasing Department will
add the consultant to the authorized consultant list.
(b) PSRs issued for a non-capital or a capital project in amounts
less than $25,000 shall require a written justification from the
requesting department. The department head of the
requesting department must state and validate that the price is
reasonable given current market conditions and that the work
is necessary. The Purchasing Department shall maintain this
documentation with the authorized PSR.
(c) Comparative pricing shall be required when a particular
project is anticipated to exceed $25,000 but is less than
$50,000 for non-capital and capital projects and the following
procedures shall be adhered to:
[1] Contact at least two firms with qualifications that match
the work that is required and obtain written price quotes;
[2] Once a firm is selected, obtain a written proposal for the
particular work to be performed and an estimated cost,
based on the number of staff hours requited to complete
the project, as well as any other additional direct out-ofpocket
costs the contractor expects to incur;
§ 57-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 57-7
1:96
[3] Request that the Town Attorney's office prepare an
agreement for the project. Note that a separate contract
must be entered into between the Town and a selected
contractor for each project;
[4] Submit a proposed contract award to the Town Board for
approval.
(d) When there are no qualified consultants on the professional
services consultants list that possess the necessary expertise
or knowledge needed, the department head submits a written
request to the Director of Purchasing containing the following:
[1] Supporting documentation which sets forth specific and
adequate justification for selecting a particular
professional consultant;
[2] Upon the Director of Purchasing's written approval, the
worksheet resolution form to approve the PSR may be
submitted to the Town Board for approval without first
obtaining comparative pricing; and
[3] The written request of the department head shall be
included as supporting documentation to the Town Board
resolution.
(4) Below is a quick overview of the procedure to be followed when
hiring a professional services contractor at various dollar values:
Project Value
Procurement
Requirements
Resolution
Needed to
Award
Contract
Required
Resolution
Needed to
Contract
Under $1,500.01 None (1) No No N/A
$1,500.01 to
$24,999.99
Any approved
contractor based on
department head
justification (2)
No Yes Yes
$25,000 to
$49,999.99
At least two
proposals from
approved
contractors and
based on written
department head
justification (3)
Yes Yes Yes
$50,000 or over Formal request for
proposals (RFP)
required (4)
Yes Yes Yes
Notes:
(1) Use a claim voucher, procurement card or purchase requisition.
§ 57-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-7
1:97
(2) Justification to include need for work and reasonability of price. Obtain a written
proposal from contractor. Contact Purchasing for CPA form. Prepare a resolution
authorizing the Supervisor to sign agreement.
(3) Obtain at least two written proposals. Either award to the lowest-priced proposer or
prepare a written justification to award to other than the lowest proposer. Contact
Purchasing for a CPA form. Prepare a resolution authorizing the project and the
Supervisor to sign agreement.
(4) Contact Purchasing to prepare a request for proposals (RFP).
C. Emergencies. An emergency is an accident or other unforeseen
occurrence or dangerous condition that affects public buildings, public
property, life, health, safety or private property or threatens, curtails or
terminates an essential service to Town residents or the public and the
remediation cannot await competitive bidding or the solicitation of
written proposals or quotations. To meet this criteria, there must be a
present, immediate and existing condition which is creating an
imminent threat or danger.
(1) For goods and services valued between $750.01 and $2,999.99
($1,500 to $2,999.99 for P-Cards), procedures under § 57-4,
Purchase orders, (above) should be followed and a special request
made to the Director of Purchasing for expedited processing.
(2) For goods and services valued between $3,000 and $19,999.99, the
following expedited purchasing procedures will apply, provided the
department head submits, to the Purchasing Department, a written
request sufficiently detailing:
(a) The date the emergency first became known to the Town;
(b) The date, time and place the goods/services are needed;
(c) A description of how the emergency meets the definition stated
above;
(d) A list of the required goods and services, their prices and
quantities from the selected supplier;
(e) The names of any other suppliers contacted and any alternate
price quotes received;
(f) A recommended course of action;
(g) A list of any prior related emergencies.
In most cases, if the requesting department complies with
these instructions, approval for the emergency procurement
will be granted within one business day.
(3) When a Town Board Declaration of emergency is required for goods
and services valued in excess of $19,999.99, Town Board approval
must be obtained prior to issuance of a purchase order.
§ 57-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 57-7
1:98
Departments are instructed to contact their Town Board liaison or
the Town Supervisor to commence this process as soon as possible.
D. Sole-source procurement. Sole-source procurement is one in which only
one vendor can supply the commodity, technology and/or perform the
services required, or as otherwise required by law, and there is no
substantial equivalent. In such cases, contract prices, terms and
conditions shall be determined through negotiation between the
supplier and the Town.
(1) To initiate a sole-source purchase, a solicitation review (SR) report
shall be prepared by the using department. The SR shall contain
the following elements, as applicable:
(a) Description of the goods, services or construction to be
procured;
(b) Need for the procurement;
(c) Required date of delivery for goods and services;
(d) Need to contract out (services only);
(e) Estimated cost of the proposed contract;
(f) Anticipated level of competition, including:
[1] Identification of any applicable statutory authority
mandating the purchase from a required source;
[2] Detailed explanation of why the goods, services or
construction are available from only one source of supply;
[3] Description of efforts made to explore other sources of
supply;
[4] A statement describing intended actions to develop
competition in the future;
[5] Any other facts which help support a non-competitive
award; and
[6] Cost or price analysis (as applicable) offering justification
that the proposed price is fair and reasonable.
(2) The SR report must be signed and dated by the department head.
The completed SR report should be submitted to the Purchasing
Department, along with a purchase requisition (if applicable).
(3) As this process is somewhat paper-intensive, departments are
urged to consolidate repeat sole-source purchases into
requirements contracts. Sole-source requirement contracts may
not exceed two years in duration.
§ 57-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-7
1:99
§ 57-8. Change orders.
(4) For sole-source purchases valued less than $20,000 ($35,000 for
public works), the Purchasing Department will send the vendor a
purchase order.
(5) For sole-source purchases in excess of $19,999.99 ($34,999.99 for
public works), the Purchasing Department will prepare a Town
Board resolution based upon the information contained in the SR
report.
E. Equipment leases. Before any commodity or equipment lease is
finalized, the lease must be forwarded to the Town Attorney for review
and approval and the Town Board shall review and approve the lease
prior to execution by the Supervisor.
F. Governmental sources. Governmental procurement sources for
commodities and service requested by the user departments shall be
investigated and utilized in accordance with applicable law, to the
extent possible. These sources may include:
(1) Federal General Services Administration (FGSA), Schedules 70 and
84;
(2) New York State Office of General Services (NYS OGS contracts);
(3) Suffolk County and other county contracts as permissible;
(4) Surplus and secondhand purchases from other governmental
entities;
(5) Commodities and/or services shall be procured from preferred
sources, pursuant to State Finance Law § 162. The Purchasing
Department shall obtain and maintain a current list of preferred
source providers from the NYS Office of General Services.
Procurements shall be in compliance with the Office of General
Services' NYS Procurement Bulletin — Preferred Source
Guidelines;
(6) National cooperative contracts as are approved and available and
in the Town of Smithtown's best interest; and
(7) Such other goods and services authorized by the Town Board in
accordance with General Municipal Law.
A. Change orders shall be authorized in the same manner as the awarded
contract. When a change order increase would result in an aggregate
change of at least the greater of 10% of the Town Board approved
contract value or $20,000, then a budget approved requisition must be
submitted to Purchasing, and approval evidenced by a Town Board
resolution is required.
§ 57-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 57-8
1:100
Chapter 57A
PROCUREMENT: BEST VALUE BID AWARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Procurement Policy — See Ch. 57.
§ 57A-1. Authority and purpose.
New York General Municipal Law § 103(1) allows the Town to authorize,
by local law, the award of certain purchase contracts (including contracts
for services) subject to competitive bidding under General Municipal Law
§ 103 on the basis of "best value," as defined in § 163 of the New York State
Finance Law. The best value option may be used if, for example, it is more
cost-efficient over time to award the good or service to other than the lowest
responsible bidder or offeror, if factors such as lower cost of maintenance,
durability, higher quality and longer product life can be documented.
§ 57A-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter apply to Town purchase contracts, including
contracts for services, involving an expenditure of more than $20,000,
but excluding purchase contracts necessary for the completion of a public
works contract pursuant to Article 8 of the New York Labor Law and any
other contract that may in the future be excluded under state law from the
best value option. If the dollar thresholds of New York General Municipal
Law § 103 are increased or decreased in the future by the State Legislature,
the dollar thresholds set forth herein shall be deemed simultaneously
amended to match the new General Municipal Law thresholds.
§ 57A-3. Standards for best value.
The Town Board may award purchase contracts, including contracts for
services, on the basis of "best value," as that term is defined in New York
State Finance Law § 163. Goods and services procured and awarded on
the basis of best value are those that the Town Board determines optimize
quality, cost and efficiency among responsive and responsible bidders or
offerors. Where possible, the determination shall be based on an objective
and quantifiable analysis of clearly described and documented criteria as
they apply to the rating of bids or offers. The criteria may include, but
B. A change order exceeding these minimum amounts may require
competitive bidding at the discretion of the Town Board.
C. The department requesting a change order shall document, in writing,
that the requested change order does not constitute a new undertaking
and/or alter the essential identity or main purpose of the contract for
the commodities or services provided.
§ 57-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57A-3
1:101
shall not be limited to, any or all of the following: cost of maintenance;
proximity to the end user, if distance or response time is a significant term;
durability; availability of replacement parts or maintenance contractors;
longer product life; product performance criteria; and quality of
craftsmanship. All awards based on best value shall require Town Board
approval.
§ 57A-4. Documentation.
Whenever any contract is awarded on the basis of best value instead of
lowest responsible bidder, the basis for determining best value shall be
thoroughly and accurately documented.
§ 57A-5. Procurement Policy superseded where inconsistent.
Any inconsistent provision of the Town's Procurement Policy, as adopted
prior to the effective date of this chapter by resolution of the Town Board,
or as amended thereafter, shall be deemed superseded by the provisions of
this chapter.
Chapter 61
RECYCLING COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Board — See Ch. 21. Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 177.
§ 61-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Town of Smithtown
Recycling Committee."
§ 61-2. Purpose.
The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown hereby finds and declares it to be
in the best interests of the citizens of the Town of Smithtown to create and
provide for the appointment of a Recycling Committee, to recommend to the
Town Board such policies and programs which may aid the people of the
Town of Smithtown and the Town Board in the realization of the recycling
goals or alternatives set forth herein.
§ 61-3. Powers and duties.
The Recycling Committee shall study recycling development,
encouragement and recycling alternatives within the Town of Smithtown
and make recommendations to the Town Board.
§ 57A-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 61-4
1:102
§ 61-4. Membership.
The Committee shall be known as the "Recycling Committee of the Town
of Smithtown" and shall consist of seven members, which shall consist of
the Supervisor of the Town of Smithtown, a Town Board member appointed
by the Town Board, the Superintendent of Sanitation, a representative of
the Department of Environment and Waterways appointed by the Town
Board, two interested citizens of the Town of Smithtown appointed by the
Town Board and one licensed Town garbage carter, regularly engaged in
the business of garbage collection, storage or recycling, to be appointed
by the Town Board. Each member shall serve for a term of two years. The
Supervisor is the designated Chairman of the Committee and the Town
Board member is the Deputy Chairman, who shall chair the meeting in the
absence of the Supervisor.
§ 61-5. Compensation.
The members of the Recycling Committee of the Town of Smithtown shall
serve without compensation. The Town Board, however, may appropriate in
the annual budget of the Town a sum of money for the purposes of providing
to the Recycling Committee funds to defray the costs and expenses incurred
by it in the performance of its duties set forth herein and to attend seminars,
trips or other such activities that would assist the Committee in effectuating
the purposes of this chapter. Such appropriation shall be charged upon
the taxable property of that part of the Town of Smithtown outside the
incorporated villages contained therein.
§ 61-6. Dissolution.
The provisions of this chapter shall expire March 1, 1992, and the Recycling
Committee shall be disbanded on said date unless the Town Board of the
Town of Smithtown reenacts the provisions of this chapter prior to March
1, 1992. Upon dissolution of the Recycling Committee, that Committee
shall turn over any documents, reports or materials it has collected to the
Supervisor of the Town of Smithtown.
Chapter 66
RETIREMENT INCENTIVE PROGRAM
§ 66-1. Statutory authorization. [Amended 5-5-1995 by L.L. No.
3-1995; 8-20-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996; 6-24-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997;
8-25-1998 by L.L. No. 6-1998; 8-10-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999;
8-22-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
The Town of Smithtown hereby elects to provide all its eligible employees
with a retirement incentive program authorized by Chapter 86 of the Laws
of 2000.
§ 61-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-2
1:103
§ 66-2. Commencement date. [Amended 8-26-1992 by L.L. No.
6-1992; 5-5-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995; 8-20-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996;
6-24-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997; 8-25-1998 by L.L. No. 6-1998;
8-10-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999; 8-22-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
The commencement date of the retirement incentive program shall be
September 4, 2000.
§ 66-3. Open period. [Amended 8-26-1992 by L.L. No. 6-1992;
5-5-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995; 8-20-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996;
6-24-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997; 8-25-1998 by L.L. No. 6-1998;
8-10-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999; 8-22-2000 by L.L. No. 6-2000]
The open period during which eligible employees may retire and receive
the additional retirement benefit shall be 60 days in length to begin on
September 4, 2000, and end at the close of business on November 2, 2000.
§ 66-4. Funding and payment.
The actuarial present value of the additional retirement benefits payable
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be funded over a five-year
period. The amount of annual payment in each of the five years shall be
determined by the actuary of the New York State Employees Retirement
System, and it shall be paid by the Town of Smithtown for each employee
who receives the retirement benefits payable under this chapter.
§ 66-5. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon the filing with the Secretary
of State of the State of New York.
Chapter 68
SEXUAL AND OTHER HARASSMENT POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 30.
§ 68-1. Sexual harassment prohibited.
Sexual harassment in the workplace is illegal, and all employees and Town
officials are forbidden from engaging in such activity in any manner. The
Town of Smithtown (hereinafter the "Town") is committed to providing a
work environment free from all forms of sexual harassment or intimidation.
§ 66-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 68-2
1:104
§ 68-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PROHIBITED HARASSMENT —
SEXUAL HARASSMENT —
Any conduct can constitute prohibited harassment when:
It is based on an individual's race, color, creed, ethnicity, disability,
religion, national origin, age, marital status, citizenship, veteran
status, sexual orientation, pregnancy, or any other category
protected by law; and
(1)
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive working environment.
(2)
A.
Examples of behavior that may constitute prohibited harassment
include, but are not limited to, the following (when they are based on
an individual's race, color, creed, ethnicity, disability, religion, national
origin, age, marital status, citizenship, veteran status, sexual
orientation, pregnancy, or any other category protected by law):
Abusive language, including innuendoes, slurs, suggestive,
derogatory or insulting comments or sounds, threats, and jokes
based on an individual's protected status.
(1)
(2) Use of demeaning or offensive words.
Abusive written language or pictures, transmitted via e-mail or
otherwise, showing or displaying offensive objects or pictures, or
graphic commentaries or gestures in the workplace.
(3)
(4) Any physical contact based on an individual's protected status.
B.
Unwelcome sexual advances, requests or demands for sexual favors,
and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature constitute
sexual harassment when:
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual's employment; or
(1)
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting the individual, such
as promotion, transfer, or termination; or
(2)
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive working environment.
(3)
A.
Examples of behavior that may constitute sexual harassment include,
but are not limited to, the following:
B.
§ 68-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-2
1:105
§ 68-3. Other forms of unlawful harassment.
Just as sexual harassment is strictly prohibited, so is harassment on the
basis of race, color, creed, ethnicity, disability, religion, national origin, age,
marital status, citizenship, veteran status, sexual orientation, pregnancy, or
any other category protected by law. The Town is committed to providing
a work environment free from all forms of unlawful harassment or
intimidation.
§ 68-4. Procedure for complaints.
Explicit or implicit threats of retribution, or promises of benefits, in
return for sexual favors.
(1)
Abusive language related to an employee's sex or sexual
preference, including sexual innuendoes, slurs, suggestive,
derogatory or insulting comments or sounds, whistling, jokes of
a sexual nature or concerning gender-specific traits, sexual
propositions and threats.
(2)
Use of demeaning or offensive words when referring to a particular
sex or sexual preference.
(3)
Requests or demands for sexual favors or sexually oriented
comments about an employee's body or appearance, sexual habits,
sexual preference, or sexual desirability.
(4)
(5) Unwelcome sexual advances.
Unwelcome physical contact, including touching, petting, pinching,
coerced sexual intercourse, assault or intentional brushing up
against a person's body.
(6)
Sexual harassment is not limited to oral comments. Abusive written
language or pictures, transmitted via e-mail or otherwise, showing
or displaying pornographic or sexually explicit objects or pictures,
graphic commentaries or obscene gestures in the workplace, which
unreasonably interfere with an employee's work performance or create
an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment, are also
prohibited.
C.
A. Any person who reasonably believes that he or she has been the victim
of sexual or other unlawful harassment, or has witnessed such activity,
must immediately report the incident to his/her department head. If you
are uncomfortable speaking to your department head or if you believe
your complaint has not been adequately addressed, you must speak to
the Town Attorney, or the Town Personnel Officer. [Amended
11-10-2009]
B. All complaints will be investigated in a timely manner.
§ 68-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 68-4
1:106
§ 68-5. Applicability; avoiding or reporting prohibited conduct;
false complaints.
Chapter 71
SUBSTANCE ABUSE PREVENTION COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Youth Bureau — See Ch. 85.
C. Confidentiality will be maintained to the maximum extent possible,
consistent with the Town's obligation to conduct a thorough
investigation. All individuals who become involved in the investigation
are required and directed to treat the matter confidentially.
D. Investigation of a complaint will normally include conferring with the
parties involved and any named or apparent witnesses. Should the
Town determine it necessary to interview the employee alleged to be
doing the harassment, where the employee is a member of a union
recognized by the Town, the employee shall be notified of his/her right
to be accompanied by a union representative at such interview. The
particular facts of the allegation will be examined individually, with a
focus upon the nature of the behavior, the pattern of such conduct, if
any, and the context in which the incident(s) occurred.
E. Individuals who believe they have been unjustly charged with sexual or
other unlawful harassment will be afforded every opportunity to offer
and present information in their defense.
F. Anyone who participates in this procedure may do so without fear of
retaliation. Retaliation against anyone, because he or she has filed a
harassment complaint, is illegal and grounds for disciplinary action.
G. An individual who is found to have violated this policy will be subject to
the Town's disciplinary procedures and, if found guilty of such
harassment, subject to a penalty up to and including termination.
A. This policy applies to all employees and Town officials, whether related
to conduct engaged in by an employee or someone not directly
connected to the Town (e.g., outside vendors, consultants).
B. All employees and Town officials will be held responsible and
accountable for avoiding or reporting prohibited conduct.
C. Anyone who knowingly makes a false complaint of sexual or other
unlawful harassment (as opposed to a complaint which, even if
erroneous, is made in good faith) shall be subject to appropriate
disciplinary action.
§ 68-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-1
1:107
§ 71-1. Legislative purpose.
It is hereby declared the policy of the Town of Smithtown, State of New
York, that in order to develop a program of community participation
regarding the control of the use of narcotics and dangerous drugs at the
local legal, it is in the best interest of the citizens of the Town of Smithtown
to create and provide for the appointment of a Town Substance Abuse
Prevention Council.
§ 71-2. Membership.
The Council shall be known as the "Town of Smithtown Substance Abuse
Prevention Council" and shall be composed of five members, who shall
be appointed by the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown for terms
not exceeding three years, and may include at least one clergyman, one
attorney, one physician and one educator.
§ 71-3. Chairman; removal of members; vacancies.
The presiding officer or Chairman of the Council shall be designated by
the Town Board from among the members so appointed to the Council. The
Town Board shall have authority to remove any member of said Council
so appointed, for cause, after a public hearing if requested. A vacancy
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment.
§ 71-4. Compensation.
The members of the Town of Smithtown Substance Abuse Prevention
Council shall serve without compensation. The Town Board, however, may
appropriate in the annual budget of the Town a sum of money for the
purpose of providing to the Substance Abuse Prevention Council funds to
defray the costs and expenses incurred by it in the performance of its duties
set forth hereafter. Such appropriation shall be a charge upon the taxable
property of that part of the Town of Smithtown outside the incorporated
villages contained therein.
§ 71-5. Powers and duties.
A. It shall be the duty of the Substance Abuse Prevention Council to
accomplish the following:
(1) Make immediately available to the community basic knowledge
acquired in the field of drug abuse, especially by youth.
(2) Create a climate in which persons seeking assistance in coping
with narcotics and dangerous drug problems can meet without
embarrassment with responsible individuals or agencies in the
position to render assistance.
(3) Authorize persons approved by the Council to contact and counsel
persons within the community suspected of using narcotics and
§ 71-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § 71-5
1:108
Chapter 74
TENANT SELECTION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bonus density for affordable housing
units — See Ch. 322.
dangerous drugs or those persons allegedly having knowledge of
such usage.
(4) Cooperate with other Substance Abuse Prevention Councils and
with the state and federal drug abuse agencies in bringing local
and community trouble areas to their attention.
(5) Cooperate with other Substance Abuse Prevention Councils and
with the state and federal drug abuse agencies in planning and
implementing local programs staffed by volunteers for the
prevention of drug abuse among those at risk within the community
within the Town of Smithtown.
(6) Develop and implement community drug abuse prevention
programs.
(7) Recruit, train and utilize volunteers from the community to serve
without charge in its programs.
B. The Council may, with the approval of the Town Board, apply to the local
agency designated to prepare and implement the comprehensive plan
under Article 83 of the Mental Hygiene Law for support from special
grants for local volunteer programs which conform to and are included
within the comprehensive plan.
§ 71-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-5
1:109

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 74-1. Title and short title.
§ 74-2. Declaration of purpose.
This Tenant Selection Advisory Committee Law is adopted for the purpose of
establishing the Tenant Selection Advisory Committee as an advisory body
to the Town Board to assist in the administration of affordable housing units
as set forth by § 322-101.
§ 74-3. Word usage; definitions.
A. The title of this chapter shall be "A Law Authorizing the Establishment
of the Tenant Selection Advisory Committee To Provide Advice and
Make Recommendations to the Town Board."
B. Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Tenant
Selection Advisory Committee Law."
A. Scope and meaning of certain words and terms.
(1) The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
(2) The word "may" is permissive.
B. Definition of terms. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT — A dwelling unit under § 322-101,
which is set aside for qualifying senior citizens.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown, Suffolk
County, New York.
§ 74-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-3
1:111

ARTICLE II
Establishment and Functions of the Committee
§ 74-4. Establishment of Tenant Selection Advisory Committee.
§ 74-5. Adoption of guidelines.
A. A Tenant Selection Advisory Committee is hereby established which
shall consist of five members. All members of the Tenant Selection
Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Town Board for terms of
three years. A vacancy shall be filled for any remainder of an unexpired
term in the same manner as an original appointment. The Tenant
Selection Advisory Committee members will serve without
compensation.
B. The Tenant Selection Advisory Committee shall select from its own
members a Chairman and shall meet as necessary to assist the Town
Board with the tenant selection process for affordable housing units.
Meetings shall be at the call of the Chairman or upon the request of four
members of the Town Board. Three members shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business. All decisions of the Committee shall be
by majority vote.
A. The Tenant Selection Advisory Committee shall act as an advisory body
to the Town Board in connection with the implementation of this
chapter and its purposes. The Tenant Selection Advisory Committee
shall study and review the operation of this chapter and all
administration thereof for the purpose of formulating and
recommending guidelines to the Town Board regarding eligibility and
selection procedures for the affordable housing units, and shall perform
those administrative tasks which the Town Board directs the Tenant
Selection Advisory Committee to undertake.
B. The Town Board will retain authority and jurisdiction over the selection
of tenants for the affordable housing units.
§ 74-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-5
1:113
Chapter 75
TOWN ATTORNEY ESCROW ACCOUNT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 30. Officers and employees — See Ch. 53.
§ 75-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to establish a petty cash account in the office
of the Town Attorney to fund an escrow account to be used by the Town
Attorney to pay legal fees required by the County Clerks of the respective
counties of New York State and the clerks of said courts.
§ 75-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COUNTY CLERK — Includes any County Clerk, its office or deputies
throughout New York State which require a fee for the filing of official
documents.
COURT CLERK — Includes any officer of a New York court who files
pleadings, motions, judgments, keeps court records and issues process.
ESCROW ACCOUNT — A non-interest-bearing checking account with an
approved New York State banking institution.
§ 75-3. Purpose.
It shall be the purpose of this chapter to provide immediate access to funds
for the following:
§ 75-4. Authorization; records; access to account.
A. The filing and/or obtaining of deeds, easements, covenants and
restrictions and legal documents on behalf of the Town of Smithtown
with the office of the Suffolk County Clerk. [Amended 12-4-1990 by
L.L. No. 8-1990]
B. The filing of legal papers with the various court clerks of the state and
federal courts.
C. Obtaining index numbers, calendar numbers, subpoenaed records and/
or individuals, jury fees and other related court costs.
D. The filing of notices of appeal.
A. This chapter shall authorize the Town Attorney to open a special escrow
account for the purposes set forth in § 75-3 above. The account shall
§ 74-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 75-4
1:114
Chapter 76
TOWN BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 30. Officers and employees — See Ch. 53.
bear the title "Office of the Town Attorney, Town of Smithtown, Escrow
Account," and shall be funded by a petty cash account in the initial
amount of $8,000. Said funds are to be replenished upon submission of
receipts to the Comptroller of the Town of Smithtown so that a balance
of $8,000 may be maintained at any given time. [Amended 9-26-1989
by L.L. No. 6-1989; 1-2-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991; 10-8-2002 by
L.L. No. 5-2002; 8-23-2005 by L.L. No. 5-2005]
B. The office of the Town Attorney shall maintain a ledger book showing
the payee, amount, date and purpose, as well as maintaining
appropriate bank statements and canceled checks, which may be
reviewed by the Comptroller of the Town of Smithtown at his request.
C. Only the Town Attorney shall be authorized to execute said escrow
checks.
D. An accounting of this account shall be limited to providing receipts
acceptable to the Comptroller of the Town of Smithtown.
§ 75-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-4
1:115

ARTICLE I
Meetings and Hearings
[Adopted 5-23-2006]
§ 76-1. Order of business.
The usual order of business at Town Board meetings shall be as follows:
§ 76-2. Agenda.
The Town Board shall adhere to printed agenda items being discussed;
provided, however, that any urgent read-on items to be considered may be
added to the agenda by motion. For purposes of this section, an item shall
be deemed urgent where the Board must take action on said item before
the next regularly scheduled meeting in order for the Town to obtain a
significant benefit or avoid a significant detriment.
§ 76-3. Consent agenda. [Added 1-8-201913]
A. Call to order.
B. Roll call.
C. Board of Commissioners business as required.
D. Correspondence.
E. Public hearings as required.
F. Advertise for public hearing as required.
G. Consent agenda. [Amended 1-8-2019]
H. Other matters as required; resolutions. [Amended 1-8-2019]
I. Other matters as required. [Amended 1-8-2019]
J. Additional resolutions and agenda items. [Amended 1-8-2019]
K. To be heard on Town matters. [Amended 1-8-2019]
L. Adjournment. [Added 1-8-2019]
A. Items requiring a decision that are expected to require no discussion or
debate may, at the Supervisor's option, be placed on the agenda under
the heading "Consent Agenda." Such items may include: approval of
minutes; acceptance of departmental reports; budget transfers and
related items; the establishment of committees and appointments to
same; the assessment of cost and expenses and the levy upon real
property tax bills for property maintenance remediations, demolition of
unsafe structures, or unpaid Town fees or charges; the acceptance,
13.Editor’s Note: This resolution also renumbered former §§ 76-3 through 76-7 as §§ 76-4
through 76-8.
§ 76-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-3
1:117
§ 76-4. Motions or amendments.
Any motion to approve, disapprove or table, or an amendment thereto,
shall be duly seconded and voted on. Any discussion shall be limited to the
question pending.
§ 76-5. Public comments.
Public comments will be recorded, including the speaker's name and
address. The Town Clerk shall receive, record and file any and all written
materials provided.
§ 76-6. Minutes of Board meetings.
Minutes of Board meetings will be recorded verbatim.
§ 76-7. Decorum at public meetings and hearings.
release, or waiver of bonds, cash deposits, or other security required
by the Town; issuance of parade/walk/run permits; and seasonal
appointments and reappointments to positions in Town departments.
B. Items may be moved out of the consent agenda section at the request of
any member of the Town Board prior to approval of the agenda. No
motion or vote of the Town Board is required with respect to a request
to move an item out of the consent agenda.
C. When a member of the Town Board requests that an item be moved out
of the consent agenda section, the Supervisor shall decide where to
place that item on the agenda.
D. Approval of the consent agenda by the Town Board shall constitute
approval of each of the items listed under the consent agenda portion of
the meeting. No separate vote to approve items set forth in the consent
agenda portion shall be required.
A. The Supervisor, or the Deputy Supervisor in his absence, as the
presiding officer, shall be responsible for the orderly conduct of
business at each Town Board meeting and Town Board hearing and
shall preserve order and decorum at all such meetings and hearings.
B. While the Board is in session, Board members must maintain order and
decorum, and no Board member shall delay or interrupt the
proceedings or the peace of the Board or disturb any Board member
while speaking.
C. A Board member must be recognized by the presiding officer before
speaking on an issue. Any Board member desiring to speak shall, upon
recognition, address the presiding officer and direct remarks to the
issue under discussion. A Board member, once recognized, shall not be
interrupted when speaking unless it is for the purpose of calling such
member to order.
§ 76-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 76-8
1:118
§ 76-8. Public participation.
A. The public may be provided a reasonable opportunity, with the
preservation of order and decorum, to address the Board on any item
heard or any Town matter in which the Town has jurisdiction or
authority.
B. Each speaker will submit his/her name and address upon a form to be
provided by the Town Clerk or his/her designee. On such form, the
speaker shall also provide a brief description of what he/she will
comment upon prior to speaking. [Amended 11-19-2015]
C. Each speaker shall be allotted three minutes for his/her comment. The
allotted time of three minutes shall include and commence from the
beginning of the speaker's remarks and includes any time that passes
during questioning or colloquy. Time cannot be shared or allotted with
other speakers. [Added 11-19-2015]
D. Speakers' remarks shall be addressed to the Board as a body and not to
any specific member thereof. Speakers shall observe the commonly
accepted rules of courtesy, decorum, dignity and good taste. Members
of the public and Board members shall be allowed to state their
positions in an atmosphere free of slander, threats of violence or
disorderly conduct which disturbs the peace and order of the Board
meeting. [Added 11-19-2015]
E. Sufficient warnings may be given by the Board at any time during a
speaker's remarks and, in the event that any individual shall violate the
rules of decorum set forth herein, the presiding officer may then cut off
comment or debate. Any person making offensive, insulting,
threatening, insolent, slanderous or obscene remarks or who becomes
boisterous or who makes threats against any person or against public
order and security during a Board meeting or engages in any disorderly
conduct which disturbs or disrupts the orderly conduct of any meeting
shall be called to order by the presiding officer. If, after receiving a
warning from the presiding officer, a person persists in violating the
rules of decorum, the presiding officer may order that person to leave
the meeting. If said person does not remove himself or herself, the
presiding officer may order him or her removed from further audience
at the meeting, unless permission to continue is granted by the majority
vote of the Board members present. [Added 11-19-2015]
F. The Director of the Department of Public Safety or his designated
representative shall serve as Sergeant at Arms at Board meetings. The
Sergeant at Arms shall carry out all orders given by the presiding
officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the
meeting. [Added 11-19-2015]
§ 76-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-8
1:119
Chapter 78
TRAFFIC SAFETY BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 81.
§ 78-1. Legislative declaration.
The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown hereby finds and declares it to
be in the best interests of the citizens of the Town of Smithtown to create
and provide for the appointment of a Traffic Safety Board.
§ 78-2. Membership; terms; removal; vacancies.
The Board shall be known as the "Town of Smithtown Traffic Safety Board"
and shall consist of no more than thirteen (13) members, including two
(2) members of the Town Board. The remaining eleven (11) members shall
be appointed by the Town Board for terms not exceeding two (2) years.
Each of the thirteen (13) members shall have one (1) vote. The presiding
officer or Chairman of the Board shall be designated by the Town Board.
The Town Board shall have authority to remove any member of said Board
so appointed, for cause, after a public hearing if requested. A vacancy,
except with respect to either of the two (2) positions held by Town Board
members, shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment. A vacancy or vacancies in one (1) or both of the two
(2) positions occupied by Town Board members shall be filled for a term
constituting the unexpired balance of the term of the appointee.
§ 78-3. Powers and duties.
The Town of Smithtown Traffic Safety Board shall do the following:
A. Promote and encourage street and highway traffic safety.
B. Formulate town-wide highway safety programs and coordinate efforts
of interested parties and agencies engaged in traffic safety education.
C. Cooperate with county and state officials in the formulation and
execution of traffic safety programs and activities.
D. Study traffic conditions on streets and highways within the town, study
and analyze reports of accidents and causes thereof and recommend to
the Town Board such changes in rules, orders, regulations and existing
laws as the Board may deem advisable.
E. Conduct meetings within the town whenever and wherever the Board
shall deem it advisable and invite to such meetings parties and
§ 76-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 78-3
1:120
§ 78-4. Composition.
Members of the Board appointed pursuant to § 78-2 hereof shall be
residents of the Town of Smithtown, private citizens or public officials,
either elected or appointed, who are interested in promoting and
encouraging traffic safety. Experience in the following career fields is
desirable but not mandatory:
§ 78-5. Compensation.
The members of the Town of Smithtown Traffic Safety Board shall serve
without compensation. Subject to the provisions of Article 16-A of the
Executive Law of the State of New York, the Town Board may appropriate
funds to defray the costs and expenses of the activities of the Board in the
performance of its duties set forth hereinabove and accept and appropriate
for said purposes funds provided to the Town of Smithtown pursuant to the
provisions of the Federal Highway Safety Act of 1966.
Chapter 81
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Safety Board — See Ch. 78.
agencies, public and private, interested in traffic regulation control and
safety education.
F. Promote safety education for drivers and pedestrians.
G. Obtain and assemble motor vehicle acts and data and analyze, study
and consolidate such data for educational and informational purposes.
A. Engineering.
B. Education.
C. Law enforcement.
D. Emergency medical service.
E. Medicine.
F. Law.
G. Commerce.
H. High school student.
§ 78-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-1
1:121
§ 81-1. Purpose.
For the purpose of assisting the District Court of the County of Suffolk in
the disposition of offenses in relation to traffic violations, pursuant to the
provisions of Article 14-B, §§ 370, 371 and 372, of the General Municipal
Law, the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown is hereby authorized to
establish a Traffic Violations Bureau to hold hearings with regard to such
offenses and to have a hearing officer preside at such hearing.
§ 81-2. Authority of Town Board.
The Traffic Violations Bureau shall be in charge of such person or persons
and shall be open at such hours as the Town Board may designate. The Town
Board shall also be responsible for the administration of the Bureau, and
further, the District Court of the County of Suffolk is not responsible with
regard to the staffing or financing of such Bureau.
§ 81-3. Minor traffic violations.
The Traffic Violations Bureau so established is authorized to dispose of
violations of traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations when such
offenses shall not constitute any traffic infraction known as "speeding" or
"passing a stopped school bus" or a misdemeanor or felony.
§ 81-4. Payment of fines.
A person who has received a notice as provided in this chapter may, within
the time specified in said notice, answer at the Traffic Violations Bureau to
the charges set forth in such notice, either in person or by written power
of attorney, by paying a prescribed fine and, in writing, waiving a hearing
in Court, pleading guilty to the charges and giving a power of attorney to
the person in charge of the Bureau to make such a plea and to pay such a
fine in Court. Acceptance of the prescribed fine and power of attorney by
the Traffic Violations Bureau shall be deemed complete satisfaction for the
violation, and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states.
§ 81-5. Certain cases not to be handled by Bureau.
Any person having been guilty of three or more violations of the traffic laws,
ordinances, rules or regulations within the 12 preceding months shall not
be permitted to pay a fine at the Traffic Violations Bureau but must appear
in Court at a time specified by the Bureau.
§ 81-6. Powers and duties.
The duties of the Traffic Violations Bureau shall be as follows:
A. It shall accept designated fines, issue receipts and represent in Court
such violators as are permitted to plead guilty in accordance with this
chapter and who desire to so plead guilty, waive a court appearance and
give a power of attorney.
§ 81-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § 81-6
1:122
§ 81-7. Power of attorney.
The power of attorney referred to in § 81-4 hereof shall be in the following
form:
POWER OF ATTORNEY: The undersigned pleads guilty to the charge noted
hereon and enclose herewith the sum of $ ________ cash, check or money
order to pay the necessary fine. (Circle the one used.)
I hereby appoint the Clerk of the Smithtown Traffic Violations Bureau as
my attorney-in-fact to appear for me in said Bureau, to enter a plea of guilty
on my behalf and to pay the above fine to such Court if acceptable.
Make all checks payable to:
"SMITHTOWN TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU"
Signed
Print your name
Address
B. It shall keep an easily accessible record of all violations of which each
person has been guilty during the preceding 12 months, whether such
guilt was established in Court or in the Traffic Violations Bureau.
C. If a violator of the traffic laws, ordinances, rules or regulations does not
appear and answer in response to a notice as provided in this chapter,
the Traffic Violations Bureau shall send to the owner of the motor
vehicle to which the notice was affixed a letter warning him that he will
be held responsible for the appearance of the offender and that, in the
event that such letter is disregarded for a period of five days, a
complaint will be filed and a warrant of arrest issued.
D. In the event that any person fails to comply with a notice as provided in
this chapter or fails to make an appearance pursuant to a summons
directing an appearance in the Traffic Violations Bureau as provided by
this chapter, the Traffic Violations Bureau shall forthwith have a
complaint entered against such person and secure and issue a warrant
for his arrest. The Traffic Violations Bureau shall not accept any fines
for such person, but shall consider every such person entirely under the
jurisdiction of the Court.
E. The Traffic Violations Bureau shall keep records of all notices issued
and arrests made for violations of the traffic laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations and of all the fines collected by the Traffic Violations
Bureau and of the final disposition or present status of every case of
violation of the provisions of the traffic laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations. These reports shall be public records.
F. The Traffic Violations Bureau shall perform such other or additional
duties and keep such other and additional records as shall be
prescribed by the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown.
§ 81-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-8
1:123
§ 81-8. Right to counsel.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall authorize the Traffic Violations
Bureau to deprive a person of his right to counsel or to prevent him from
exercising his right to appear in Court to answer to, explain or defend any
charge of a violation of any traffic law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
§ 81-9. Fines to be paid to Bureau.
All fines collected upon conviction or plea of guilty of any person charged
with a violation of any traffic law, ordinance, rule or regulation shall be paid
to the Traffic Violations Bureau of the Town of Smithtown.
§ 81-10. Appeals. [Added 9-27-1994]
A. Authority.
(1) There shall be an Appeals Board within the Traffic Violations
Bureau which shall consist of three or more duly qualified hearing
examiners. The hearing examiner who hears and determines the
matter being appealed from shall not be a member of the particular
appeal panel as to that specific appeal, but may otherwise be a
member for other matters in which he or she did not preside and
make a determination.
(2) The Appeals Board may not consider evidence not presented to the
hearing examiner in the original hearing. The Appeals Board may
review the facts and the law in the matter appealed from on the
basis of error of fact or law. Otherwise, the Appeals Board must
affirm the determinations being appealed.
(3) Appeals may only be from final determinations after hearings made
on the record and ex parte hearings or denials of applications
(motions) to open a default judgment entered within six months.
(4) No appeal may be had where a plea of guilty or guilty with an
explanation was entered by the respondent.
B. Appeal procedure.
(1) A respondent aggrieved by the final determination of a hearing
examiner by the plea of not guilty or a decision of a hearing
examiner denying a motion to vacate a default judgment may
obtain an appeal by filing a notice of appeal along with a filing fee
of $75 (cash, certified check or money order only). The filing fee of
$75 for the appeal includes the cost of providing the respondent
with a transcript of the proceeding that is appealed.
(2) The notice of appeal must be in writing on a form obtained from the
Traffic Violations Bureau and filed personally with the officers of
the Traffic Violations Bureau during the ordinary business hours of
said Bureau within 30 calendar days of the entry date of the final
§ 81-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 81-10
1:124
determination(s) or decision(s). The notice of appeal may also be
filed within the same time period by mail, provided that it is mailed
by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed
to the Traffic Violations Bureau at its offices at 65 Maple Avenue,
Smithtown, New York 11787.
(3) Before the filing of a notice of appeal, the respondent shall have
either posted a cash or recognized surety company bond in the full
amount of the final determination(s) appealed from or have paid all
fines and penalties assessed by such determination(s).
(4) The notice of appeal must set forth the reasons why the final
determination(s) or denial of a motion to vacate a default judgment
should be reversed or modified.
(5) If the respondent wishes a transcript of the proceedings, he or she
must so indicate at the time of the filing of the notice of appeal.
Upon such request, the transcript of the proceedings will be
furnished to the respondent by mail within 30 calendar days of the
filing of the notice of appeal. If the respondent or his or her
attorney wishes to be present at the hearing on appeal, such
request to appear must be expressly noted on the notice of appeal
itself.
(6) Briefs shall not be required, but if the respondent or his or her
counsel wishes to file a brief, it must be indicated on the notice of
appeal. When the questions are presented on appeal can be
determined without an examination of all the pleadings and
proceedings, the respondent or counsel may prepare a written
statement showing how the questions arose and where decided by
the hearing examiner and set forth only so much of the facts
alleged to be proven or sought to be proven as are necessary to a
decision on the questions raised on appeal.
(7) Whether the filing is a brief or written statement, it must be filed in
triplicate with the Traffic Violations Bureau within 45 days of the
filing of the notice of appeal. The filing of a brief or statement must
be done either personally at the offices of the Parking Violations
Bureau or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested,
to the offices of said Bureau.
C. Scheduling and conduct of the appeal.
(1) When the respondent has requested to appear at the appeal
hearing, the Traffic Violations Bureau shall notify the respondent
and his or her counsel of the date, time and place where the appeal
shall be held. No appeal shall be conducted fewer than 45 days
after the filing of the notice of appeal. When no request has been
made by the respondent or counsel to be present at the appeal
hearing, no other notice shall be sent to the respondent or counsel.
§ 81-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-10
1:125
(2) The appeal shall be heard and determined only upon the record of
the hearing before the initial hearing examiner, the notice of appeal
itself, any written statement or brief filed by the respondent or
counsel and any oral argument, if so presented.
(3) All appeals shall be submitted without oral argument unless
specifically requested in writing at the time of the filing of the
notice of appeal by the respondent or counsel.
(4) The respondent and counsel shall be notified of the decision of the
Appeals Board in writing within 60 days of the hearing date.
(5) The determination of the Appeals Board shall be the final
determination within the Traffic Violations Bureau. Judicial review
may be sought pursuant to Article 78 of the New York State Civil
Practice Laws and Rules.
(6) Failure by any respondent to furnish or supply any relevant
material required by this section within the specified time allotted
shall be deemed an abandonment of such appeal and shall
automatically be dismissed by the hearing examiners, who shall
make a notation on the notice of appeal to that effect.
D. Appeals Board determination(s).
(1) The Appeals Board shall have the authority to either dismiss the
violation(s), uphold the original determination(s) or modify the
original determination(s) by reducing fines and/or penalties.
(2) In the event that the Appeals Board determines that the violation(s)
should be dismissed, then the respondent will:
(a) Be refunded the $75 notice of appeal filing fee, less $2.50 per
page for the cost of the transcript of the original hearing if
requested by the respondent; and
(b) Be refunded the fines and/or penalties paid for the violation(s)
appealed or, if the respondent posted a cash or recognized
surety company bond, the Traffic Violations Bureau will release
such bond back to the respondent.
(3) In the event that the Appeals Board determines that the violation(s)
should be modified, then the respondent will:
(a) Be refunded only the difference between the fines and/or
penalties paid for the violations appealed and the modified
determination made by the Appeals Board; and
(b) In the case where a cash or recognized surety company bond
was posted, then the respondent must first pay the modified
Appeals Board determination before the Traffic Violations
Bureau will release the bond back to the respondent.
§ 81-10 SMITHTOWN CODE § 81-10
1:126
Chapter 83
WORKPLACE VIOLENCE PREVENTION POLICY
Chapter 85
YOUTH BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Substance Abuse Prevention Council — See
Ch. 71.
§ 85-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the Town of Smithtown to create a Youth Bureau pursuant
to the Executive Law, Article 19-A, for the purpose of planning, coordinating
and supplementing the activities of public, private and religious agencies
devoted to the welfare, protection and development of persons under the
age of 21. The Town of Smithtown recognizes that the youth of Smithtown
deserve special attention and assistance in dealing with their needs.
Further, it is the intent of the Town of Smithtown to create a Youth Board to
advise the Town Supervisor on Youth Bureau policy.
§ 85-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR — The head of the Youth Bureau and the executive
secretary to the Youth Board.
YOUTH — Any person under 21 years of age.
YOUTH BOARD — The Town of Smithtown Citizen Youth Board, to advise.
YOUTH BUREAU — The Town of Smithtown Youth Bureau.
YOUTH PROGRAM — Any program designated to accomplish the objectives
of the Youth Bureau.
§ 85-3. Objectives and organization.
(c) In no event will the $75 filing fee be refunded if the original
determination(s) are modified. The respondent is only entitled
to a refund of the filing fee less the transcript costs if the
original determination(s) are dismissed.
A. Objectives. The Youth Bureau's powers and duties are to administer,
manage and provide for programs, projects and plans which promote
and advance the moral, physical, mental and social well-being of the
§ 81-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-3
1:127
§ 85-4. Advisory Youth Board.
youth in the Town of Smithtown, which will stimulate and encourage
community interest and participation in youth programs and which,
alone or in cooperation with programs and alone or in cooperation
with other persons, groups and municipalities, will foster and cultivate
a wholesome environment for the involvement of youth in meaningful
activities. The Youth Bureau shall be concerned with all youth, the
untroubled as well as youth in trouble. In order to define and resolve
existing problems of our youth and to prevent the development of new
problem situations, the Bureau shall pursue the following objectives:
(1) To conduct an ongoing program of research to determine the needs
of youth in the Town of Smithtown.
(2) To make an inventory of community resources capable of meeting
the needs of youth.
(3) To plan for and encourage the development of new services
considered essential for meeting the needs of youth or to endorse
modifications of current services.
(4) To grant financial aid to public and private agencies in order to
expand current services or to create new services for youth.
(5) To integrate and help coordinate the services of local, public and
private agencies working with the Town's youth.
(6) To maintain a continuous research program on social problems
affecting youth and new ways of meeting the needs created by
these problems.
B. Organization. The Youth Bureau shall operate within and shall be
subject to the rules and regulations promulgated by the Supervisor and
upon such conditions as to qualify for state aid under Article 19-A of the
Executive Law of the State of New York and any amendments thereto.
The Bureau shall be staffed by a full-time Executive Director and such
other personnel as shall be deemed necessary for accomplishing the
goals of the Youth Bureau. The Executive Director shall be responsible
to the Supervisor for the purpose of planning, coordinating and
supplementing the activities of public, private or religious agencies
devoted in whole or in part to the welfare and protection of youth.
A. The Youth Bureau shall have a Youth Board to advise the Supervisor on
matters of Youth Bureau policy. The Youth Board shall consist of
persons representing the fields of education, law enforcement, mental
hygiene, judiciary, welfare, business, recreation and youth
organizations, who shall be appointed by the Supervisor, with the
approval of the Town Board. The Youth Board, in fulfilling its obligations
to the Youth Bureau and the Supervisor, shall advise and assist
community groups devoted in whole or in part to youth and recommend
legislation. The Executive Director shall also be the executive secretary
§ 85-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 85-4
1:128
of the Youth Board. The executive secretary shall have no vote in the
official deliberations of the Youth Board, but shall administer to its
needs and requirements in the fulfillment of its obligations to the Youth
Bureau and the Supervisor.
B. Composition of the Youth Board.
(1) The Board shall consist of a minimum of 13 and a maximum of 28
adults and youth, who shall be appointed by the Supervisor of the
Town of Smithtown, subject to confirmation by the Town Board. In
addition, the Supervisor may appoint one or more ex officio
members.
(2) One member of the Board shall be designated as Chairperson for a
specified term, by the Supervisor, subject to confirmation by the
Town Board.
(3) Officers, other than the Chairperson, shall be elected from and by
the Board and confirmed by the Supervisor.
(4) Members of the Board shall not be considered Town employees for
any purpose whatsoever.
C. Terms of office.
(1) Each member of the Board shall be appointed for a term of three
years, except that of the members first appointed, five shall be
appointed for one year, five for two years and the remaining
members for three years.
(2) Ex officio members shall serve at the pleasure of the Supervisor.
D. Vacancies and removals.
(1) Any member of the Board appointed to fill a vacancy occurring
otherwise than by expiration of term shall be appointed for the
remainder of the unexpired term of the member whom he or she is
to succeed.
(2) The Supervisor and the Town Board may remove any member of
the Board for cause.
(3) If a member of the Board is absent from three consecutive
scheduled (not special) meetings and is not excused by the
Chairperson of the Board, the Board shall declare his or her
position vacant.
(4) Vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled by appointment by the
Supervisor, subject to confirmation by the Town Board.
E. Personnel. The Youth Board may recommend to the Supervisor and the
Town Board the employment of personnel, subject to the rules of civil
service, who shall be responsible to the Supervisor.
§ 85-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-4
1:129
F. Compensation.
(1) The Chairperson and all other members of the Board shall serve
without compensation.
(2) The Executive Director and such additional personnel as may be
authorized by the Town Board shall receive compensation within
appropriations established by the Town Board.
G. Meetings.
(1) The Youth Board shall meet monthly and at such additional times as
the Chairperson of the Board or a majority thereof may determine.
(2) One-third of the voting members shall constitute a quorum. A
majority of the quorum must approve any action of the Board. Each
voting member shall have one vote which must be cast in person.
Ex officio members shall have no vote.
H. Powers and duties of the Board. The Board shall have the following
powers and duties:
(1) To advise the Supervisor concerning Youth Bureau policy.
(2) To establish local youth boards, with the approval of the Supervisor,
to oversee youth programs in specific communities in the Town of
Smithtown.
(3) To develop and effect policies and programs with the approval of
the Supervisor, such as guidance, education, counseling,
community involvement and recreation, for the Youth Board and
any established local youth boards.
(4) To formulate and adopt rules and bylaws, with the approval of the
Supervisor, governing the activities of the Board and its
relationship to local youth boards.
(5) To supplement and aid in coordinating the activities of public,
private and religious agencies devoted in whole or in part to the
prevention of delinquency and youthful offenders and serve as a
consultant to such agencies.
(6) To encourage closer cooperation between all public and private
agencies and groups so as to stimulate employment for youth and
encourage sound youth programs.
(7) To cooperate with all public and private agencies and groups in
developing plans, programs and facilities designed to promote the
welfare of youth.
(8) To receive and expend grants, with the approval of the Supervisor,
from the state, federal or county governments or from private
individuals, corporations or associations and establish a reasonable
basis, with the approval of the Supervisor, for the allocation of
§ 85-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 85-4
1:130
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 94
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Substance Abuse Prevention Council — See
Ch. 71.
Beaches and parks — See Ch. 101.
Bingo — See Ch. 105.
Games of chance — See Ch. 173.
these funds to youth programs so as to serve most effectively the
objectives of this section.
(9) To approve or reject applications, with the approval of the
Supervisor, for federal, state and/or county financial assistance to
public and private agencies seeking to engage in the development
and expansion of recreation and youth service projects, as defined
by the laws of the State of New York and the regulations of the New
York State Division of Youth.
(10) To devise, analyze, accept or reject plans for the creation or
expansion of recreation and youth service projects or other youth
programs, all with the approval of the Supervisor, and make
appropriate recommendations to the Supervisor.
(11) To obtain, assemble and develop statistical records and data,
including those that reflect the incidence and trends of delinquency
and youthful crimes and offenses in the Town, with the help of the
Youth Bureau.
(12) To make necessary studies and recommendations with respect to
family affairs and problems, youth guidance, adult education,
recreation, rehabilitation of juvenile delinquents and parole,
institutional or other corrective treatment.
(13) To foster educational programs in connection with youth problems.
(14) To appoint such advisory groups and committees as may be
necessary to carry out its powers and duties.
(15) To keep minutes of all meetings.
(16) To submit an annual report to the Supervisor.
(17) To submit a proposed annual budget to the Supervisor.
(18) To perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Supervisor
and/or the Town Board.
§ 85-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-4
1:131
§ 94-1. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town Board of the Town
of Smithtown to protect the public interest, welfare, health and safety
within the Town of Smithtown by prohibiting the consumption of alcoholic
beverages in public places within the town. The Town Board finds that
possession of open or unsealed containers of alcoholic beverages in a public
place within the town has led to consumption of the same, resulting in
public intoxication, disorderly conduct, disturbance of the public peace,
littering of the public places, destruction of property and vandalism. The
Town Board finds, further, that preservation of the public welfare and
prevention of conditions which lead to conduct disturbing the public peace
attributable to consumption of alcoholic beverages can be accomplished
by the prohibition of the consumption of alcoholic beverages in public
places and by further prohibiting the possession of an open or unsealed
container of alcoholic beverages under circumstances which indicate that
the possessor of such open or unsealed container in a public place intends
to consume the same or intends to have it consumed by another person.
§ 94-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer,
cider and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits,
wine or beer and capable of being consumed by a human being.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle suitable for, or
used to hold, any liquid.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any highway, street, sidewalk, park, playground, parking
lot or town building in the town.
TOWN — The Town of Smithtown.
§ 94-3. Prohibited acts.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to:
§ 94-4. Open containers in vehicles.
An open bottle or open container containing liquor, beer or wine or any
alcoholic beverage in any vehicle shall be presumptive evidence that the
A. Consume any alcoholic beverage in any public place within the town.
B. Have in his possession an open or unsealed container of an alcoholic
beverage while in any public place, for the purpose of consuming such
alcoholic beverage by himself or by another in any public place.
§ 85-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 94-4
1:132
same is in the possession of all the occupants of the vehicle, in violation of
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 94-5. Exceptions.
The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to the consumption of an alcoholic
beverage or possession for the purpose of consumption in any public place
where the same is authorized by license or permit under the laws and
regulations of this state and under the regulations of the town; nor shall
such prohibition apply to the possession of an open or unsealed container
of an alcoholic beverage solely for the purpose of transporting the same
without an intent or indication to consume the same in any public place.
§ 94-6. Applicability of statute.
This chapter shall not apply to any person in violation of § 1227 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 94-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-9-1990 by L.L. No.
2-1990]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars
($100.) or by imprisonment in jail for ten (10) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, for the first offense and by a fine not exceeding two hundred
dollars ($200.) or by imprisonment for fifteen (15) days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment, for a second or subsequent offense.
Chapter 101
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS, BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS
§ 101-1. Use restricted.
A. Except as otherwise provided, only residents or taxpayers of the Town
of Smithtown may use the Town parks and beaches, the adjoining
parking fields, the boat loading and unloading ramps and other
facilities contained within or adjacent thereto. [Amended 7-27-2004]
B. No person shall be admitted to any park or beach who is under the age
of six years unless accompanied by an adult. The accompanying adult
shall assume full responsibility for the conduct and safety of such minor
by his or her entry into the park or beach.
C. No person shall use an electronic cigarette ("vape") or smoke or
possess a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe or other smoking instrument in
any Town park, beach, playground or facility; or in or within 50 feet of
any Town building. [Added 8-14-2012; amended 2-4-2020 by L.L.
No. 5-2020]
§ 94-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-2
1:133
§ 101-2. Buildings, structures and equipment.
No person in a park or beach shall:
§ 101-3. Soil and vegetation.
No person in a park or beach shall:
§ 101-4. Wildlife.
No person in a park or beach shall:
§ 101-5. Sanitation.
No person in a park or beach shall:
A. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, damage, displace or remove or
otherwise tamper with structures or equipment, facilities or property or
parts of appurtenances thereof, whether temporary or permanent.
B. Remove down timber or other wood or materials.
C. Construct or erect any structure, whether temporary or permanent, or
install any public service utility, without a written permit from the Town
Parks Supervisor.
A. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove or pick the flowers or seeds
or damage or remove the bark of any trees, plants or shrubs.
B. Climb upon or attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to or tie or
hitch any animal to any tree, plant or shrub.
C. Dig or remove any sod or soil.
A. Hunt or trap, or otherwise willfully kill, harm, frighten or molest or have
in his or her possession the nest, eggs or young of any mammal or bird.
B. Give or attempt to give or offer any tobacco, alcohol, drugs, or any other
noxious, offensive or poisonous substances to any animal, mammal or
bird.
A. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of the Long Island Sound or any fountain, pool or lake in or adjacent to
any park or beach or in any tributary, storm sewer or drain flowing into
such waters any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid.
B. Bring in or drop, deposit or leave any dirt, garbage or rubbish anywhere
on park or beach grounds, except in the proper receptacles where these
are provided.
C. Defecate or urinate in any location except in public or private rest
rooms and in designated toilets or urinals, nor shall anyone fail to leave
washrooms and rest rooms in a neat and sanitary condition after use.
[Amended 1-9-1990]
§ 101-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 101-6
1:134
§ 101-6. Traffic and parking.
No person in a park or beach shall:
§ 101-7. Bicycles; overflights.
A. Fail to comply with all of the applicable provisions of the Uniform
Traffic Code of the Town of Smithtown as it relates to the equipment
and operation of vehicles. [Amended 1-9-1990]
B. Fail to obey any Town employee who is hereby authorized and
instructed to direct traffic and parking in the parks and beaches and on
the highways, streets and roads immediately adjacent thereto under the
direction of the Town Parks Maintenance Director or Director of the
Department of Public Safety. [Amended 1-9-1990; 9-7-1993;
3-22-1994]
C. Fail to observe temporary or permanent traffic and parking signs and
other signs posted at the direction of the Town Parks Maintenance
Director, the Department of Public Safety or Traffic Safety Director.
[Amended 1-9-1990; 3-22-1994]
D. Fail to notify a Town employee of an emergency in the nature of a
breakdown requiring the assistance of a tow truck and/or mechanic.
E. Use an established or designated parking area or any other location to
wash, wax, perform maintenance or repair his or her or any other
vehicle, except emergency repairs.
F. Park overnight, except that overnight parking at Town beaches will be
permitted for vehicles of campers, boaters and fishermen with permits
issued by the Town Clerk or the Town Parks Maintenance Director and
displaying official Town parking permits or vehicles bearing Smithtown
Bay Yacht Club stickers. Overnight parking of vehicles by campers,
boaters or fishermen pursuant to this subsection shall only be
authorized while occupants of the vehicles are actively engaged in such
permitted activity. [Amended 6-28-2005]
G. Drive any vehicle on any area except a paved road or established
parking area or such other area as may be specifically designated by
the Town Parks and Beaches Supervisor.
A. Bicycles.
(1) Bicycles may be ridden only on paved roads or paths designated for
that purpose, in single file and as close to the right-hand side of the
paving as conditions permit.
(2) Bicycles may be walked or pushed by hand over any grassy area,
wooded trail, established or designated parking area or paved area
designated for pedestrian use.
§ 101-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-7
1:135
§ 101-8. Bathing and swimming; peace and good order.
(3) No person shall ride any other person on a bicycle nor ride a
bicycle between 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before
sunrise without an attached headlight visible at least 200 feet in
front of, and a red taillight or reflector visible at least 100 feet to
the rear of, such bicycle.
(4) No person shall leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack
when such is provided and there is a space available nor leave a
bicycle lying on the ground or in any other place or position where
other persons may collide with or be otherwise injured by it.
B. Overflights. Overflights of the parks, beaches, waters or waterways of
the Town of Smithtown by ultralight powered flight vehicles at an
altitude of less than 500 feet or by manned gliders, kites or other
unpowered flight vehicles at any altitude are prohibited.
A. Bathing and swimming. No person in a park or beach shall:
(1) Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to
any park or beach except in such places as are designated for such
purposes and in compliance with the provisions of the Code of the
Town of Smithtown and such supplementary regulations as may be
issued by the Town Parks Maintenance Director. [Amended
3-22-1994]
(2) Swim, bathe or wade in designated waters or waterways at hours of
the day other than those designated by the Town Parks
Maintenance Director or at times when such activity has been
prohibited by the Director upon his finding that such would be
dangerous or otherwise inadvisable. [Amended 3-22-1994]
(3) Use any type of water equipment or other floating object or form of
device that is prohibited by the Town Parks Maintenance Director
upon his finding that such would cause inconvenience, injury or
discomfort to bathers, except if such equipment is designed and
intended for the protection of life. [Amended 3-22-1994]
(4) Dress or undress on any beach or in any park, vehicle, washroom,
rest room, walkway, road or among shrubbery or trees or any place
open and subject to public view in any Town park or beach.
Dressing or undressing shall take place in bathing houses or
structures as may be specifically provided for that purpose.
[Amended 1-9-1990]
(5) Bring into or operate in or adjacent to any park or beach any boat,
raft or other watercraft or fish in any waters or waterways
designated for swimming, bathing or wading.
B. Peace and good order. [Amended 7-22-1986; 1-9-1990]
§ 101-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 101-8
1:136
§ 101-9. Firearms. [Amended 1-9-1990]
No person in a park or beach shall use, carry or possess firearms of any
description or kind or air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings, BB
guns or other forms of weapons or any kind of trapping devices potentially
dangerous to humans and wildlife; nor shall any person use, carry or
possess any instruments that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges;
nor shall any person shoot or propel any type of missile into parks or
beaches from areas beyond their boundaries.
§ 101-10. Fireworks.
No person in a park or beach shall bring in or have in his possession or
set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn any firecracker,
torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or explosive or flammable material or
any substance, compound, mixture or article that, in conjunction with any
other substance or compound, would be dangerous nor throw the same into
any park or beach from land or a highway or water or waterway adjacent
thereto.
§ 101-11. Games and sports.
No person shall take part in or about the playing of any games involving
thrown or otherwise propelled objects, except in areas set forth for that
purpose. The conduct of team sports, such as football or baseball, is
prohibited except on the fields or courts or other type of playing areas
provided therefor.
(1) Indecent exposure prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any female
person to appear on a public beach or park or walk or road or
among shrubbery or trees or any place open and subject to public
view in the Town's parks and/or beaches clothed or costumed in
such a manner that the portion of her breast below the top of the
areola is not covered with a fully opaque covering or in such
manner that her genitals, pubic area or buttocks are not covered
with a fully opaque covering. It shall be unlawful for any male
person to appear on a public beach or park or walk or road or
among shrubbery or trees or any place open and subject to public
view in the Town's parks and/or beaches clothed or costumed in
such a manner that his genitals, pubic area or buttocks are not
covered with a fully opaque covering.
(2) Excessive noise prohibited. No person shall, by the use of
apparatus such as radios, cassettes, tape players or similar soundproducing
devices or otherwise, cause loud, disturbing or excessive
noises at Town beaches and parks, and such devices shall not be
permitted to be used in areas designated at Town beaches as
"radio-free zones."
§ 101-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-12
1:137
§ 101-12. Horseback riding.
No person shall ride a horse, except on designated bridle paths and
provided that the animal shall be properly broken and restrained and ridden
with due care for the safety of other members of the public.
§ 101-13. Improper conduct.
No person in a park or beach shall:
A. Enter or remain therein while under the influence of intoxicating liquor
or nonprescribed controlled substances.
B. Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other areas.
C. Use loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent
language.
D. Engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the
peace.
E. Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance.
F. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any group of persons occupying
any area or participating in any activity under a permit.
G. Fail or refuse to produce a permit or identification when requested to
do so by any Town employee who desires to inspect the same for the
purpose of enforcing any ordinance or rule.
H. Hold any meeting, make a speech or address, exhibit any performance
or form any parade or procession in any park or beach without a permit
from the Town Parks Maintenance Director. [Amended 3-22-1994]
I. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private,
without a written permit from the Town Parks Maintenance Director.
[Amended 3-22-1994]
J. Bring a dog, except a guide dog, hearing dog or other dog actually used
to aid the disabled, or other domestic animal into any Town park at any
time nor to any Town beach during the period from April 1 to
September 30, except in designated areas, such as dog parks, where
dogs shall be permitted. [Amended 1-9-1990; 11-30-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
K. Bring to any Town park and beach any container, receptacle or bottle
comprised of glass or glassware.
L. By the use of apparatus such as radios, cassette tape players, bullhorns
or similar sound producing devices or otherwise, cause loud, disturbing
or excessive noise at Town beaches and parks. No such device shall be
permitted to be used in any area designated at any Town beach or park
as a "radio-free zone." [Added 7-22-1986; amended 1-9-1990]
§ 101-12 SMITHTOWN CODE § 101-14
1:138
§ 101-14. Alcoholic beverages. [Amended 3-22-1994]
No person shall bring alcoholic beverages into or drink alcoholic beverages
within the Town's parks or beaches, except that, under the regulations and
control of the Town Parks Maintenance Director:
§ 101-15. Picnic areas.
No person in a park or beach shall:
§ 101-16. Camping. [Amended 1-9-1990; 6-9-1992; 3-22-1994;
6-11-1996; 12-10-1996; 4-14-2009; 12-11-2012; 12-17-2019]
No camps of any description are to be maintained in any park or beach
without first filing an application and obtaining a permit from the Town
Parks Maintenance Director. Such permits may be granted on a first-comefirst-
serve basis as space limitations prove. The fee for said camping permit
shall be payable in advance at a rate of $35 per permit per day (maximum
10 persons per permit). Fees may be changed from time to time at the
discretion of the Town Board.
A. Sales of alcoholic beverages in individual servings and not in original
packages or bulk will be permitted at designated recreation centers or
refreshment stands where concession privileges have been granted.
B. Any person or groups of persons who have obtained a permit under
§ 101-18 may bring alcoholic beverages into parks or beaches for
consumption only by such person or members of such group and
consumption shall take place only in designated picnic areas.
C. The marina concession stand at Long Beach may sell alcoholic
beverages in their original packages or in bulk for consumption only on
the patrons' boats.
A. Picnic in a place other than those designated for that purpose by the
Town Parks Maintenance Director. [Amended 3-22-1994]
B. Reserve or attempt to reserve or prohibit the use by others of
fireplaces, tables or beaches. All facilities are on a first-come-first-serve
basis.
C. Exclude others from any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the
buildings or structures therein.
D. Retain the use of an area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the
park or beach is crowded.
E. Ignite or maintain a fire on any beach except in designated areas at
Short Beach, Landing Avenue Park, Callahan's Beach, Schubert Beach/
Park, Bill Richards Park, Hoyt Farm and Veterans Memorial Park, or in
other than a fireplace in any park, or leave a fire which has not been
completely extinguished. [Amended 12-10-1996]
§ 101-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-17
1:139
§ 101-17. Merchandising and commercial activities. [Amended
3-22-1994; 10-25-2012]
§ 101-18. Group permits. [Amended 3-22-1994; 6-11-1996;
12-10-1996]
A. No person in a park or beach shall:
(1) Display or offer for sale any article, nor shall he or she station or
place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or
display or any such article within a park or beach.
(2) Announce, advertise or otherwise call public attention in any way
to any article or service for sale or hire.
(3) Post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription without a
written permit from the Town Parks Maintenance Director.
(4) Use any park or beach property for commercial, business or
professional purposes involving the sale of any article or the
rendering of any service for a fee, except for those activities as may
be authorized and defined by the Town Board by license,
concession or permit.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any established
nonprofit group organized and operated exclusively for religious,
cultural or charitable purposes, if the solicitations are conducted
among the members or officers of the group and there is no
remuneration for taking such solicitations and with the expressed
written permission of the Town Parks Maintenance Director.
A. Groups of 11 or more persons must obtain a permit to use the parks and
beaches payable in accordance with the following schedule: [Amended
5-27-2003; 4-14-2009; 12-11-2012; 12-17-2019]
Number of People Fee
Town park facilities
11 to 50 $50
51 to 100 $100
101 to 200 $225
201 to 300 $325
301 to 400 $500
For each additional 100 thereafter $100
Long Beach facilities
Large pavilion
11 to 50 $125
51 to 100 $250
§ 101-17 SMITHTOWN CODE § 101-18
1:140
Number of People Fee
101 to 200 $350
Small pavilion (water view)
25 $100
Picnic areas - no pavilion
11 to 50 $100
51 to 100 $150
101 to 200 $250
201 to 300 $350
301 to 400 $500
Other Town beach facilities
11 to 50 $50
51 to 100 $100
101 to 200 $225
201 to 300 $325
301 to 400 $500
For each additional 100 thereafter $100
B. The application must be filed by an adult resident of the Town of
Smithtown with the Town Parks Maintenance Director, who will then
issue the permit, subject to the following conditions:
(1) The applicant must accept responsibility for the conduct of
members of the group and assume liability for any and all injuries
to persons or property arising from the acts of any members of the
group.
(2) The group's activities must be restricted to areas designated for
such purposes.
(3) The permit will specify the facility for which it was granted but
does not give the group exclusive use of the same.
(4) All automobiles used by members of the group must bear the
official Town parking permit or season permit. The fee for
nonresident parking at facilities designated by the Town Parks
Maintenance Director, on a per-vehicle basis, shall be $12 per
vehicle, per day, for Town park facilities and $12 per vehicle, per
day, for Town beach facilities. Fees may be changed from time to
time at the discretion of the Town Board. [Amended 4-14-2009;
12-11-2012]
§ 101-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-18
1:141
§ 101-19. Closing of parks and beaches.
§ 101-20. Parking permits; reissuance fee; fine.
(5) Town Parks Maintenance Director or his authorized representative
may require the surrender of permits issued under this section for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(6) Any and all permits for the use of Town parks and beaches may be
revoked at any time at the discretion and direction of the Town
Parks Maintenance Director.
(7) The permit shall expire 1/2 hour after sunset of the day for which it
was granted.
(8) Any person or group of persons wishing to bring alcoholic
beverages into parks or beaches for consumption therein shall
apply to the Town Parks Maintenance Director who shall issue a
permit which shall allow them to consume such beverages in
designated picnic areas only, subject to all the conditions of this
§ 101-18.
A. The Town Parks Maintenance Director may close any section or part of
any park or beach entirely or merely to certain uses, for any interval of
time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals. [Amended
3-22-1994]
B. No person shall enter or remain in any park or beach more than 1/2
hour after sunset. No person shall park any motor vehicle at any park or
beach more than 1/2 hour after sunset, except as provided in § 101-6F.
A. No person shall park any motor vehicle at any time in the parking fields
adjoining the Town parks and beaches or elsewhere within the confines
of said parks and beaches, unless the vehicle bears a sticker duly issued
by the Town Clerk or the parking of the vehicle at such locations is
otherwise authorized. Residents or taxpayers of the Town of Smithtown
may obtain such stickers from the Town Clerk, or such Town employee
as he or she may designate, for all motor vehicles owned by the resident
or taxpayer or provided by his or her employer. Each sticker shall be
permanently affixed to the window of the motor vehicle for which it was
issued. Stickers lost or defaced may be reissued upon surrender of the
permit registration. All such stickers will only be deemed valid during
the time period designated on the face thereof. [Amended 7-27-2004]
B. Residents or taxpayers who do not own a motor vehicle or have
possession of one provided by his or her employer shall be issued a
parking permit card by the Town Clerk. This card will enable the motor
vehicle of which the holder is an occupant to park in the parking fields
adjoining the Town beaches or elsewhere within the confines of said
beaches. This card shall be nontransferable and must be signed at the
time it is issued by the holder in order to be validated.
§ 101-18 SMITHTOWN CODE § 101-20
1:142
§ 101-21. Guests.
Any resident or taxpayer of the Town of Smithtown shall be allowed, as his
or her guests, the occupants of any motor vehicle in which he is a passenger
and for which he holds a parking sticker or card. No fee shall be required
for any such guest.
§ 101-22. Season permits; fee.
The Town Clerk may, on affidavit of a sponsor who is the owner of a cottage
or the proprietor of a boardinghouse within the Town of Smithtown, whose
name shall be noted thereon, issue a season permit to any nonresident who
has rented a cottage or is boarding within the Town for a period of more
than one week. Such permit shall permit the nonresident to park his or her
motor vehicle in the parking fields adjoining the Town parks or beaches.
This permit shall be nontransferable and must be signed by the holder at
the time it is issued in order to be validated. The fee for this season permit
shall be $5 for each two-week period, shall be issued for a definite period of
time and shall bear an expiration date. The Town Clerk shall have the names
of sponsors, and permits must be surrendered to the Town Clerk at the end
of the two-week period.
§ 101-23. Indemnification from loss or injury.
§ 101-24. Nature preserves.
C. Any person, who is not a resident or taxpayer of the Town of Smithtown,
displaying a parking sticker or any resident or taxpayer who obtains
more than one parking sticker per motor vehicle without surrendering
his or her permit registration for reissue due to loss or defacement shall
be subject to a fine of $50. [Amended 1-9-1990]
D. Any person, who is not a resident or taxpayer of the Town of Smithtown,
who holds a parking permit card or any resident or taxpayer who holds
more than one parking permit card shall be subject to a fine of $50.
[Amended 1-9-1990]
A. The Town of Smithtown shall not be responsible in any manner for the
damage or theft of any personal articles from any location on parks and
beaches or the damage or theft of any motor vehicle while upon any of
the parks or beaches or adjacent roadways.
B. The Town of Smithtown shall not be responsible for any injuries as a
result of the use of the Town parks and beaches, which is an assumption
of the risk by the user.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown may dedicate portions of
parks and beaches or other land owned by the Town to a nature
preserve for the purpose of preserving and protecting scenic values,
unique flora or fauna, geological formations or other natural features,
which land shall not thereafter be disposed of or used for any other
§ 101-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-24
1:143
§ 101-25. Removal of beach grass.
purpose. If the title to land has been acquired by the Town of Smithtown
through philanthropy, however, donors shall have the right to designate
into which of the classification areas hereinafter set forth the land will
be placed.
B. Land endowed to the Town for purposes of protection, maintenance or
development and conservation or scenic easements may also be
included in nature preserves.
C. The following classification areas may be included in a nature preserve:
(1) Fragile areas:
(a) Shall not have paths, buildings or other man-made uses
constructed thereon but may have limited parking facilities.
(b) May be used only by organized groups, by appointment only, to
pursue educational and scientific activities.
(2) Conservation areas:
(a) May have nature centers, trails for the independent study of
native plants and wildlife, buildings for interpretive classes
and full parking facilities.
(b) May be used by the general public for educational and cultural
purposes.
(3) Buffer areas:
(a) Shall be located between differing classification areas or
between any classification area and active recreation areas of
parks and beaches or existing zoned land and shall be left in
their natural state.
(b) May not be used by any person for any purpose other than
ingress and egress to or from other areas or lands, through
designated corridors.
D. All other sections of this chapter applying to the use of Town parks and
beaches shall apply to the use of nature preserves, except where the
provisions of this section are more restrictive.
A. In view of the danger of erosion caused thereby, no person shall move,
remove or destroy any grass or natural growth of vegetation
whatsoever from any lands in the Town of Smithtown on the beaches,
dunes and cliffs adjacent to the Long Island Sound, except as herein
provided. This prohibition shall apply to an owner of the whole or of any
interest in said lands, to any lessee, tenant or occupant thereof and to
any person whatsoever, whether or not legally or illegally upon said
lands.
§ 101-24 SMITHTOWN CODE § 101-25
1:144
§ 101-26. Hoyt Farm educational program fees. [Added 12-11-1984]
Payment of the following fees shall be required for purposes of gaining
admission to the educational programs offered at Hoyt Farm:
B. Application for permit. [Amended 5-8-2007]
(1) The Building Director of the Town of Smithtown is hereby
authorized and empowered to issue a written permit for the taking,
destroying, moving, transplanting or replanting of beach grass or
natural vegetation in the beach areas, subject to any rules and
regulations adopted by the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown,
if the issuance of the permit will not cause or contribute to the
erosion of said lands.
(2) An applicant for a permit shall file with the Building Director of the
Town of Smithtown a verified application, in duplicate, for such
permit. The application shall set forth:
(a) The name of the applicant.
(b) His or her interest in the area concerned.
(c) If the applicant is not the owner, his or her right or authority to
do the work under the permit.
(d) A description of the area concerned.
(e) The reason for the application.
(f) If the area concerned is to be improved with a structure, an
agreement to replant the adjacent area, or, if the area
concerned is not to be improved, an agreement to replant the
area from which the beach grass or vegetation is removed.
(g) The time within which the work under the permit will be
commenced and completed.
(h) An agreement to comply with the requirements of the Building
Director of the Town of Smithtown and any rules and
regulations adopted by the Town of Smithtown pursuant
hereto.
A. Group rates:
(1) Residents: $1 per person or $20 flat fee for a group of 20 to 35.
(2) Nonresidents: $1.25 per person or $30 flat fee for a group of 20 to
35.
(3) Groups in excess of 35 shall pay a fee as above stated, plus $1 for
each additional person.
§ 101-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-27
1:145
§ 101-27. Recreational field permits. [Added 4-14-200914]
No association, organization, or group of 15 or more persons shall make
use of or attempt to make use of any Town recreational field without first
filing a written application and obtaining a recreational field permit from
the Town Recreation Department, together with payment of any charge or
fee as may be fixed by resolution of the Town Board. Town recreational
fields shall include any Town-operated field utilized for baseball, softball,
soccer, football, lacrosse or other similar athletic activity.
§ 101-28. Town Board authorized to modify fees. [Added 4-14-2009]
The Town Board may modify, from time to time, any charge or fee set forth
under this chapter by Town Board resolution.
§ 101-29. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-9-1990; 7-14-1992]
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of any ordinance of the Town of Smithtown shall be guilty of an offense
punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both. However, for the purposes
of confirming jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers, such violations
shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor, and for such purposes only all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm, association or corporation
violating any provisions of any ordinance of the Town of Smithtown shall be
subject to a penalty in a sum not exceeding $250 for the first such violation
or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days; and up to and not exceeding
$1,000 for any subsequent violations. In addition to such fine, the defendant
shall pay all costs and expenses incurred by the Town in determining such
violation. The foregoing shall be in addition to all other remedies available
under law to the Town or the Town Board.
Chapter 105
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Entertainment regulations — See Ch. 148. Games of chance — See Ch. 173.
§ 105-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Bingo Licensing
Ordinance."
14.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 101-27 as § 101-29.
§ 101-27 SMITHTOWN CODE § 105-2
1:146
§ 105-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words used herein are defined as
follows:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — Includes only bona fide religious,
charitable or nonprofit organizations of veterans, volunteer firemen and
similar nonprofit organizations.
BINGO OR GAME — Includes a specific game of chance, commonly known
as "bingo" or "lotto," in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated
numbers or symbols on a card conforming to numbers or symbols selected
at random.
CONTROL COMMISSION — The State Lottery Control Commission.
LICENSE — A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
TOWN — The Town of Smithtown.
§ 105-3. License required. [Amended 7-23-1963]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, corporation or
organization, other than an authorized organization licensed under the
provisions of this chapter to conduct the game of bingo within the territorial
limits of the Town of Smithtown. Any authorized organization licensed
under this chapter shall conduct any such game subject to the provisions of
this chapter, the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law of
the State of New York and the provisions of the State Lottery Control Law.
§ 105-4. General restrictions. [Amended 7-23-1963]
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization, other than a
licensee under the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal
Law, shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available
for conducting bingo a hall or other premises for any consideration
whatsoever, direct or indirect.
B. No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any
leased premises if the rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or
partly, on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived
from the operation of such game.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article
14-H of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any
supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the
conduct of bingo games from other than a supplier licensed under the
Bingo Control Law or from another authorized organization.
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
§ 105-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-4
1:147
§ 105-5. Application for license.
§ 105-6. Investigation; fees; duration of license. [Amended
7-23-1963]
The Town Board shall make an investigation of the qualifications of each
applicant and the merits of each application with due expedition after the
filing of the application, and if it shall determine that the applicant is duly
qualified to be licensed to hold, operate and conduct games of chance under
the provisions of this chapter, Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law
and the rules and regulations governing the holding, operation and conduct
of the Control Commission; that the member or members of the applicant
designated in the application to hold, operate or conduct the games of
chance, to hold, operate and conduct which the license was applied for,
are bona fide active members of the applicant and are persons of good
moral character and have never been convicted of crimes; that such games
of chance are to be held, operated and conducted in accordance with the
E. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.) in any single game of bingo.
F. No series of prizes on any one (1) bingo occasion shall aggregate more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.).
G. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall
participate in the management or operation of such game.
H. No person shall receive any remuneration participating in the
management or operation of any game of bingo.
I. The unauthorized conduct of bingo game and any willful violation of any
provision of this chapter shall constitute and be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
A. Each applicant for a license shall file with the Town Clerk a written
application therefor in the form prescribed in the rules and regulations
of the control commission, duly executed and verified containing the
statements required by § 480 of the General Municipal Law.
B. In the event that any premises upon which any such game of chance is
to be held, operated or conducted or which is to be used for any other
purpose in connection with the holding, operating or conducting
thereof is to be leased from any person, persons or corporation, a
written statement shall accompany the application, signed and verified
under oath by such person or persons or executed and verified under
oath on behalf of such corporation, stating his or its address and the
amount of rent which will be paid for such premises and that such
lessor or lessors, or if a corporation all of its officers and each of its
stockholders who holds ten percent (10%) or more of its stock issued
and outstanding, are of good moral character and have not been
convicted of a crime.
§ 105-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 105-6
1:148
provisions of this chapter, Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and in
accordance with the rules and regulations governing the holding, operation
and conduct thereof; and that the proceeds thereof are to be disposed of
as provided by this chapter, and if the Town Board is satisfied that no
commissions, salary, compensation, reward or recompense whatever will be
paid or given to any person holding, operating or conducting or assisting in
the holding, operation and conduct of any such games of chance, except as
in this chapter and other applicable laws otherwise provided, and that no
prize will be offered and given in excess of the sum or value of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.) in any single game of chance and that the aggregate of
all prizes offered and given in all of such games of chance, held, operated
and conducted on a single occasion under said license shall not exceed the
sum or value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.), it shall issue a license to
the applicant for the holding, operation and conduct of the specific kinds
of games of chance applied for, accordingly, upon payment of a license fee
or fees of ten dollars ($10.) for each occasion upon which any games of
chance are to be conducted under such license. No license for the holding,
operation and conduct of any game or games of chance shall be issued
which shall be effective for a period of more than one (1) year.
§ 105-7. Hearing; amendment of license.
§ 105-8. Form, content and display of license.
Each license shall be in such form as shall be prescribed in the rules
and regulations promulgated by the Control Commission containing the
statement required by § 483 of the General Municipal Law. Each license
issued for the conduct of any game or games of chance shall be
A. The applicant shall furnish the Town Clerk with a full set of fingerprints.
[Added 7-10-1979]
B. The Town Clerk shall be authorized to forward the applicant's
fingerprints to the Division of Criminal Justice Services for a criminal
background investigation. [Added 7-10-1979]
C. The applicant shall be charged a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.) for a full
search and return from the Division of Criminal Justice Services, said
fee to be made payable to the Town Clerk of the Town of Smithtown.
[Added 7-10-1979]
A. No application for the issuance of a license shall be denied by the Town
Board until after a hearing, held on due notice to the applicant, at which
the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the qualifications of the
applicant and the merits of the application.
B. Any license issued may be amended, upon application made to the Town
Board, if the subject matter of the proposed amendment could lawfully
and properly have been included in the original license and upon
payment of such additional license fee, if any, as would have been
payable if it had been so included.
§ 105-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-8
1:149
conspicuously displayed at the place where the same are to be conducted at
all times during the conduct thereof.
§ 105-9. Control and supervision; suspension of license; inspection
of premises. [Amended 7-23-1963]
The Town Board shall have and exercise control and supervision over all
games of chance held, operated or conducted under such license, to the
end that the same are fairly held, operated and conducted in accordance
with the provisions of such license, the rules and regulations promulgated
by the Control Commission and the provisions of Article 14-H of the General
Municipal Law governing the holding, operation and conduct of the same,
and the Town Board shall have the power and the authority to suspend
any license issued by it and to revoke the same, after notice and hearing,
for violation of any such provision and shall have the right of entry, by
its respective officers and agents, at all times into any premises where
any such game of chance is being held, operated and conducted or where
it is intended that any such game of chance shall be held, operated and
conducted or where any equipment being used or intended to be used in the
conduct thereof is found, for the purpose of inspecting the same.
§ 105-10. Sunday games. [Amended 7-11-1972]
Games of bingo conducted under any license under this chapter shall be
permitted on Sundays after 1:00 p.m.
§ 105-11. Frequency of games; alcoholic beverages.
No game or games of chance shall be held, operated or conducted under
any license issued under this chapter oftener than on six (6) days in any
one (1) calendar month or in any room or outdoor area where alcoholic
beverages are sold or served during the progress of the game or games.
§ 105-12. Statement of receipts and expenses.
Within fifteen (15) days after the conclusion of the holding, operating and
conducting of any such game of chance, the authorized organization which
held, operated or conducted the same, and its members who were in charge
thereof, shall furnish to the Town Clerk a duly verified statement showing
the amount of the gross receipts derived from each game of chance, which
shall include receipts from the sale of shares, tickets or rights in any
manner connected with participation in said game or the right to participate
therein, each item of expense incurred or paid and each item of expenditure
made or to be made, the name and address of each person to whom each
such item has been paid or is to be paid, with a detailed description of
the merchandise purchased or the services rendered therefor, the net profit
derived from each such game of chance and the use to which such net profit
has been or is to be applied and a list of prizes offered and given, with the
respective value thereof, and it shall be the duty of such licensee to maintain
§ 105-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 105-12
1:150
and keep such books and records as may be necessary to substantiate the
particulars of each such report.
§ 105-13. Examination of records; examination of managers;
disclosure of information.
The Town Board shall have power to examine or cause to be examined
the books and records of any authorized organization to which any such
license is issued, so far as they may relate to any transactions of any
game of chance thereunder, and to examine any manager, officer, director,
agent, member or employee thereof under oath in relation to the conduct
of any such game of chance under any such license, but any information so
received shall not be disclosed except so far as may be necessary for the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter and the applicable
law.
§ 105-14. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-10-1969]
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of the Bingo Ordinance of the Town of Smithtown shall be guilty of a Class
A misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.) and imprisonment for a period not exceeding one (1) year for each
such offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 108
BOAT BASIN AND MOORING AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Environment and
Waterways — See Ch. 27.
Beaches and parks — See Ch. 101.
Shellfish — See Ch. 233.
Abandoned vessels — See Ch. 303.
Water districts — See Ch. 312.
Waterways — See Ch. 318.
§ 108-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Long Beach Boat
Basin, Long Beach Mooring Areas and Nissequogue River Mooring Areas
Ordinance of the Town of Smithtown."
§ 108-2. Designation of mooring spaces. [Amended 12-20-1984;
6-22-2004; 10-25-2011]
Mooring spaces of various sizes shall be designated and assigned by the
Director of the Department of Public Safety and his or her designees within
the areas designated at Long Beach and the Nissequogue River.
§ 105-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-3
1:151
§ 108-3. Permits required. [Amended 3-8-1988; 10-25-2011]
§ 108-4. Permit requirements; additional requirements; application.
[Amended 3-8-1988; 2-21-1989; 7-14-1992; 10-25-2011]
§ 108-5. and § 108-6. (Reserved)15
§ 108-7. Mooring permit fees. [Amended 12-20-1984; 12-2-1986;
3-8-1988; 12-4-1990; 10-22-2002; 10-30-2008; 11-6-2018]
Mooring permit fees shall be $185 per year.
§ 108-8. Mooring requirements. [Amended 12-20-1984]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to make use of the following without
first having obtained the appropriate permit from the Town Clerk.
Permits will be granted only to residents and/or taxpayers of the Town
of Smithtown. Parties may contract and possess a mooring or a boat
berth but not both simultaneously.
(1) Mooring space.
(2) Boat berth.
(3) Boat ramp.
(a) Trailered boats.
(b) Cartop boats.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to make use of a winter wet storage
space without first having obtained the appropriate permit.
A. An applicant for a permit as required in § 108-3A(1), (2) and (3) shall file
a written application with the Town Clerk, signed by the individual
applicant, and an affidavit stating that he or she has read and
understands and agrees to comply with this chapter and the rules
promulgated by the Town of Smithtown Town Clerk.
B. The Town Clerk shall have the power and authority to adopt and from
time to time amend reasonable rules and regulations consistent with
this chapter.
C. Failure of any person to comply with this chapter or any rule or
regulation adopted hereunder shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
15.Editor’s Note: Former §§ 108-5, Issuance of mooring permits; assignment of spaces; term
of permit; removal of equipment, and 108-6, Transferability of mooring permits, as
amended, were repealed 10-25-2011.
§ 108-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 108-8
1:152
A. All moorings in the Long Beach mooring area shall utilize mushroom
anchors having a minimum weight in accordance with the following
table: [Amended 3-8-1988]
Length of Vessel
Overall
(feet)
Minimum Weight of Anchor
(pounds)
0 to 16 100
17 to 20 125 to 150
21 to 25 150
26 to 30 200
31 to 35 250
Over 35 300
B. All moorings in the Nissequogue River shall utilize mushroom anchors
having a minimum weight in accordance with the following table:
[Amended 3-8-1988]
Length of Vessel
Overall
(feet)
Minimum Weight of Anchor
(pounds)
0 to 16 100
17 to 20 125 to 150
21 to 25 200
26 to 30 250
31 to 35 300
Over 35 350
C. All moorings shall have a maximum scope in accordance with the
following table:
Length of
Vessel Overall Chain*
Pennant**
(Manila)
(feet) (feet) (inches) (feet) (inches)
Under 20 30 1/4 6 5/8
20 to 30 30 5/16 10 1
Over 30 35 3/8 10 1 1/4
NOTES:
*The foregoing scope requirements are based on an approximate depth
of mean low water of three to 10 feet. For moorings in deeper water,
add an additional five feet of chain for each additional foot increase in
the depth of the water.
§ 108-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-8
1:153
§ 108-9. through § 108-13. (Reserved)16
§ 108-14. Boat berth permit fees. [Amended 5-22-1984; 12-2-1986;
3-8-1988; 12-4-1990; 10-22-2002; 10-30-2008; 11-6-2018]
§ 108-15. (Reserved)17
§ 108-16. Temporary mooring. [Amended 10-25-2011]
Pleasure boats may tie up to the dock, subject to direction of the dock
attendant placed in charge by the Director of the Department of Public
Safety and his or her designees, for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or supplies for a period not to exceed 10 minutes.
§ 108-17. Vacant berths/moorings. [Amended 12-20-1984; 3-8-1988;
2-21-1989; 7-14-1992; 10-25-2011]
**Equivalent sizes of nylon or stainless steel wire may be used. If
manila or nylon, adequate chafing gear must be used. Manila pennants
shall be replaced every year.
D. No mooring shall be so located that a vessel when tied thereto may
endanger or interfere with a vessel attached to any previously placed
moorings.
A. The permit fee for a boat berth shall be a minimum fee of $1,200 or $60
per linear foot, whichever is greater.
B. In addition to the permit fee, the following fees for the use of electricity
shall apply:
(1) The fee for the use of a twenty-amp twist lock shall be $200 for the
season.
(2) The fee for the use of a thirty-amp twist lock shall be $300 for the
season.
(3) The fee for the use of a fifty-amp twist lock single/fifty-amp twist
lock with twin 30 amps shall be $500 for the season.
(4) The fee for the use of a fifty-amp twist lock adapter to a single
thirty-amp twist lock shall be $300 for the season. [Added
12-11-2018]
A. The permittee shall notify the Director of the Department of Public
Safety and his or her designees at least seven days prior to leaving a
16.Editor’s Note: Former §§ 108-9, Boat berth permit required; additional rules, 108-10,
Application for boat berth permit; holding fee, 108-11, Issuance of boat berth permit;
term of permit, 108-12, Boat berth permit renewals, and 108-13, Transferability of boat
berth permits, as amended, were repealed 10-25-2011.
17.Editor’s Note: Former § 108-15, Berthing requirements, was repealed 10-25-2011.
§ 108-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 108-17
1:154
§ 108-18. Transient rentals; fees; procedure. [Amended 3-8-1988]
berth or mooring vacant if the vacancy is to last for a period of four
days or more.
B. Failure to use an assigned berth or mooring for a total of 30 days during
the entire permit period without the prior approval of the Director of
the Department of Public Safety and his or her designees will result in
termination of the permit.
C. Subject to availability, moored boats may utilize open boat slips
between the dates of October 15 and December 15 for a fee of $150.
[Added 11-6-2018]
A. A "transient boater" is defined as a boater who operates a vessel that is
not registered to a party residing in the Town of Smithtown or who has
not contracted to utilize a berth at the Town Marina.
B. A transient boater who is a resident of the Town of Smithtown shall pay
a rental fee of $10 per day from the Tuesday immediately after Labor
Day through the Thursday immediately before Memorial Day and $1.10
per linear foot per day from the Friday immediately before Memorial
Day through Labor Day. Nonresident transients shall pay a rental fee of
$35 per day from the Tuesday immediately after Labor Day through the
Thursday immediately before Memorial Day of the following year and
$2.25 per linear foot per day from the Friday immediately before
Memorial Day through Labor Day. [Amended 10-22-2002;
3-25-2003; 5-10-2005; 10-30-2008]
C. The Director of the Department of Public Safety and his or her
designees shall keep and post at the Town Marina a transient boater list
for the purpose of selecting and regulating the rental of transient
berths. Transient boaters wishing to rent such a berth shall register
with the Director of the Department of Public Safety and his or her
designees, providing requested dates, if applicable. Subject to
considerations of the size of the vessel and available berth, the boater
who registers prior in time is prior in right to the rental of a berth than
succeeding registrants. [Amended 10-25-2011]
D. Before a transient boater is permitted to lease a vacant berth, he or she
shall produce proof of general liability insurance in the minimum
amount of $300,000. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
prohibit the renting of a transient berth more than once in a season by
the same boater, provided that said boater registers with the Director of
the Department of Public Safety and his or her designees. Registering is
not permitted until a transient boater actually surrenders possession of
a transient berth at the end of the rental period. [Amended
6-22-2004; 10-25-2011]
E. Transient rental fees shall be payable to and be the property of the
Town of Smithtown and shall be paid directly to the Department of
§ 108-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-18
1:155
§ 108-19. Winter wet storage. [Added 8-8-1989; amended
7-14-1992; 9-7-1993; 10-25-2011]
The Town Board, in recognition of a public need and in order to put the
Town Marina facilities to more efficient use, has authorized winter wet
occupancy of the Town Marina by resident and nonresident boat owners,
subject to availability and the feasibility of the same as determined by the
Department of Public Safety Division of Waterways and Navigation.
§ 108-20. through § 108-22. (Reserved)18
§ 108-23. Winter wet storage permit fee. [Added 8-8-1989; amended
11-6-2018]
The winter wet storage permit fee shall be calculated at the rate of $15 per
linear foot of the vessel to be stored. Said fee is subject to change annually
at the direction of the Town Board.
§ 108-24. Responsibility for damage to stored vessels. [Added
8-8-1989]
Boat owners who store their vessels in the Town of Smithtown Marina do so
at their risk. The Town of Smithtown shall not be responsible for damage to
vessels in the Marina, whether by fire, storm, vandalism or any other cause.
§ 108-25. through § 108-29. (Reserved)19
§ 108-30. Boat ramp permit fees. [Added 12-20-1984; amended
5-24-1988; 3-26-1991]
Public Safety Division of Waterways and Navigation. All transient rental
fees shall be paid in full prior to the use of the vacant berth and are
nonrefundable. [Amended 7-14-1992; 9-7-1993; 10-25-2011]
F. Before a transient boater is permitted to dock his or her vessel, he or
she shall produce valid vessel registration, proof of general liability
insurance covering property damage and personal injury in the
minimum amount of $300,000. [Added 6-22-2004; amended
10-25-2011]
A. The boat ramp permit fee shall be $45 per year for trailered boats and
$7 per year for cartop boats. [Amended 10-22-2002; 10-30-2008]
18.Editor’s Note: Former §§ 108-20, Winter wet storage permits, 108-21, Application for
winter wet storage, and 108-22, Issuance of wet storage permit; transient fee, added
8-8-1989, as amended, were repealed 10-25-2011.
19.Editor’s Note: Former §§ 108-25, Boat ramp permits required, added 12-20-1984, as
amended; 108-26, Application for boat ramp permits for trailered boats, added
12-20-1984, as amended; and 108-27, Application for boat ramp permit for cartop boats,
added 5-24-1988, as amended, were repealed 10-25-2011. Former § 108-28, Commercial
canoe livery permits; fees, added 5-24-1988, as amended, was repealed 4-12-2005. Former
§ 108-29, Transferability of boat ramp permits, added 12-20-1984, as amended, was
repealed 10-25-2011.
§ 108-18 SMITHTOWN CODE § 108-30
1:156
§ 108-31. Abandoned vessels. [Amended 3-8-1988]
§ 108-32. Responsibility for damage. [Amended 3-8-1988]
B. Any person who has obtained a mooring permit pursuant to § 108-4
shall receive, without additional fee, one boat ramp permit for cartop
boats as specified in § 108-27 for the use of a dinghy associated with
said mooring permit.
A. Any vessel which remains unmoved for a period of at least one day in
the same location at any Town mooring space, boat berth, public dock
or any shoreline in the Town of Smithtown, within the jurisdiction of the
Town of Smithtown or in the waters located in the Town of Smithtown,
without a mooring permit or boat berth permit or temporary lease from
the Town of Smithtown for the use of that space shall be deemed to be
an abandoned vessel and may be taken into custody and disposed of by
public sale in the same manner as set forth for abandoned vehicles in
Chapter 6, §§ 6-1, 6-2 and 6-3, of the Uniform Traffic Code of the Town
of Smithtown.
B. The Town of Smithtown is hereby empowered to utilize any space in the
mooring area or boat berths for the purpose of placing damaged,
abandoned, disabled or impounded vessels. [Amended 2-21-1989;
7-14-1992]
C. Any vessel duly deemed abandoned may be impounded prior to disposal
as stated in Subsection A of this section. The fee for impounded vessels
shall be $100 for impoundment, plus a storage fee of $10 per day. All
charges are the responsibility of the registered owner of the impounded
vessels and are payable to the Town of Smithtown.
D. Any unauthorized vessels docked or moored in any waterway under the
jurisdiction of the Town of Smithtown are subject to fine and/or
impoundment. [Added 6-22-2004]
A. Boat owners who berth or moor vessels in the Town of Smithtown do so
at their own risk. The Town of Smithtown shall not be responsible for
damage to vessels in the Town of Smithtown whether by fire, storm,
vandalism or any other cause.
B. Boat owners who berth or moor vessels in the Town of Smithtown
Marina or mooring area must, prior to obtaining permits for same,
secure general liability insurance covering property damage and
personal injury in the minimum amount of $300,000. The permittee
shall submit suitable evidence of such insurance prior to the initial use
of the berth assigned and annually thereafter and upon demand by the
Town of Smithtown. [Amended 6-22-2004]
C. No modification or alteration of any kind shall be made to a berth or
mooring by persons assigned same without the specific prior written
§ 108-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-32
1:157
§ 108-33. Swimming and fishing restricted.
Swimming, fishing or the taking of crabs or other seafood from the docks or
boats at the boat basin or in the waters of the boat basin is prohibited.
§ 108-34. Sanitary and safety requirements. [Amended 2-21-1989]
§ 108-35. Vending restricted.
The vending of goods, wares and merchandise or any other commercial
activity in or about the boat basin and Long Beach mooring area and
along the Nissequogue River is prohibited, except that concessions for the
vending of gasoline, food and other products or other commercial activities
may be leased or permitted by the Town of Smithtown pursuant to the Town
Law and other statutes of the State of New York.
§ 108-36. Changes in licensing procedures; termination of permits
for safety.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as limiting in any way the
right of the Town of Smithtown to establish a new system of licensing
by amendment or repeal of this chapter, and the Town, in such event,
shall be obligated only to make refunds of fees prepaid. The Town may
also terminate permits for reasons of safety upon making proper refund of
fees charged, except that there shall be no refund if such termination is
occasioned by a violation of this chapter.
§ 108-37. Parking of motor vehicles.
permission of the Director of the Department of Public Safety and his
or her designees. [Added 6-22-2004; amended 10-25-2011]
A. The flushing of toilets or dumping of oil refuse or sewage or garbage
along the Nissequogue River and the boat basin proper, or in the
channel leading from the boat basin to Porpoise Channel, is strictly
prohibited.
B. No persons shall take on gas for a boat, or any other fuel, while engines
are running, nor permit gas to be poured into boat tanks from gas cans
or any other portable device at any location at the Marina, the Town
courtesy floats, the Town trailer ramp floats or within Stony Brook
Harbor, the Nissequogue River or within any navigable channels within
the jurisdiction of the Town of Smithtown.
A. The parking of vehicles shall be in accordance with the Traffic Code of
the Town of Smithtown.
B. Commercial vehicles larger than 1/2 ton shall not be permitted to park,
except for local delivery.
C. The parking of vehicles or boat trailers or the storage of boats is
prohibited except in designated areas.
§ 108-32 SMITHTOWN CODE § 108-38
1:158
§ 108-38. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-8-1988]
§ 108-39. Town Board authorized to modify fees. [Added 2-26-2002;
amended 3-25-2003]
The Town Board may modify, from time to time, by Town Board resolution,
fees that are charged under this chapter.
Chapter 112
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Permit Review Board — See Ch. 13.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 115.
Condominium and cooperative
conversions — See Ch. 129.
Dredging — See Ch. 138.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 145.
Environmental and coastal quality
review — See Ch. 151.
Excavations and regrading — See Ch. 154.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 164.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 170.
Historic districts — See Ch. 185.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 245.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 248.
Zoning — See Ch. 322.
A. Each violation of this chapter, any regulation, order or ruling
promulgated hereunder or any permit issued hereunder shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or both; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. In addition to such fine, the defendant shall pay all costs and
expenses incurred by the Town in determining such violation. Each
violation of this chapter shall constitute disorderly conduct, and every
person violating the same shall be a disorderly person. The foregoing
shall be in addition to all other remedies available under the law to the
Town or the Town Board.
B. The Town of Smithtown Department of Public Safety Division of
Waterways and Navigation, as well as any additional personnel as may
be designated by the Director of the Department of Public Safety
Division of Waterways and Navigation, shall be empowered to issue
summonses for violations of this chapter or any rule issued hereunder
or any portion thereof. [Amended 2-21-1989; 7-14-1992; 9-7-1993;
10-25-2011]
§ 108-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-39
1:159

ARTICLE I
Building Code
[Adopted as Ch. 8 of the 1964 Code]
§ 112-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended 12-4-1984]
The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown hereby adopts the applicability
of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code in its
entirety.20
§ 112-1.2. Energy conservation. [Added 5-17-2012 by L.L. No.
2-201221]
§ 112-1.3. Residential solar energy fast track application process.
[Added 12-13-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
A. The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown hereby adopts the
applicability of the Energy Conservation and Construction Code of New
York State in its entirety.
B. Effective date. This section shall become effective immediately upon
filing with the New York State Secretary of State.
A. Legislative intent. This section is intended to authorize a streamlined
permit application process for residential rooftop solar electric and
solar hot water energy systems as developed by the Long Island Unified
Solar Permit Initiative (LIUSPI) working with the Suffolk County
Planning Commission and the Long Island Power Authority.
B. Pursuant to the residential solar energy fast track application process,
the Town of Smithtown shall hereby provide that for standard
installations of residential solar electric and solar systems, it will:
(1) Establish a reduced permit application fee.
(2) Provide permit determinations within 14 days of submittal of a
completed application.
(3) Utilize the LIUSPI Solar Energy System Fast Track Permit
Application as an alternative to existing building permit forms.
(4) Create a central registry of solar installations for commercial
installations, standard installations, and nonstandard installations,
in order to assist first responders.
(5) Require a label on the utility meter and any AC disconnect switch
for commercial installations, standard installations, and
nonstandard installations, in order to assist first responders.
20.Editor’s Note: Former § 112-1.1, Plumbing fixtures, added 8-14-1990, as amended, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 10-25-2011.
21.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former § 112-1.2, ENERGY STAR® program,
added 8-12-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008.
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-1.3
1:161
§ 112-1.4. Geothermal permitting code. [Added 3-19-2015]
C. For the purpose of this section, the term "standard installation" shall
mean an installation that:
(1) Is not subject to review by the Historical Advisory Board.
(2) Is on a residential building or legal accessory structure.
(3) Is to be on a roof with a single layer of roof covering (unless waived
by the Building Director).
(4) Is to be flush-mounted parallel to the roof surface and no more than
six inches above the surface.
(5) Has an eighteen-inch clearing at one side of the roof ridge and a
ten-inch clearing path to the ridge.
(6) Has a gravity roof load of no more than five pounds per square per
square foot for photovoltaic (PV) and six pounds per square foot for
residential solar hot water (RSHW).
(7) Is to be installed by contractors which are on LIPA's prescreened
solar contractor list.
(8) Uses PV panels that have been certified by a nationally recognized
testing laboratory as meeting the requirements of the Underwriters
Laboratory (UL) Standard 1703; and inverters that are on a list of
New York State Public Service Commission type-tested inverters
which are tested by UL or other nationally recognized laboratories
to conform with UL 1741.
(9) Uses RSHW equipment that has been certified by the Solar Rating
and Certification Corporation under its OG-100 standards for solar
collectors.
(10) Uses other equipment such as modules, combiner boxes and a
mounting system that has been approved for public use.
(11) Is in full compliance with all current National Electrical Code
(NEC) requirements.
D. Effective date. This section shall take effect immediately upon filing
with the Secretary of State of the State of New York.
A. Geothermal systems.
(1) Definitions.
(a) A closed loop system uses buried high-density polyethylene
(HDPE) plastic piping installed in drilled and grouted
boreholes that conductively exchanges thermal (heat) energy
with the ground via circulating water or a water/antifreeze
mixture through the piping system.
§ 112-1.3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 112-1.4
1:162
(b) An open loop system is a series of standard water wells that
extract and use groundwater directly as a heat-exchange
source then return the heated or cooled groundwater back to
the aquifer.
(c) A direct exchange system uses buried copper tubing that
conductively exchanges heat energy with the ground via
circulating a refrigerant through the tubing.
(2) There are several types of geothermal systems, also known as
"ground source heat pumps," typically used on Long Island for
space heating and cooling. They include: closed loop, open loop,
and direct exchange systems and are distinguished by the type of
ground heat exchanger (GHX) installed in the earth for heat
transfer.
(3) The closed loop and direct exchange (DX) GHXs may be installed
vertically in drilled boreholes or horizontally in excavated trenches
then backfilled. The open loop systems are installed only in vertical
drilled boreholes.
(4) When geothermal systems are proposed in conjunction with
applications for the approval of sewage disposal and water supply
facilities at a particular project site, the installation is also subject
to guidelines issued by Suffolk County Department of Health
Services (SCDHS) in General Guidance Memorandum #25,
Guidelines Regarding the Use of Geothermal Well Systems (Memo
25).
B. Permitted geothermal systems and locations.
(1) Geothermal systems may be permitted, installed, and erected
pursuant to a building permit and subject to the project meeting all
other requirements, including compliance with applicable
plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes.
(2) Permitted geothermal systems eligible to receive a building permit
are those that are of a system listed in Subsection A(1); comply
with the applicable general requirements in Subsection C; and
satisfy the following basic criteria:
(a) An open loop system using standard water well(s) to both
extract and return groundwater from/to the same aquifer and
with well screens set within 50 vertical feet of one another.
(b) An open loop system that is not connected to a potable water
system.
(c) An open loop system where the depth to groundwater is at
least 20 feet below the surface.
§ 112-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-1.4
1:163
(d) A vertical closed loop system using standard HDPE "U-bends"
installed into drilled boreholes and grouted fully from bottom
to top per industry standards.
(e) A horizontal closed loop system, using standard HDPE pipe
installed into horizontal trenches and backfilled per industry
standards.
(f) A DX-to-earth contact system including either horizontal,
diagonal or vertical loops and DX-to-water systems including
vertical loops.
(g) Is not proposed to be located within the following areas of
potential sensitivity:
[1] One-hundred-year flood hazard zones considered a V or AE
Zone on the FEMA flood maps.
[2] Tidal or freshwater wetland.
[3] Regulated tidal or freshwater surface water body.
[4] Coastal erosion hazard area.
(3) Other geothermal systems that are not eligible for a building
permit under the requirements of Subsection B(2), including those
located within areas of potential sensitivity, may be allowed at the
discretion of the Building Director after appropriate additional
review and evaluation and contingent on obtaining other required
permits or approvals from other regulatory agencies, such as the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
(NYSDEC) and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA).
C. General requirements.
(1) Permit applications shall be submitted to the Building Department
on forms it provides and shall comply with the requirements
therein, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Application for permit. Permit applications shall include, but
not be limited to, the following items, which may be satisfied by
documentation supplied by the design engineer, installer or
equipment manufacturer as applicable:
[1] Demonstrate compliance with applicable site plan
requirements.
[2] A plot plan on an approved property survey no greater
than one inch equals 40 feet scale depicting the limits of
the setback zone distance from structures, property lines
and public roads.
[3] Certification by the design engineer and/or installer that
the geothermal system complies with all applicable
§ 112-1.4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 112-1.4
1:164
regulations and all applicable state and/or local building
codes.
[4] Certification by the design engineer and/or installer that
the geothermal system was installed as designed and that
the design and installation complies with the relevant
industry standards and guidelines outlined below in
Subsection C(1)(b), including but not limited to Air
Conditioning Contractors of America (ACCA) Manual J
heat pump unit sizing for residential systems, ACCA
Manual N or comparable load calculation techniques for
commercial systems, and manufacturer-specified closed
loop and DX field design guidelines.
[5] For open loop systems only, a one-line diagram of the
electrical components on the plot plan (submersible pump
power supply) in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of installation conforms to
the National Electric Code, Electrical Code of the Town of
Smithtown and the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
[6] Certification of Subsection C(1)(a)[1] through [5] above
must be performed by a licensed professional engineer.
(b) Design standards and guidelines.
[1] The design and installation standards of geothermal
systems, including related wells and boreholes for the
GHX, shall conform to applicable industry standards,
including, but not limited to, those listed below by type of
system, and shall comply with the building code as well as
all other applicable requirements:
[a] All systems: the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI), the American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM), the American Society of Heating,
Refrigeration, and Air Conditioning Engineers
(ASHRAE), the Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration
Institute (ARI), ACCA, Refrigeration Section of the
International Building Code, and other similar
certifying organizations. The manufacturer
specifications shall be submitted as part of the
application. The individual piping loops, circuits, and
fully constructed piping network for all geothermal
systems shall be pressure tested for integrity of
original material and joints prior to backfill in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and
the governing standards or guidelines. Materials used
to backfill horizontal GHXs and the buried, horizontal
piping for vertical GHXs shall be suitable granular soil
§ 112-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-1.4
1:165
and shall be free from frozen lumps, ashes, refuse,
vegetable or organic matter, rocks or boulders over
150 mm (six inches) in any dimension, or other
materials that may damage the piping. The backfilled
excavations shall be compacted in accordance with
industry standard practice and governing guidelines
and regulations.
[b] Open loop systems: the National Ground Water
Association (NGWA) and the American Water Works
Association (AWWA).
[c] Closed loop systems: the International Ground Source
Heat Pump Association (IGSHPA) and the NGWA.
[d] Direct exchange (DX) systems: the Canadian
Standards Association (CSA), the National Association
of Corrosion Engineers (NACE), the American Society
of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) and in accordance
with manufacturer's guidelines, methods and
standards.
[2] For closed loop systems, the following specifically applies:
[a] Closed loop borefield installers must be trained and
accredited by IGSHPA and certified by the piping
manufacturer in polyethylene pipe heat-fusion or
electro-fuse welding techniques, whichever is used.
[b] Closed loop borefields that will supply greater than 50
tons of heating/cooling capacity must be designed by
an IGSHPA certified geothermal designer in good
standing with IGSHPA.
[c] If antifreeze solutions are used as a circulating fluid in
the buried ground heat exchanger, only antifreeze
recommended by IGSHPA such as methanol, ethanol,
and food-grade propylene glycol shall be permitted.
[d] The borehole annulus (space between the borehole
wall and piping) shall be filled and sealed through its
entire depth with a high-solids bentonite clay grout (at
least twenty-percent solids by weight), from the
bottom of the borehole to the top using the tremie
method of grouting.
[e] Where grouting material extends through zones of salt
water, a salt water resistant grout material shall be
used.
[3] For open loop systems, the following specifically applies:
§ 112-1.4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 112-1.4
1:166
[a] Open loop system contractors must be registered by
NYSDEC for drilling and installing wells and installing
and start-up of submersible pumps, and a copy of a
NYSDEC well completion report must be submitted
after the installation of the wells.
[b] Well drilling contractors must notify the Suffolk
County Water Authority (SCWA) of the location of
wells installed as part of an open loop geothermal
system.
[c] Open loop systems with rated pumping capacity of
greater than 45 gallons per minute (gpm), or systems
of lesser capacity proposed on a site with existing
water supply wells and for which the combined
pumping capacity of proposed and existing wells
exceeds 45 gpm must obtain a Long Island well permit
from the NYSDEC Division of Water.
[d] Open loop systems with rated pumping capacity of
greater than 45 gpm shall employ use of a plate-frame
or shell-in-tube heat exchanger (HX) installed
between the well piping and building hydronic loop to
prevent cross-contamination of the return water by
refrigerant, biocides, or corrosion inhibitors.
[e] Heat pump coils and HX material of construction for
open loop systems must be compatible with the
groundwater chemistry per manufacturer's limits.
[f] Water extraction.
[i] Open loop systems may utilize a waterway to the
extent permissible under federal, state, or local
municipal laws or regulations.
[ii] Installation requirements for open loop wells shall
be the same as those for potable water wells, with
respect to the means to prevent aquifer
contamination (grouting, etc.), or in conformance
with standards, regulations, or guidelines
established by the Town Engineer, NYSDEC,
NGWA, and AWWA.
[iii] Any water table drawdown caused by an
extraction well or wells shall not cause harm to
the environment or otherwise impact the use of
existing water supply wells on neighboring
properties.
[g] Discharge of water.
§ 112-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-1.4
1:167
[i] Discharge of water from open loop systems into
storm or sanitary sewer systems shall be
prohibited, except upon written approval by the
SCDHS, NYSDEC, or other authority having
jurisdiction.
[ii] Discharge of water from open loop systems into a
waterway or tidal or freshwater wetland is not
allowed unless approved by applicable federal,
state, and local authorities.
[iii] Underground injection of water discharge from an
open loop system shall be subject to the following
conditions:
[A] Returned water shall contain no treatment
additives or other introduced chemicals.
[B] The return well shall recharge the same
aquifer from which the supply water is
extracted, and recharge shall occur within 50
vertical feet of the supply well screen.
[C] The return well shall discharge the water
below the water table depth to prevent
aeration of the return water, which can lead
to precipitation of iron or other minerals and
premature plugging of the well screens.
[h] Return water practices shall not cause erosion, harm
to the environment or flooding at the surface or other
nuisance conditions on neighboring properties.
[4] For DX systems, the following applies:
[a] DX system contractors shall demonstrate they have
successfully completed a DX system installers training
course and are certified by an applicable equipment
and material manufacturer to install DX systems.
[b] Piping and tubing shall be of a material equivalent to
or better than Type Air Conditioning Refrigeration
(ACR) piping, tubing and associated fittings in
accordance with the appropriate ASTM standard and
ASME standard.
[c] Below-grade joints shall be purged with inert gas and
brazed in accordance with American Welding Society
(AWS) standards. Piping tubing and fittings shall be
installed in accordance with CSA standards.
[d] DX system contractors shall perform joining of all
refrigerant connections per CSA standards.
§ 112-1.4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 112-1.4
1:168
[e] All underground Type ACR piping and tubing shall
have a cathodic protection system which shall be
designed and installed in accordance with the
appropriate CSA standards and local site-specific
conditions.
[f] For vertical DX boreholes that are drilled into
saturated aquifer materials (below the water table),
the borehole annulus shall be filled and sealed
through its entire depth with a geothermal grout from
the bottom of the borehole to the top using the tremie
method of grouting per CSA standards.
[g] Horizontal DX GHXs and vertical DX boreholes lying
above the water table shall be backfilled and
compacted as specified in Subsection B(1)(b)[1][a].
Due consideration shall be given to settling of the
excavated area.
(2) As-built drawings. Upon completion of construction, a scaled asbuilt
drawing must be provided showing the locations of buried
wells, closed loops, DX boreholes and horizontal connector piping,
triangulated from two points on the property such as a building
corner or other permanent structure. Offsets must also be shown
from the nearest property line, and on-site septic systems and
private water wells. As-built drawings must be certified by a
licensed professional engineer.
(3) Decommissioning.
(a) If the geothermal system remains nonfunctional or inoperative
for a continuous period of one year, the Building Director may
require that the buried ground heat exchanger be taken out of
service by the property owner.
(b) Closed loop piping systems shall be decommissioned by
flushing and filling the piping with potable water and capping
off the ends. If the heat transfer fluid contains regulated
materials (e.g., antifreeze, biocides, or corrosion inhibitors),
the heat transfer fluid shall be contained and disposed of in
accordance with applicable regulations.
(c) Open loop wells shall be decommissioned per NYSDEC
requirements.
(4) Setbacks and separation distances.
§ 112-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-1.4
1:169
Setbacks and Separation Distances for Geothermal Systems
(in feet)
Open Loop Systems3
Supply Well Return Well
Closed Loop
and DX
Systems <45 gpm >45 gpm <45 gpm >45 gpm
Public water
supply well
1001 1001 1001 2001 2001
Private water
supply well
25 25 501,2 50 1001,2
Sewage disposal
structure, e.g.,
septic tank,
cesspool
251 25 751,2 25 501
Stormwater
recharge
structure, e.g.,
leach field, unlined
catch basin
25 25 501 25 501
Potential source of
contamination;
e.g., underground
petroleum storage
tank, chemical use
and waste storage
area, etc.
25 252 502 25 25
On-site utility,
sewage and water
line, lined catch
basin
10 10 10 10 10
Building
foundation
10 10 10 10 102
Property line 10 10 10 10 10
Notes:
1. Consistent with SCDHS General Guidance Memorandum #25, Guidelines Regarding
the Use of Geothermal Well Systems for Closed Loop and Open Loop Systems (applies
to geothermal systems proposed in conjunction with applications for the approval of
sewage disposal and water supply facilities).
2. Setbacks and separation distances should be verified by a qualified water supply
engineer or hydrogeologist for protection of building structures during re-injection
through return well (under shallow water table conditions), protection of geothermal
supply well water quality from sewage or chemical contamination, and protection of
private drinking water supply well from thermal effects or water level drawdown caused
by geothermal wells.
§ 112-1.4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 112-1.4
1:170
§ 112-2. Penalties for offenses. [Added 5-5-1970; amended
8-14-1990]
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this article of the Code of the Town of Smithtown shall be punishable
by a fine or imprisonment, or both; however, for the purpose of confirming
jurisdiction upon the courts and judicial officers, such violations shall be
deemed to be misdemeanors and for such purposes only, all provisions
of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm, association or corporation
violating any provisions of this article of the Code of the Town of Smithtown
shall be subject to a penalty in the sum not exceeding $2,500 or
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days for the first offense and a penalty
in a sum not exceeding $5,000 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days
for a second or subsequent offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
In addition to such fine, the defendant shall pay all costs and expenses
incurred by the Town in determining such violation. Each violation of this
article shall constitute disorderly conduct, and any person violating the
same shall be a disorderly person. The foregoing shall be in addition to all
other remedies available under the law to the Town or the Town Board.
Notes:
3. Separation distance between the supply and return wells at a project site should at
a minimum be based on recommendation from the drilling contractor, geothermal
system designer, and heat pump manufacturer to minimize thermal interference. For
high-capacity systems (rated >45 gpm), separation distances should be verified by a
qualified water supply engineer or hydrogeologist.
§ 112-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:171

ARTICLE II
Building Construction Administration
[Adopted as Ch. 9 of the 1964 Code]
§ 112-3. Designation of Building Director. [Amended 5-8-2007]
There is hereby designated in the Town of Smithtown a public official to be
known as the "Town of Smithtown Building Director," hereinafter referred
to as the "Building Director," who shall be appointed by the Town Board at
a compensation to be fixed by it.
§ 112-4. Acting Building Director. [Amended 5-8-2007]
In the absence of the Building Director or in the case of his inability to act
for any reason, the Supervisor shall have the power, with the consent of the
Town Board, to designate a person to act in behalf of the Building Director
and to exercise all the powers conferred upon him by this article.
§ 112-5. Appointment of inspectors. [Amended 5-8-2007]
The Town Board may appoint one building inspector or more, as the need
may appear, to act under the supervision of the Building Director and to
exercise any portion of his powers and duties. The compensation of such
building inspectors shall be fixed by the Town Board.
§ 112-6. Restrictions on employees.
No officer or employee of the Building Department shall engage in any
activity inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the Building
Department, nor shall he, during the term of his employment, be engaged
directly or indirectly in any building business, in the furnishing of labor,
materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance
of a building or the preparation of plans or specifications thereof within
the Town of Smithtown, except that this provision shall not prohibit any
employee from such activities in connection with the construction of a
building or structure owned by him and not constructed for sale.
§ 112-7. Powers and duties of Building Director. [Amended
5-8-2007]
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, ordinance or
regulation, or except as herein otherwise provided, the Building
Director shall administer and enforce all of the provisions of laws,
ordinances and regulations applicable to the construction, alteration,
repair, removal and demolition of buildings and structures and the
installation and use of materials and equipment therein and the
location, use, occupancy and maintenance thereof.
B. He shall have the power to adopt rules with the consent of the Town
Board to secure the intent and purposes of this article and a proper
§ 112-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-7
1:173
§ 112-8. Department records and reports. [Amended 5-8-2007]
§ 112-9. Cooperation of other departments. [Amended 5-8-2007]
The Building Director may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation
of the Police, Fire and Health Departments and of all municipal officials
exercising any jurisdiction over the construction, use or occupancy of
buildings or the installation of equipment therein.
§ 112-10. Building permit required; application.
enforcement of the laws, ordinances and regulations governing building
construction.
C. He shall receive applications and issue permits for the erection,
alteration, removal and demolition of buildings or structures or parts
thereof and shall examine the premises for which such applications
have been received or such permits have been issued for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations governing
building construction.
D. He shall issue all appropriate notices or orders to remove illegal or
unsafe conditions, to require the necessary safeguards during
construction and to ensure compliance during the entire course of
construction with the requirements of such laws, ordinances and
regulations. He shall make all inspections which are necessary or
proper for the carrying out of his duties, except that he may accept
written reports of inspection from building inspectors or other
employees of the Department of Buildings or from generally recognized
and authoritative service and inspection bureaus, provided that the
same are certified by a responsible official thereof.
E. Whenever the same may be necessary or appropriate to assure
compliance with the provisions of applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations covering building construction, he may require the
performance of tests in the field by experienced, professional persons
or by accredited and authoritative testing laboratories or service
bureaus or agencies.
A. The Building Director shall keep permanent official records of all
transactions and activities conducted by him, including all applications
received, permits and certificates issued, fees charged and collected,
inspection reports, and notices and orders issued. All such records shall
be public records open to public inspection during business hours.
B. The Building Director shall annually submit to the Town Board a written
report and summary of all business conducted by the Department of
Buildings, including permits and certificates issued, fees collected,
orders and notices promulgated, inspections and tests made and
appeals or litigation pending.
§ 112-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 112-10
1:174
A. No person, firm or corporation shall commence the erection,
construction, enlargement, alteration, removal, improvement,
demolition, conversion or change in the nature of the occupancy or use
of any building, structure or site or cause the same to be done, without
first obtaining a separate building permit from the Building Director for
each such building, structure or site, except that no building permit
shall be required for the performance of ordinary repairs which are not
structural in nature. [Amended 5-8-2007; 4-6-2010]
B. Application for a building permit shall be made to the Building Director
on forms provided by him and shall contain the following information:
[Amended 5-8-2007]
(1) A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done.
(2) A statement of the use or occupancy of all parts of the land and the
proposed building or structure.
(3) The valuation of the proposed work.
(4) The full name and address of the owner and of the applicant and
the names and addresses of their responsible officers if any of them
are corporations.
(5) A brief description of the nature of the proposed work.
(6) A duplicate set of plans and specifications as set forth in Subsection
D of this section.
(7) Such other information as may reasonably be required by the
Building Director to establish compliance of the proposed work
with the requirements of the applicable building laws, ordinances
and regulations.
C. Applications shall be made by the owner or lessee, or agent of either, or
by the architect, engineer or builder employed in connection with the
proposed work. Where such application is made by a person other than
the owner, it shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the owner or
applicant that the proposed work is authorized to make such
application.
D. Plans. [Amended 5-8-2007]
(1) Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by
duplicate copies of plans and specifications, including a plot plan,
drawn to scale, showing the location and size of all proposed new
construction and all existing structures on the site, the nature and
character of the work to be performed and the materials to be
incorporated, the distance from lot lines, the relationship of
structures on adjoining property, the widths and grades of
adjoining streets, walks and alleys and, where required by the
Building Director, details of structural, mechanical and electrical
§ 112-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-10
1:175
§ 112-11. Fees. [Amended 3-8-1966; 4-5-1966; 2-22-1972; 6-5-1979;
4-20-1982; 8-24-1982; 11-13-1984; 6-23-1987; 1-12-1988;
6-11-1991; 3-27-2001; 5-27-2003; 1-10-2006]
work, including computations, stress diagrams and other essential
technical data.
(2) Plans and specifications shall bear the signature of the person
responsible for the design and drawings and, where required by
§ 7302, as amended, of Article 147 of the Education Law of the
State of New York,22 the seal of a licensed architect or a licensed
professional engineer. The Building Director may waive the
requirement for filing plans and specifications for minor
alterations.
E. Simultaneous with the applicant's obtaining a building permit, he must:
[Added 3-8-1966]
(1) Submit, in writing, a detailed drawing showing the exact number
and location of each plumbing fixture and heating unit to be
installed.
(2) Obtain a separate permit from the Building Director for this
purpose. A permit for this purpose will not be granted unless the
applicant submits specifications which limit the lead content of
solder to be used in all new installations of interior plumbing
carrying drinking water and all alterations thereof to a maximum of
0.20%. [Amended 12-28-1982; 5-8-2007]
F. Simultaneous with the applicant's obtaining a building permit, if he
intends to construct a fireplace he must: [Added 3-8-1966]
(1) Submit, in writing, a detailed drawing showing the size and
location of each fireplace to be installed.
(2) Obtain a separate permit from the Building Director for this
purpose.
G. Amendments, if any, to the application or to the plans and specifications
accompanying the same shall be filed with the Building Department and
approval received from the Building Director prior to the
commencement of such change of work. [Amended 5-8-2007]
A. The following fees prescribed herein shall be paid to the Building
Department at time of application. No permits or certificates shall be
issued until all applicable fees have been paid.
(1) Residential buildings. Fees shall be as follows:
22.Editor's Note: These provisions are now covered in part by §§ 6501, 7304 and 7307 of the
New York State Education Law.
§ 112-10 SMITHTOWN CODE § 112-11
1:176
(a) Permit for new construction: base fee of $250 and $0.45 per
square foot of proposed work, including basement, each floor,
attic, garage area and/or deck area. [Amended 10-25-2011;
2-5-2019]
(b) Permit for additions, alterations, fire repair, garage
conversions, detached garage, decks or construction of
accessory structures: base fee of $250 and $0.35 per square
foot of proposed work. [Amended 10-25-2011]
(c) Residential antennas, satellite dishes, fireplaces, stoves, sheds,
air-conditioning units, and heating units: $100 per unit.
(d) Plumbing permits: $50 for the first two fixtures and $25 for
each additional fixture.
(e) (Reserved)23
(f) Gas pressure test: $100 per meter, per test. [Amended
10-25-2011]
(g) Retaining walls: base fee of $200 and $1 per four square feet of
wall area.
(h) Rooftop-mounted solar panels: $150; installation of solar
energy systems that qualify as a "standard installation" under
§ 112-1.3C: $50. [Added 8-8-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
(2) Commercial buildings. Fees shall be as follows:
(a) Permits for new construction and/or additions: base fee of $400
and $0.50 per square foot of gross floor area. [Amended
2-5-2019]
(b) Interior alterations and fire repair: base fee of $250 and $0.50
per square foot of proposed work. [Amended 10-25-2011;
2-5-2019]
(c) Commercial antennas, satellite dishes, heating and airconditioning
units and other permanently installed equipment:
$500 per unit. [Amended 10-25-2011; 2-5-2019]
(d) Plumbing permits: $250 for the first two fixtures and $30 for
each additional fixture in excess of two. [Amended 2-5-2019]
(e) (Reserved)24
(f) Gas pressure test: $250 per meter, per test. [Amended
10-25-2011; 2-5-2019]
23.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(1)(e), establishing a permit fee for the repair of fire
damage, was repealed 10-25-2011. See now Subsection A(1)(b).
24.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(2)(e), establishing a permit fee for the repair of fire
damage, was repealed 10-25-2011. See now Subsection A(2)(b).
§ 112-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-11
1:177
(g) (Reserved)25
(h) Installation of elevators: $100 per elevator and an annual fee of
$50 for yearly certificate of inspection.
(i) Truss identification symbol enforcement fee: $50 per permit.
(j) Facade renovations: base fee of $250 and $0.45 per square foot
of affected area. [Added 12-13-2011; amended 2-5-2019]
(k) Tents: $200. [Added 10-2-2012]
(l) Rooftop-mounted solar panels: $10 per panel, not to exceed
$1,000. [Added 8-8-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
(3) General permits or fees. Fees shall be as follows:
(a) Installation of fences: $150.
(b) Installation of aboveground or in-ground pools other than
qunite or concrete: $250, including fence; qunite or concrete
in-ground swimming pools: $300, including fence.
(c) Installation of ground-mounted solar panels: $250 for up to 20
panels; $250 plus $2 per panel in excess of 20 panels, not to
exceed $20,000. [Amended 12-13-2011; 8-8-2017 by L.L.
No. 4-2017]
(d) Installation or removal of storage tanks: $200 per tank.
[Amended 2-5-2019]
(e) Demolition of residential structure: $200 per structure.
[Amended 10-25-2011]
(f) Permits for electrical work only: $50 in addition to electrical
agency fees.
(g) Use permit fee: $200.
(h) Demolition of commercial structure, per structure: [Added
10-25-2011]
Size or Structure
(square feet) Fee
Up to 9,999 $300
10,000 up to 19,999 $500
20,000 up to 49,999 $1,000
50,000 and above $2,500
25.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(2)(g), establishing a fee for the installation of fire
sprinkler and/or fire suppression systems, was repealed 10-25-2011. See now Subsection
A(2)(c).
§ 112-11 SMITHTOWN CODE § 112-11
1:178
(i) Site work only: $500. [Added 2-5-2019]
(4) An additional fee of $100 shall be paid for all residential permits
that require a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of
compliance. An additional fee of $200 shall be paid for all
commercial permits that require a certificate of occupancy or a
certificate of compliance. An additional fee of $500 shall be paid for
all permits that require a temporary certificate of occupancy which
shall be valid for a six-month period. A fee of $200 per residential
unit or room shall be paid unless the unit or room has already
obtained an individual certificate of occupancy. [Amended
2-5-2019]
(5) Plan review. An applicant or design professional may seek a review
of applicable Building Code requirements at a plan review meeting
prior to the official submission of an application. A preliminary plan
review fee of 20% of the building permit fee, excluding mechanical
items, shall be paid therefor prior to the plan review meeting. This
fee is in addition to the required building permit fee.
(6) Resubmission fee. An additional fee of $200 shall be paid if the
applicant or design professional, upon resubmission of drawings,
has not complied with Building Department comments. This fee is
in addition to the required building permit fee.
(7) Amendments to permits involving the installation, construction,
alteration or demolition of structures or appurtenances, shall be
issued an amendment permit for a fee of $200.
(8) Unless otherwise indicated in Subsection A(9) below, and in lieu of
the regular permit fee, a built-prior permit fee of three times the
regular permit fee shall be charged for any residential or
commercial permit or accessory structure permit or sign permit,
for any structure or installation built prior, or installed prior, to an
application, permit or certificate being filed and/or issued.
(9) A fee of $50 per item, in addition to the regular permit fee, shall be
charged for an application for carports, outside basement
entrances, fireplaces, porches, roofs over patios or roofs over
decks, decks, gazebos, aboveground swimming pools, hot tubs,
fencing, retaining walls, oil tanks, satellite antennas, solar panels,
or sheds measuring 144 square feet or less, built prior, or installed
prior to an application, permit, or certificate being filed and/or
issued, and for swimming pools demolished prior to an application,
permit or certificate being filed and/or issued. [Amended
4-26-2018]
(10) Building permits and certificates, as set forth herein, may be
accorded expedited review, processing and issuance, so long as the
applicant therefor shall pay, as an additional fee, all administrative
§ 112-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-11
1:179
§ 112-12. Issuance of building permit or disapproval.
costs on an overtime basis, subject to staff availability. [Added
10-10-2006]
B. In the event that an application for a building permit is not approved,
amended, or is withdrawn, the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of
50% of the fee paid, provided that no construction has been
commenced. If construction has been commenced and the application is
not approved, amended, or is withdrawn, the fees paid shall not be
refunded. [Amended 1-21-2016]
C. Certificates of occupancy. A fee of $50 per document shall be paid to the
Building Department for a certificate of occupancy, whether for an
original building or structure or any addition or alteration thereto. A fee
of $50 per document shall be paid to the Building Department for a
duplicate certificate of occupancy and a fee of $250 shall be paid to the
Building Department for a property history letter. The history letter will
describe all structures of record with or without permits and their uses
and sizes.
D. Reproduction of documents. A fee of $2 per page shall be charged for
the reproduction or photocopying of any document or record contained
in the Building Department.
E. Expirations and renewals. All permits shall expire one year from the
date of issuance. A permit may be renewed once, upon the expiration
thereof. The renewal fee shall be 1/2 of the original fee. Any subsequent
permit shall be deemed a new application for which the standard fees
shall apply. [Amended 9-24-2009]
F. Inspections. Up to two inspections shall be performed for each required
inspection category. In the event that additional inspections are
required, an additional fee of $50 shall be charged for each additional
inspection.
A. The Building Director shall examine or cause to be examined all
applications for permits and the plans, specifications and documents
filed therewith. He shall approve or disapprove the application within a
reasonable time. [Amended 5-8-2007]
B. Upon approval of the application and upon receipt of the legal fees
therefor, he shall issue a building permit to the applicant upon the form
prescribed by him and shall affix his signature or cause his signature to
be affixed thereto.
C. Upon approval of the application, both sets of plans and specifications
shall be endorsed with the word "approved." One set of approval plans
and specifications shall be retained in the files of the Building
Department, and the other set shall be returned to the applicant,
together with the building permit, and shall be kept at the building site,
§ 112-11 SMITHTOWN CODE § 112-12
1:180
§ 112-13. Performance of work under building permit.
open to inspection by the Building Director or his authorized
representative at all reasonable times. [Amended 5-8-2007]
D. The Building Director shall not issue a building permit pursuant to the
provisions of this article unless and until the Superintendent of
Highways and the Town Engineer have certified to him, in writing, that
the roads leading to the structure for which such building permit is
sought are in passable condition for the use of emergency vehicles. No
road shall be certified to be in passable condition unless and until it
shall consist of a full width of subgrade of six-inch soil-stabilized earth
on a permeable base; said subgrade must also have been treated with at
least one coat of road oil for the full width. The provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to the issuance of a building permit for a
dwelling to be erected on a lot, which lot fronts on a street shown upon
a plat approved by the Planning Board of the Town of Smithtown as
provided in §§ 276 and 277 of the Town Law of the State of New York
and for which plat a performance bond in accordance with the
requirements of the Smithtown Subdivision Regulations26 is on file with
the Town of Smithtown at the time of the application for such building
permit; nor shall said provisions apply to the issuance of a building
permit for alterations of an existing structure for which structure a
valid and effective certificate of occupancy is then in existence; nor
shall said provisions apply to the erection or alteration of accessory
buildings as defined in the Building Zone Ordinance27 of the Town of
Smithtown. [Added 7-12-1966; amended 5-8-2007]
E. If the application, together with plans, specifications and other
documents filed therewith, describes proposed work which does not
conform to all of the requirements of the applicable building
regulations, the Building Director shall disapprove the same and shall
return the plans and specifications to the applicant. Upon the request of
the applicant, the Building Director shall cause such refusal, together
with the reason therefor, to be transmitted to the applicant in writing.
[Amended 5-8-2007]
A. A building permit shall be effective to authorize the commencing of
work in accordance with the application, plans and specifications on
which it is based for a period of six months after the date of its issuance.
For good cause, the Building Director may allow a maximum of two
extensions for periods not exceeding three months each. In the event
that the work authorized by the permit is not completed within such
time, the Town may direct the permittee to restore the premises to the
condition which existed prior to the issuance of the permit, such action
to be brought in Supreme Court, in accordance with § 112-24 herein.
[Amended 8-11-1987; 5-8-2007]
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 248, Subdivision of Land.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Zoning.
§ 112-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-13
1:181
§ 112-14. Revocation of building permit.
§ 112-15. Stop-work orders; penalty. [Amended 8-24-1982;
5-8-2007; 9-24-2009; 4-6-2010; 9-20-2012]
B. The issuance of a building permit shall constitute authority to the
applicant to proceed with the work in accordance with the approved
plans and specifications and in accordance with the applicable building
laws, ordinances or regulations. All work shall conform to the approved
application, plans and specifications.
C. Building permits shall be prominently displayed on the job site at all
times during the progress of construction, so as to be readily seen from
adjacent thoroughfares.
A. The Building Director may revoke a building permit theretofore issued
in the following instances: [Amended 5-8-2007]
(1) Where he finds that there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application, plans or
specifications on which the building permit was based.
(2) Where he finds that the building permit was issued in error and
should not have been issued in accordance with the applicable law.
(3) Where he finds that the work performed under the permit is not
being prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of the
application, plans or specifications.
(4) Where the person to whom a building permit has been issued fails
or refuses to comply with a stop order issued by the Building
Director.
B. Where a person shall have constructed a foundation and such
foundation shall have remained without further construction and/or
without any capping of the foundation for a period of over 90 days, the
Town may for safety purposes: [Added 5-2-1978]
(1) Revoke the building permit.
(2) Enter on the premises and fill in and/or cap the foundation for the
purposes of such safety, and all expenses incurred by the Town
shall be the liability of said person or owner of the property.
C. Where a building permit is revoked, the person to whom the permit was
issued shall, within 30 days thereof, submit a plan to the Building
Director to bring the subject of the permit into compliance with the
Town of Smithtown Zoning Ordinance28 and the New York State Fire
Prevention and Building Code, or shall, upon obtaining the necessary
permit, remove it. [Added 9-24-2009]
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Zoning.
§ 112-13 SMITHTOWN CODE § 112-15
1:182
§ 112-16. Right of entry. [Amended 5-8-2007]
The Building Director and building inspectors, upon the showing of proper
credentials and in the discharge of their duties, may enter upon any
building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour, and no person shall
interfere with or prevent such entry.
§ 112-17. Certificate of occupancy. [Amended 3-8-1966; 12-22-1987;
5-8-2007]
A. Whenever the Building Director has reasonable grounds to believe that
work on any building, structure or site is being prosecuted in violation
of the provisions of the applicable building laws, ordinances or
regulations or not in conformity with the provisions of the application,
plans or specifications on the basis of which the building permit was
issued or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, he shall notify the owner
of the property, or the owner’s agent, or the person performing the
work to suspend all work, and any such persons shall forthwith stop
such work and suspend all building activities until the stop-work order
has been rescinded. Such order and notice shall be in writing, shall
state the conditions under which the work may be resumed and may be
served upon a person to whom it is directed, either by delivering it
personally to him or by posting the same upon a conspicuous portion of
the building under construction and sending a copy of the same by
certified mail.
B. Penalty for failure to comply with stop-work order. Any person, owner,
or owner’s agent or the person performing the work who shall fail to
comply with a stop-work order issued by the Building Director shall be
subject to a fine or penalty of not less than $1,000 nor more than $5,000
for a conviction of a first offense; upon conviction of a second violation
where the offense is committed within five years of the first conviction,
a fine of not less than $2,000 nor more than $10,000; and upon
conviction of a third or subsequent violation where the offense is
committed within five years of the first and second conviction, which
shall constitute a misdemeanor, a fine of not less than $4,000 nor more
than $15,000 or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day, or part thereof, such violation
continues following notification by the Town or service of a summons
shall constitute a separate offense punishable in like manner.
A. No building or structure shall be maintained, used or occupied in whole
or in part until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
Building Director. [Amended 9-24-2009]
B. No building or structure which is enlarged, extended or altered or upon
which work has been performed which required the issuance of a
building permit shall continue to be maintained, used or occupied for
more than 30 days after the completion of the alteration or work unless
a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building
§ 112-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-17
1:183
§ 112-18. Inspection prior to issuance of certificate.
Director; nor shall any such building or structure be permitted to
remain in a state of incompletion absent a valid, unexpired building
permit. [Amended 9-24-2009]
C. No change shall be made in the use or type of occupancy of an existing
building unless a certificate of occupancy authorizing such change shall
have been issued by the Building Director.
D. The owner or his agent shall make application for a certificate of
occupancy. Accompanying this application, and before the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, there shall be filed with the Building Director:
(1) An affidavit of the registered architect or licensed professional
engineer who filed the original plans or of the registered architect
or licensed professional engineer who supervised the construction
of the work or of the superintendent of construction who
supervised the work and who, by reason of his experience, is
qualified to superintend the work for which the certificate of
occupancy is sought. This affidavit shall state that the deponent has
examined the approved plans of the structure for which a
certificate of occupancy is sought, that the structure has been
erected in accordance with approved plans and, as erected,
complies with the law governing building construction except
insofar as variations therefrom have been legally authorized. Such
variations shall be specified in the affidavit.
(2) A duly executed certificate issued by a duly recognized electrical
inspection agency.
(3) A Town of Smithtown Plumbing Inspector's certificate of
compliance for heating and plumbing installations and facilities.
(4) A Town of Smithtown Building Director's certificate of compliance
for fireplaces.
(5) A Town of Smithtown Building Inspector's approval indicating
compliance with all required inspections of the New York State Fire
Prevention and Building Code. [Added 9-24-2009]
A. Before issuing a certificate of occupancy, the Building Director shall
examine or cause to be examined all buildings, structures and sites for
which an application has been filed for a building permit to construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, remove, demolish or change the use or
occupancy; and he may conduct such inspections as he deems
appropriate from time to time during and upon completion of the work
for which a building permit has been issued. [Amended 5-8-2007]
B. There shall be maintained in the Building Department a record of all
such examinations and inspections, together with a record of findings of
violations of the law.
§ 112-17 SMITHTOWN CODE § 112-19
1:184
§ 112-19. Issuance of certificate of occupancy.
§ 112-20. Temporary certificate of occupancy. [Amended
12-11-1973]
§ 112-21. Tests. [Amended 5-8-2007]
Whenever there are reasonable grounds to believe that any material,
construction, equipment or assembly does not conform to the requirements
of the applicable building laws, ordinances or regulations, the Building
Director may require the same to be subjected to tests in order to furnish
proof of such compliance.
§ 112-22. Elevator inspections. [Added 2-3-1970]
A. When, after final inspection, it is found that the proposed work has been
completed in accordance with the applicable building laws, ordinances
and regulations and also in accordance with the application, plans, and
specifications filed in connection with the issuance of the building
permit, the Building Director shall issue a certificate of occupancy upon
the form provided by him. If it is found that the proposed work has not
been properly completed, the Building Director shall refuse to issue a
certificate of occupancy and shall order the work completed in
conformity with the building permit and in conformity with the
applicable building regulations. [Amended 5-8-2007]
B. The certificate of occupancy shall certify that the work has been
completed and that the proposed use and occupancy is in conformity
with the provisions of the applicable building laws, ordinances and
regulations and shall specify the use or uses and the extent thereof to
which the building or structure or its several parts may be put.
A. Pursuant to § 322-92 of the Town Code, the Building Director may issue
a temporary certificate of occupancy for a building or structure, or part
thereof, before the entire work covered by the building permit is
completed, provided that such portions as have been completed may be
occupied safely without endangering life or the public welfare.
[Amended 5-8-2007]
B. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall remain effective for a period
not exceeding six months from the date of issuance.
A. The owners of all buildings in which elevators are installed shall
arrange for competent inspections, by New York State-approved
inspectors, of passenger elevators every six months and freight
elevators every 12 months.
B. A copy of such inspections must be posted in each elevator car, and an
affidavit of inspection must be filed with the Building Department of the
Town of Smithtown.
§ 112-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-23
1:185
§ 112-23. Penalties for offenses.
In accordance with § 385 of Article 18 of the Executive Law of the State of
New York:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct,
alter, repair, move, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain
any building or structure or portion thereof in violation of any provision
of law or rule promulgated by the Building Department in accordance
with applicable laws or to fail in any manner to comply with a notice,
directive or order of the Building Director or to construct, alter, use or
occupy any building or structure or part thereof in a manner not
permitted by an approved building permit or certificate of occupancy.
[Amended 5-8-2007]
B. Any person who shall fail to comply with a written notice, directive or
order of the Building Director within the time fixed for compliance
therewith and any owner, builder, architect, tenant, contractor,
subcontractor, construction superintendent or their agents or any other
person taking part or assisting in the construction or use of any building
who shall violate any of the applicable provisions of law or any lawful
order, notice, directive, permit or certificate of the Building Director
made thereunder shall be punishable by fine, penalty or imprisonment,
or both; however, for the purpose of conferring jurisdiction upon courts
and judicial officers, such violations shall be deemed to be
misdemeanors, and for such purposes only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. For each violation of the
provision of this article, any person, firm or corporation violating any
provisions of this article of the Town of Smithtown shall be subject to a
fine or penalty in a sum not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,500 for a
conviction of a first offense; upon conviction of a second violation where
the offense is committed within five years of the first conviction, a fine
of not less than $2,000 nor more than $5,000; and upon conviction of a
third or subsequent violation where the offense is committed within five
years of the first and second convictions, shall constitute a
misdemeanor, which a fine of not less than $4,000 nor more than
$15,000 or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day, or part thereof, such violation continues
following notification by the Town or service of a summons shall
constitute a separate offense punishable in like manner. [Amended
3-22-1966; 10-8-1985; 5-8-2007; 9-20-2012]
C. Except as provided otherwise by law, such a violation shall not be a
crime, and the penalty or punishment imposed therefor shall not be
deemed for any purpose a penal or criminal penalty or punishment and
shall not impose any disability upon or affect or impair the credibility as
a witness, or otherwise, of any person convicted thereof.
§ 112-23 SMITHTOWN CODE § 112-24
1:186
§ 112-24. Abatement of violation.
Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken at law or in equity to
prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation
or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to
prevent illegal acts, conduct or business in or about any premises, and these
remedies shall be in addition to penalties otherwise prescribed by law.
§ 112-25. Unsafe buildings; unsafe structures.29 [Amended
5-8-2007; 5-17-2012]
A. All buildings and structures which are structurally unsafe, unsanitary
or not provided with adequate egress or which constitute a fire hazard
or are otherwise dangerous to human life or which, in relation to
existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment
are, severally, for the purpose of this article, unsafe buildings or
structures. All unsafe buildings or structures are hereby declared to be
unlawful. All such unsafe buildings or structures shall be abated by
repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the
procedure of this section.
B. The Building Director shall examine or cause to be examined every
building or structure reported as unsafe or damaged and shall make a
written record of such examination.
C. Whenever the Building Director shall find any building or structure or
portion thereof to be an unsafe building or structure as defined in this
article, he shall, in the same manner as provided for the service of stop
orders in § 112-15 of this article, give to the owner, agent or person in
control of such building or structure written notice stating the defects
thereof. This notice shall require the owner, within a stated time, either
to complete specified repairs or improvements or to demolish and
remove the building or structure or portion thereof.
D. If the Building Director finds that there is actual and immediate danger
of failure or collapse so as to endanger life, such notice shall also
require the building, structure or portion thereof to be vacated
forthwith and not reoccupied until the specified repairs and
improvements are completed, inspected and approved by the Building
Director. The Building Director shall cause to be posted at each
entrance to such building or at another conspicuous location at such
structure, a notice: THIS BUILDING/STRUCTURE IS UNSAFE AND ITS
USE OR OCCUPANCY HAS BEEN PROHIBITED BY THE BUILDING
DEPARTMENT. Such notice shall remain posted until the required
repairs are made or demolition is completed. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation or their agents or other person to remove
such notice without written permission of the Building Director or for
29.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 115, Buildings, Unsafe.
§ 112-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-25
1:187
§ 112-26. Retaining walls, sea walls and bulkheading. [Added
2-19-1963]
No retaining wall, sea wall or bulkheading of any character shall be
constructed, altered, removed or demolished, nor shall work therefor be
commenced, until a permit therefor has been applied for and obtained as
provided by § 112-10 of this article. No such permit shall be issued until and
unless detailed plans and specifications for the proposed retaining wall, sea
wall and bulkheading have been submitted to and approved by the Town
Engineer.
any person to access the building or structure except for the purpose of
making the required repairs or of demolishing the same.
E. In cases of emergency which, in the opinion of the Building Director,
involve imminent danger to human life or health, he shall promptly
cause such building, structure or portion thereof to be made safe or to
be removed. For this purpose he may at once access such building or
structure or land on which it stands, or abutting land or structures, with
such assistance and at such cost as may be necessary. He may vacate
adjacent structures and protect the public by appropriate barricades or
such other means as may be necessary and, for this purpose, may close
a public or private way.
F. Costs incurred under Subsections D and E of this section shall be paid
out of the Town general fund on certificate of the Building Director.
Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and
shall be collected in the manner provided by law.
§ 112-25 SMITHTOWN CODE § 112-26
1:188
Chapter 113
NOTICE AND CERTIFICATES OF ASSESSMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 112. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 248.
§ 113-1. Legislative intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown finds that of its citizens have
been misled by exaggerated claims or failure to provide adequate or
sufficient information on the part of some subdividers or their agents,
employees or sales agents with respect to estimated taxes with regard to
homes situated in subdivisions and the school district in which the property
is located. It is the intent of this chapter to correct the aforesaid abuses,
to provide a guide for the majority of the subdividers within the Town who
deal with the public on a high plane of business integrity and to provide
adequate and sufficient information so that a prospective home buyer in this
Town can make an informed and intelligent decision.
§ 113-2. Scope.
This chapter shall apply to any person who offers new homes for sale or
contract for the construction of residential homes on real property owned
by him or in which he has a beneficial interest wherein such sales are
made from a model house and/or from a set of standardized plans used by
such person. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "person" shall be
intended to include a person, partnership, corporation or any other form of
legal entity, its agents and employees.
§ 113-3. Posting.
All persons coming within the provisions of § 113-2 of this chapter shall
conspicuously post in every model house authorized to be constructed by
the Town of Smithtown or in their sales office located within the Town of
Smithtown, or both, at least one notice containing the information required
by § 113-4 of this chapter. Such notice shall be uniform in size, form and
texture and shall be issued by the Assessor.
§ 113-4. Required information.
Each notice shall contain the following information:
A. Current tax rate for county, Town, special district or school taxes. The
notice shall contain a statement that such tax rate is subject to change
in any given tax year. The tax rate shall be the tax rate for the area in
which the real property is located or offered for sale; and, in the event
that the real property is located or offered for sale in more than one
§ 112-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-4
1:189
§ 113-5. Current tax rate.
Within one month following the beginning of any given tax year, the
subdivider shall post a notice as required by § 113-3 herein containing all
information as based upon the tax rate for county, Town, special district and
school district taxes.
§ 113-6. Statement upon issuance of certificate of occupancy.
[Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
There shall be attached to every certificate of occupancy or certificate of
compliance issued by the Building Department of the Town of Smithtown for
all assessable residential structures a statement prepared by the Assessor
of the Town of Smithtown setting forth the current tax rate for county,
Town, special district and school taxes for the area in which the structure
school district or special district, a separate notice shall be posted for
each such separate school district or special district containing the
information required by this subsection.
B. The estimated assessed valuation of the model house or the house as
offered on the plans and specifications as approximated by the Assessor
of the Town of Smithtown with increments and deductions indicated for
various standardized options and deviations from the basic model. The
estimated assessed valuation shall be the estimated assessed valuation
for the area in which the real property is located or offered for sale;
and, in the event that the real property is located or offered for sale in
more than one school district or special district, a separate notice shall
be posted for each separate school district or special district containing
the information required by this subsection.
C. The estimated county, Town, special district and school tax for the
model house or the house as offered on the plans and specifications, as
approximated by the Assessor, with increments and deductions
indicated for various standardized options and deviations from the
basic model. The estimated county, Town, special district and school tax
shall be the estimated county, Town, special district and school tax for
the area in which the real property is located or offered for sale; and, in
the event that the real property is located or offered for sale in more
than one school district or special district, a separate notice shall be
posted for each such separate school district or special district
containing the information required by this subsection.
D. The notice shall contain a statement to the effect that information as to
the estimated assessed valuation for the model house with increments
and deductions for other than standardized options and deviations will
be available in the office of the Assessor upon request and submission
of a plan thereof.
E. The designation of the school district within which the real property
lies.
§ 113-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 113-6
1:190
is located; the estimated valuation of such structure; and the estimated
county, Town, special district and school taxes for each such structure. Such
statement shall indicate the dates when the tax year begins and ends and
that the tax rate may change during any future tax year. Such statement
shall be available in the office of the Assessor of the Town of Smithtown
upon request and the payment of a fee of $100 for new homes and a fee of
$50 for any other assessable improvement, payable to the Building Director
at the time of building permit application.
§ 113-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No.
5-2007]
It shall be unlawful for any person, within the provisions of this chapter, to
fail to post the notice as required by § 113-3 hereof, to change any of the
information contained on the notice or to fail to post a notice as required
by § 113-5 hereof. The Building Director shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter and, from time to time, shall cause inspections to be made of model
houses in order to determine that notices are posted in conformance with
this chapter. A violation of this chapter shall be a violation punishable by
fine of not more $500 for the first such violation and in a sum not exceeding
$1,000 for any subsequent violation; said penalties to be recoverable in
a civil action in the name of the Town of Smithtown as damages. Each
day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Except
as provided otherwise by law, such a violation shall not be a crime, and
the penalty or punishment imposed therefor shall not be deemed for any
purpose a penal or criminal penalty or punishment and shall not impose any
disability upon or affect or impair the credibility as a witness or otherwise
of any person convicted thereof.
§ 113-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
Chapter 115
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
§ 115-1. Authority to remove or repair.
The Town Board may provide for the removal or repair of buildings in
business, industrial and residential sections that, from any cause, may now
be or shall hereafter become dangerous or unsafe to the public.
§ 113-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-2
1:191
§ 115-2. Procedure.
Prior to the removal or repair of any building as aforesaid, the Town Board
shall provide as follows:
Chapter 117
A. For an inspection and report by an official duly appointed by the Town
Board.
B. For a notice to be served on the owner or someone of the owner's
executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees or any other person
having a vested or contingent interest in the property, either personally
or by registered mail, addressed to the last known address, if any, of the
owner, or someone of the owner's executors, legal representatives,
agents, lessees or other person having a vested or contingent interest in
the same, as shown by the records of the Receiver of Taxes and/or in the
office of the County Clerk or County Register, containing a description
of the premises, a statement of the particulars in which the building or
structure is unsafe or dangerous and an order requiring the same to be
made safe and secure or removed; and, if such service is made by
registered mail, for a copy of such notice to be posted on the premises.
C. For time within which the person served with such notice may
commence the securing or removal of the buildings or structures.
D. For the filing of a copy of such notice in the office of the Clerk of the
county within which such building or structure is located, which notice
shall be filed by such Clerk in the same manner as a notice of pendency
pursuant to Article 65 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules and shall have
the same effect as a notice of pendency as therein provided. A notice so
filed shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of filing;
provided, however, that it may be vacated upon the order of a judge or
justice of a county of record or upon the consent of the Town Attorney.
E. For a hearing before the Town Board, notice of which and the time and
place thereof to be specified in the notice to repair or demolish, served
upon the owner and such persons having an interest in the property or
structure as herein prescribed.
F. For the removal of such building or structure by the Town in the event
that such owner fails or refuses to repair or remove the same within the
time provided.
G. For the assessment of all costs and expense incurred by the Town in
connection with the proceedings to remove or secure, including the
cost of actually removing said building or structure and the cost of
insurance indemnifying the Town against any loss arising from injuries
to persons or property as a result of the Town removing or securing said
building or structures, against the land on which said building or
structures are located.
§ 115-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 115-2
1:192
BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 322.
§ 117-1. Applicability of statutory provisions.
The provisions of Article 19-A of the General Municipal Law are hereby
applicable to the establishment or extension of Business Improvement
Districts in the Town of Smithtown.
§ 117-2. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary
of State; provided, however, that such chapter is subject to a permissive
referendum, and the Town Clerk shall forthwith proceed to notice such fact
and conduct such referendum if required by petition.30
Chapter 119
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 94.
Bingo — See Ch. 105.
Games of chance — See Ch. 173.
Tents — See Ch. 273.
Zoning — See Ch. 322.
30.Editor's Note: No such petition for referendum was filed.
§ 115-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-2
1:193

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 119-1. Legislative intent; definitions.
A. It is the intent of the Town Board to regulate the conduct of special
event activities, such as carnivals, circuses, parades and outdoor
assemblages, so as to preserve the public peace and good order and to
ensure the health and safety of the residents of the Town of Smithtown
in the surrounding areas of such special event activities.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given the
meanings as set forth herein:31
PARADE — An organized procession, march, walk or run.[Added
5-28-2009]
PROCESSION — See "parade."[Added 5-28-2009]
SPECIAL EVENT — Any form of entertainment open to the public
and generally conducted outdoors with the presence of tents, booths
or temporary structures erected for such purpose or any combination
of the foregoing, including but not limited to the following forms of
entertainment commonly known as "carnivals," "circuses," "fairs,"
"bazaars," "menageries" or "sideshows." Such forms of entertainment
are generally characterized by the presence of any of the following
activities or any combination thereof: mechanical rides, exhibitions of
skill, animal exhibitions, games of skill or games of chance where
otherwise permitted by local regulation.
31.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “local,” which immediately followed, was repealed
1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020.
§ 119-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-1
1:195

ARTICLE II
Special Events
[Amended 5-28-200932]
§ 119-2. Exceptions; permit required. [Amended 3-23-2017 by L.L.
No. 1-2017, effective 10-1-2017; 1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
§ 119-3. Application requirements. [Amended 3-23-2017 by L.L. No.
1-2017, effective 10-1-2017; 1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
Application for said written approval of the Town Board, and for a permit
required by § 119-2 of this chapter, shall be made on an application form
approved by the Town Clerk submitted no later than 60 days prior to the
date of the event and verified by a duly qualified officer of the sponsoring
organization, setting forth the following information:
A. All special events are prohibited in the Town of Smithtown, except when
such special events are approved, in writing, by the Town Board.
B. Any special event authorized pursuant to § 119-2A of this chapter shall
be conducted only upon the issuance of a permit by the Town Clerk.
Such permit shall be issued only upon the filing of a written, verified
application completed in accordance with this chapter by an officer of
the organization sponsoring such special event, at least 60 days prior to
the day of the commencement of such special event.
A. A certificate of public liability insurance in limits not less than
$1,000,000 combined single limit for both bodily injury or death of any
one or more persons and for damage to or destruction of property.
(1) All insurance certificates shall include the Town of Smithtown as an
additional insured and shall be noncancellable without 15 days'
prior written notice of cancellation to the Town Clerk.
(2) Evidence of an owners' and contractors' protective liability policy
in limits of no less than $1,000,000 combined single limit, naming
the Town of Smithtown as the insured, shall be provided to the
Town Clerk in the form of the original insurance policy.
(3) The Town Board may require an applicant to supply additional
insurance coverage when the minimum amounts stated are, in the
opinion of the Town Board; insufficient for the risk undertaken or
when required otherwise by law.
B. An accurate description of the premises upon which the function
(bazaar, fair or entertainment) is to be given.
C. The zoning classification within which said premises lies.
32.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Arts. II and III as Arts. III and IV,
respectively.
§ 119-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-3
1:197
§ 119-4. Affidavit of posting. [Amended 3-23-2017 by L.L. No.
1-2017, effective 10-1-2017; 1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
The application shall be read by the Town Board at its regular meeting
next following the filing of the application, provided that proof in the
form of an affidavit of posting, together with photographs depicting the
requisite postings, is filed with the Town Clerk prior to said regular meeting
certifying that at least five days prior to said meeting a sign has been posted
on the premises as required by § 119-6 hereof. A second posting is required
no more than 10 days prior to the date of the event, and an affidavit of the
second posting must be filed with the Town Clerk no less than five days prior
to the date of the event.
§ 119-5. Issuance of permit; restrictions. [Amended 3-23-2017 by
L.L. No. 1-2017, effective 10-1-2017]
D. The zoning classification of all properties lying within 500 feet of the
subject premises.
E. The number and type of amusements, equipment and facilities which
will be involved in the function.
F. The duration of the function, specifying commencement and
termination by date and the hours of each day during which the
activities will be held.
G. The Federal Employer Identification Number (EIN), name and address
of the person or persons of the sponsoring organization who will be in
charge of the function.
H. The disposition of the proceeds therefrom.
I. A nonrefundable fee of $100 shall accompany each application
submitted under this chapter to cover the costs of application review
and site inspections.
(1) The application fee may be waived for official military or veterans
organizations, a local school district, or any other Smithtown-based
entity as the Town Board deems appropriate.
A. After receipt of the affidavit of posting, the application shall be read by
the Town Board at its regular meeting. Thereafter, the Town Clerk may
issue a permit for the conduct of the special event. No such permit shall
be issued if the Town Board determines that the special event will
disturb the public peace and good order or adversely affect the use and
enjoyment of adjoining properties in adjoining use districts or that the
conduct of the special event will be inconsistent with the public health,
safety or welfare. [Amended 1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
B. Permits may impose reasonable restrictions, conditions and safeguards
upon the issuance of the permit and/or conduct of the special event so
as to assure consistency with the standards set forth above, including a
§ 119-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 119-5
1:198
§ 119-6. Posting of signs. [Amended 3-23-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017,
effective 10-1-2017; 1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
For special event permit applications, notice of the application shall be
given by the applicant erecting a white with black lettering sign or signs
measuring not less than two feet long and one foot wide on the premises,
giving notice of the application and the date, time and place of the reading.
The sign shall be set not more than 10 feet from the property line and shall
not be less than two feet nor more than six feet above grade and must be
posted on the premises as required hereinabove and must be displayed for
a period of not less than five days immediately preceding the Town Board's
reading of the application and again 10 days prior to the date of the event.
The filing of an affidavit by the applicant that this requirement has been
complied with, together with photographs depicting the requisite postings,
requirement for the deposit of an adequate sum of money with the Town
at the time of issuance of the permit to guarantee restoration of the
premises to a neat and orderly condition upon completion of the special
event. [Amended 1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
C. Beginning and end times for all special events shall be subject to
approval by the Town Clerk. [Amended 1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
D. Where the expected number of persons or the duration of the special
event may impact the health, safety and welfare of the public, as a
condition to granting the special event permit, the Town Board may
require the applicant to reimburse the Town for the costs of increased
police protection, public safety oversight, and Department of Parks,
Buildings and Grounds and/or Highway Department facilitation,
including any additional equipment, as may be deemed necessary by
the Town to adequately and safely control and protect the persons
attending the event, the event area and traffic in and around the event
area. Such costs shall include all necessary staffing and shall be
provided to the applicant prior to the issuance of the permit.
E. The Town Board may require the applicant to provide a letter of credit,
bond, cash deposit, or other suitable security instrument to secure
compliance with conditions in the special event permit and to ensure
adequate cleanup of the property after the event. No special event
permit shall be issued until the security has been provided to the Town
Clerk. If the applicant fails to honor the permit conditions or to
adequately clean up the property following the event, the Town may use
such portion of the security as is required to remedy the situation.
F. Permits issued shall be subject to immediate revocation upon violation
of the provisions thereof or the provisions of this chapter. Such
revocation shall be issued by the Town Clerk upon the direction of the
Town Board.33
33.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection G, regarding expedited applications, which immediately
followed, was repealed 1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020.
§ 119-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-6
1:199
shall be deemed sufficient proof of compliance. The affidavit of posting and
photographs for the second posting required must be filed with the Town
Clerk no less than five days prior to the date of the event.
§ 119-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine or imprisonment,
or both; however, for the purpose of conferring jurisdiction upon courts
and judicial officers, such violations shall be deemed misdemeanors, and
for such purposes only, all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall
apply to such violations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm,
association or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty in a sum not exceeding $500 for the first violation and
a sum not exceeding $1,000 for any subsequent violation, said penalties to
be recoverable in a civil action, in the name of the Town of Smithtown, as
damages.
§ 119-8. Firesafety inspection.
Notwithstanding the issuance of a permit in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, no special event shall commence operation or open to the
public until the Department of Public Safety, Fire Prevention Division, of the
Town of Smithtown issues a report affirming that all tents, rides, buildings,
structures, electrical wiring and equipment are in a nonhazardous and
reasonably fireproof condition. All tents, rides, buildings, structures and
electrical wiring equipment shall be in place and operational for purposes
of inspection by a Fire Marshal no later than 12:00 noon of the last business
day immediately prior to the scheduled opening/commencement of said
special event.
§ 119-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § 119-8
1:200
ARTICLE III
Parades and Processions
[Amended 5-28-2009; 3-23-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017, effective
10-1-2017]
§ 119-9. Exceptions; permit required. [Amended 1-7-2020 by L.L.
No. 1-2020]
§ 119-10. Application requirements.
A. All parades are prohibited in the Town of Smithtown, except when such
parades are approved, in writing, by the Town Board.
B. Any parade authorized pursuant to § 119-9A of this chapter shall be
conducted only upon the issuance of a permit by the Town Clerk. Such
permit shall be issued only upon the filing of a written verified
application completed in accordance with this chapter by an officer of
the organization sponsoring such parade, at least 60 days prior to the
date of commencement of the parade.
A. Application for written approval of the Town Board, and for a permit
required by § 119-9 of this chapter, shall be made on an application
form approved by the Town Clerk, submitted no later than 60 days prior
to the date of the event and verified by a duly qualified officer of the
sponsoring organization, setting forth the following information:
[Amended 1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
(1) A detailed parade route with a map of the route to be traveled from
an established, authorized parade designated route list as
promulgated by the Town Clerk.
(2) The Federal Employer Identification Number (EIN), name, address
and telephone number of the person or persons of the sponsoring
organization who will be in charge of the function.
B. In addition to the application requirements specified in § 119-10A, the
Department of Public Safety, upon receipt of the application, will notify
the Suffolk County Police Department, Fourth Precinct, of the proposed
parade, and if any portion of the proposed parade route shall occur
upon, or intersect with, any state highway, the New York State
Department of Transportation, in order for the parade application to
comply with any and all New York State Department of Transportation
requirements, including, but not limited to, signage and road closure
requirements.
C. Application for parade permits used solely for the purposes of practice
or training are prohibited.
D. The applicant must also execute an agreement with the Town of
Smithtown to indemnify and hold harmless the Town of Smithtown from
and against any and all claims arising from the parade.
§ 119-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-10
1:201
§ 119-11. Issuance of permit; restrictions.
E. The application shall be read by the Town Board at its regular meeting
next following the filing of the application, provided that proof in the
form of an affidavit of posting, together with photographs depicting the
requisite postings, is filed with the Town Clerk prior to said regular
meeting certifying that at least five days prior to said meeting a sign has
been posted on the premises as required by § 119-14 hereof. A second
posting is required no more than 10 days prior to the date of the
parade, and an affidavit of the second posting must be filed with the
Town Clerk no less than five days prior to the date of the parade.
[Added 1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
A. After receipt of the application, the Town Board shall read the
application at its regular meeting whereupon the Town Clerk may issue
a permit for the conduct of the parade. No such permit shall be issued if
the Town Board determines that the parade will disturb the public
peace and good order or adversely affect the use and enjoyment of
adjoining properties in adjoining use districts or that the conduct of the
parade will be inconsistent with the public health, safety or welfare.
[Amended 1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
B. Permits may impose reasonable restrictions, conditions and safeguards
upon the issuance of the permit and/or conduct of the parade so as to
assure consistency with the standards set forth above. [Amended
1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
C. The Town Board may require the applicant to provide a letter of credit,
bond, cash deposit, or other suitable security instrument to secure
compliance with conditions in the parade permit and to ensure
adequate cleanup of the property after the event. No special parade
permit shall be issued until the security has been provided to the Town
Clerk. If the applicant fails to honor the permit conditions or to
adequately clean up the property following the event, the Town may use
such portion of the security as is required to remedy the situation.
D. Permits issued shall be subject to immediate revocation upon violation
of the provisions thereof or the provisions of this chapter. Such
revocation shall be issued by the Town Clerk upon the direction of the
Town Board.
E. Nothing herein shall preclude the Town Board from limiting the
readings from two readings to one reading in the event that
circumstances exist which require a parade application to be
expedited.34
34.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F, regarding expedited applications, which immediately
followed, was repealed 1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020.
§ 119-10 SMITHTOWN CODE § 119-12
1:202
§ 119-12. Parade permit not required for funeral processions.
A parade permit shall not be required for any funeral processions for the
actual burial of the dead nor for processions to and from a place of worship
for services in connection therewith. The discharge of firearms or fireworks
and the making of other unreasonable noises during funeral processions are
prohibited.
§ 119-13. Restrictions for parades. [Amended 1-7-2020 by L.L. No.
1-2020]
Any parade held pursuant to a permit issued by the Town Clerk shall only
take place upon those highways and parts of highways or public streets
as shall be specified by the Town Clerk in a permit. Nothing herein shall
prevent the Town Clerk from specifying an alternate parade route if the
Town determines that the proposed parade route will disturb the public
peace and good order or be inconsistent with the public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 119-13.1. Posting of signs. [Added 1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
For parade permit applications, notice of the application shall be given by
the applicant erecting a white with black lettering sign or signs measuring
not less than two feet long and one foot wide at the beginning and end
of the route, facing the public street, giving notice of the application and
the date, time and place of the reading. The sign shall be set not more
than 10 feet from the property line and shall not be less than two feet
nor more than six feet above grade and must be posted at the beginning
and end of the route as required hereinabove and must be displayed for a
period of not less than five days immediately preceding the Town Board's
reading of the application and again 10 days prior to the date of the parade.
The filing of an affidavit by the applicant that this requirement has been
complied with, together with photographs depicting the requisite postings,
shall be deemed sufficient proof of compliance. The affidavit of posting and
photographs for the second posting required must be filed with the Town
Clerk no less than five days prior to the date of the parade.
§ 119-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-13.1
1:203

ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Requirements
§ 119-14. Penalties for offenses. [Added 5-28-200935 ]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine or imprisonment,
or both; however, for the purpose of conferring jurisdiction upon courts
and judicial officers, such violations shall be deemed misdemeanors, and
for such purposes only, all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall
apply to such violations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm,
association or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty in a sum not exceeding $500 for the first violation and
a sum not exceeding $1,000 for any subsequent violation, said penalties to
be recoverable in a civil action, in the name of the Town of Smithtown, as
damages.
§ 119-15. Other permits.
§ 119-16. Revocation. [Amended 3-23-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017,
effective 10-1-2017; 1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
In the event that the person, firm, corporation or other entity conducting
a special event, parade or outdoor assemblage violates or causes to be
violated any condition set forth in a permit issued pursuant to this chapter,
the Town Board may revoke such permit authorizing the conduct of the
special event, parade or outdoor assemblage.
A. Nothing contained herein shall relieve an applicant from the necessity
of obtaining permits as may be required for public assemblies, use of
parklands within the Town of Smithtown or other permits as may be
required under the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
B. Any application for a special event, parade or outdoor assemblage that
includes a proposed display of pyrotechnics, commonly referred to as
fireworks, shall clearly indicate said proposal on the application form to
conduct a special event, parade or outdoor assemblage and shall
comply fully with the provisions of Article XXI, Fireworks, of the Fire
Prevention Code of the Town of Smithtown36 and the applicable current
standards of the National Fire Protection Association.
C. Nothing contained herein shall relieve an applicant from the necessity
of obtaining permits as may be required for special events or parades
from any other New York State, Suffolk County, or other agency as may
be required by law. [Added 5-28-2009]
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former §§ 119-11 and 119-12 as §§ 119-15
and 119-16, respectively.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 164, Fire Prevention.
§ 119-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-16
1:205
Chapter 124
CHRISTMAS TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting generally — See Ch.
215.
Zoning — See Ch. 322.
§ 124-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "Christmas Tree
Ordinance of the Town of Smithtown."
§ 124-2. Purpose.
The proliferation of and the engagement in the sale of Christmas trees and
related materials has become a concern for the Town Board of the Town of
Smithtown. Many individuals are setting up sites for the sale of Christmas
trees without regard to the fire, traffic and safety concerns of the residents
and guests of the Town of Smithtown. These sites are often left abandoned
and in a state of disrepair after the holiday season has passed. Therefore, it
is the intent of the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown to provide for the
regulation of the sale of Christmas trees and to provide an orderly manner
in which such sites may be established and cleaned.
§ 124-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHRISTMAS TREE — Includes any variety of tree used as a symbol of
expressing the holiday season, including wreathes and/or like holiday plants
or decorations.
PERSON — An individual, firm, association, corporation, labor organization,
partnership, tenant, vendee in possession, lessee, agent or employee.
§ 124-4. Permit required.
No person shall engage in or carry on the business of storing or selling
Christmas trees as defined herein within the corporate limits of the Town of
Smithtown without first obtaining a permit therefor as provided herein.
§ 124-5. Contents of permit application. [Amended 11-24-1992]
Applicants for a permit under this chapter must file with the Town Clerk
a sworn application, in writing, together with three conforming copies,
together with the appropriate application fees, to the Town Clerk. Such
application shall give the following information:
§ 119-16 SMITHTOWN CODE § 124-5
1:206
§ 124-6. Permit application processing fee. [Amended 11-24-1992]
All applicants for a permit under this chapter shall pay a processing fee
of $25 per permit application, in addition to any other required fee, to the
Town Clerk.
§ 124-7. Exemption from fee. [Amended 11-24-1992]
Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary person, church or
organization registered with the Secretary of State in Albany as such an
organization pursuant to Article 7-A of the Executive Law shall be exempt
from the application fee required in § 124-6.
§ 124-8. Liability insurance; cash deposit. [Amended 11-24-199237]
A. The name of the applicant.
B. The address of the applicant.
C. The applicant's place of residence for the past five years.
D. The applicant's business address for the past five years.
E. The business name under which Christmas trees will be sold.
F. A notarized written authorization from the owner of the property on
which Christmas trees will be sold.
G. A sworn statement from the property owner that the property used to
sell Christmas trees will be left in a clean condition.
H. A list of dates that the property will be occupied for selling Christmas
trees.
I. The location where Christmas trees are to be sold, including street
address and Suffolk County Tax Map parcel number.
J. The zoning district in which the property in question is located.
K. A sworn statement that the applicant shall save and hold harmless the
Town of Smithtown and its officials and employees from all damages
caused by the negligence of the applicant.
A. The applicant shall obtain general liability insurance naming the Town
of Smithtown as additional insured in the amount of $100,000 and
provide a certificate of the same.
B. The applicant shall post a cash deposit in the amount of $250 which will
be refunded after the site is cleaned up on or before January 3 of each
year.
37.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former §§ 124-10 through 124-14 and
renumbered former §§ 124-15 through 124-18 as §§ 124-10 through 124-13 respectively.
§ 124-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-9
1:207
§ 124-9. Separate permit per site.
Separate permits shall be required for each location where Christmas trees
will be sold.
§ 124-10. Terms of permit.
§ 124-11. Failure to comply. [Amended 11-24-1992]
Failure to comply with this chapter shall subject the applicant to automatic
forfeiture of the cash amount deposited.
§ 124-12. Penalties for offenses.
§ 124-13. Enforcement. [Amended 11-24-1992; 9-7-1993]
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the Department of Public
Safety or its designated representatives or agents and the Suffolk County
Police Department.
A. Every person authorized to sell Christmas trees under this chapter shall
have his or her permit conspicuously posted at all times, and said
permit shall be protected from the elements at all times.
B. No permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
transferred from one person to another or from one business or entity
to another business or entity.
C. All permits issued under this chapter shall commence on November 15
and shall expire on January 3 of each year.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or fails to comply
with any condition imposed by this chapter shall have committed a
violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,500 or imprisonment for
not more than 30 days, or both, for a conviction of a first offense and
punishable by a fine of $5,000 or imprisonment for not more than 60
days, or both for a conviction for a second or subsequent offense. A
separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. The Town Attorney is authorized and directed to institute any and all
actions and proceedings necessary to enforce this chapter. The Town
Attorney is also authorized to seek damages and any civil penalties in
any civil action and such penalties shall be in addition to and not in lieu
of any criminal prosecution and penalty.
§ 124-9 SMITHTOWN CODE § 124-13
1:208
Chapter 129
CONDOMINIUM AND COOPERATIVE CONVERSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 112. Zoning — See Ch. 322.
§ 129-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Condominium and Cooperative
Conversion."
§ 129-2. Legislative intent.
A significant increase in the conversion of rental units to cooperatives
or condominiums is currently taking place. It is sound public policy to
encourage such conversion while, at the same time, protecting tenants in
possession who do not desire or who are unable to purchase the units in
which they reside from being coerced into vacating such units or paying
unconscionable rent increases. The acute shortage of housing
accommodations has aggravated the position of nonpurchasing tenants, and
the position of nonpurchasing tenants who are sixty-two (62) years of age or
older is particularly precarious because of limited financial resources and
physical limitations. The New York State Legislature, in order to provide
protection for persons sixty-two (62) years of age and older and eligible
disabled persons, has enacted Chapter 771 of the 1983 Session Laws of
New York amending § 352-e of the General Business Law by adding a new
Subdivision 2-a to cover senior citizens [persons sixty-two (62) years of age
or older] and disabled persons who are not covered under § 352-eee or
352-eeee of the General Business Law and providing for local adoption by
city, town or village governments not already covered.
§ 129-3. Adoption of provisions.
The Town of Smithtown hereby adopts the provisions of Chapter 771 of
the 1983 Session Laws of New York amending § 352-e of the General
Business Law by adding a new Subdivision 2-a to protect senior citizens
[persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older] from eviction after a plan
has been filed with the Attorney General to convert rental dwelling units
to cooperative or condominium ownership and from unconscionable rent
increases in connection with uncontrolled rental dwelling units.
§ 129-4. Enforcement; penalties for offenses; injunction.
A. For purposes of confirming jurisdiction upon courts and judicial
officers, any violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be a
misdemeanor, and, as such, all provisions of law relating to
misdemeanors shall apply herein. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any
§ 124-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-4
1:209
Chapter 135
SMITHTOWN ANIMAL SHELTER AND ADOPTION CENTER
§ 135-1. Purpose; incorporation of statute.
It is hereby declared and found that the health, welfare and safety of the
inhabitants of the Town of Smithtown require regulations supplementing
the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law, and said New York State
Agriculture and Markets Law is herein incorporated by reference.
§ 135-1.1. Department name. [Added 9-24-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
The Town of Smithtown Animal Control and Adoption Center shall
henceforth be named the "Town of Smithtown Animal Shelter and Adoption
Center."
§ 135-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any Animal Control Officer I or II or the
Animal Shelter Supervisor of the Town of Smithtown.
ANIMAL SHELTER SUPERVISOR — The Animal Shelter Supervisor of the
Town of Smithtown.
ASSISTANT ANIMAL SHELTER SUPERVISOR — The Assistant Animal
Shelter Supervisor of the Town of Smithtown.
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner and not under the immediate
control of the owner, his owner's agent or a member of the owner's family,
or running at will, acting on its own initiative and not on a rope, leash or
similar device.
CAT — Any member of the species Felis domestica.
DOG — Any member of the species Canis familaris.
person, firm, association, corporation or partnership convicted of
violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.) or
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) for the first conviction or
imprisonment for not more than fifteen (15) days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. A second conviction for a violation of this chapter
shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.) or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
B. In addition, the Town Board may maintain an action or proceeding in
the name of the town in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with, or restrain by injunction the violation of this chapter.
§ 129-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 135-2
1:210
GUIDE DOGS — Any dog that is trained to aid a person who is blind, deaf
or otherwise physically disabled and is actually used for such purposes or
any dog owned by a recognized guide dog training center located within the
state during the period such dog is being trained or bred for such purposes.
HARBOR — To provide food or shelter to any dog.
HOUSEHOLD — All the persons who live in one house; a family or a family
and servants.
IDENTIFICATION TAG — A tag which sets forth an official identification
number as required by the provisions of this chapter and the Agriculture
and Markets Law of the State of New York.
OFFICIAL IDENTIFICATION NUMBER — A series or combination of letters,
numbers or symbols approved and furnished by the Town Clerk or personnel
of the Department of Public Safety, Smithtown Animal Shelter and Adoption
Center Division.[Amended 8-14-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
OWNER — The person in whom is vested the ownership or title of an animal.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other
organized group of persons.
POLICE DOG WORK — Any dog harbored by any state or municipal police
department or any state or federal law enforcement agency, which has been
trained to aid law enforcement officers and is actually being used for police
work purposes.
SHELTER CLERK — Includes any Department of Public Safety, Smithtown
Animal Shelter and Adoption Center Division, personnel.[Amended
8-14-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
SIDEWALK — The area between the curbline and the abutting property
owner's line.
§ 135-3. Running at large restricted.
It shall be and hereby is declared to be unlawful for any person owning,
possessing or harboring any dog to allow such dog, whether licensed or not,
to run loose or be at large in any territorial limits of the Town of Smithtown,
except upon any real property owned, leased or lawfully occupied as a
residence or on private lands with the permission of the owner, unless such
dog is under the immediate and full control of the owner or person in charge
thereof and said dog is on a suitably strong leash no longer than six feet in
length.
§ 135-4. License, collar and identification tag required.
A. No person shall own or harbor a dog unless licensed pursuant to Article
7 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law and this chapter.
Licenses shall not be required for dogs:
(1) Under the age of four months which are not at large.
§ 135-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:211
§ 135-5. Nuisances.
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall cause,
suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance
on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area,
park or any place where people congregate or walk or on any public
property whatsoever or on any private property without permission of the
(2) That are service dogs as the term is defined in Article 7 of the New
York State Agriculture and Markets Law, or successor law.
(3) Confined to the premises of an animal shelter or incorporated
society devoted to the care or treatment of lost, strayed or
homeless animals.
(4) Confined to the premises of a person, firm or corporation that holds
a valid certificate of exemption issued by the New York State
Department of Agriculture and Markets.
(5) That are police work dogs.
B. The applicant for a license for a spayed or neutered dog must file with
the Town Clerk an affidavit made by the owner or a veterinary
certificate showing that the dog has been spayed or neutered. No such
affidavit or certificate shall be required if already on file in connection
with an earlier license period.
C. All licenses shall be renewed for a period of one, two or three years,
beginning with the first day of the month following the date of issuance,
and shall be renewable prior to the expiration date, provided that the
dog's rabies vaccination is effective through the license period.
D. The Town Clerk, or authorized personnel of the Department of Public
Safety, Smithtown Animal Shelter and Adoption Center Division, at the
time of issuing the license, shall deliver to the applicant an
identification tag bearing the same official identification number as the
license. [Amended 8-14-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
E. The owner shall place and keep on each licensed dog a suitable collar,
to which shall be securely attached the license identification tag issued
for such dog. No identification tag shall be placed on a dog other than
the dog described in the license.
F. Applications for a dog license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
processing fee promulgated by the Town Clerk. A portion of the fee
shall be paid by the Town of Smithtown to the New York State Animal
Control Fund. Licensing fees may be established by the Town Board as
needed. [Amended 8-14-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
G. Any person wishing to replace an identification tag previously issued
shall pay a fee promulgated by the Town Clerk for a replacement tag.
[Amended 8-14-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
§ 135-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 135-5
1:212
owner of said property. The restriction in this section shall not apply to that
portion of the street lying between the curblines, which portion shall be
used to curb such dog under the following conditions:
§ 135-6. Seizure of animal(s). [Amended 8-14-2018 by L.L. No.
4-2018]
§ 135-7. Redemption of seized animal(s). [Amended 8-14-2018 by
L.L. No. 4-2018]
Any animal seized pursuant to the preceding section may be redeemed by
its owner, provided that such owner produces proof that the animal has
been licensed.
§ 135-7.1. Sterilization required; exemptions. [Added 8-14-2018 by
L.L. No. 4-2018]
After a seized animal has been in the custody of the Town of Smithtown
Animal Shelter and Adoption Center for a period of not less than three
days, or, if notice to the owner was sent by mail, for a period of not less
than seven days, the Town of Smithtown Animal Shelter shall not release a
dog or cat to a person claiming ownership thereof, unless such dog or cat
has been sterilized by a licensed veterinarian; provided, however, that such
requirements shall not apply:
A. The person who so curbs such dog shall immediately remove all feces
deposited by such dog by any sanitary method approved by the Suffolk
County Department of Health.
B. The feces removed from the aforesaid designated area shall be disposed
of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog
curbed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter in a sanitary
manner approved by the Suffolk County Department of Health.
A. Except as hereinbefore provided, any personnel of the Department of
Public Safety, Smithtown Animal Shelter and Adoption Center Division,
or any peace or police officer may:
(1) Seize any dog running at large.
(2) Seize any dog which is not licensed, whether on or off the owner's
premises.
(3) Issue summonses to the owners of all dogs seized.
(4) Seize any animal at the request of the Suffolk County Police
Department, Sheriff's Department or any Fire Department within
the Town of Smithtown.
B. Every animal seized shall be properly fed and cared for at the expense
of the Town until redemption or disposition thereof is made as
hereinafter provided.
§ 135-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-7.1
1:213
A. If a licensed veterinarian certifies to such shelter that he or she has
examined such dog or cat and found that because of a medical reason,
the life of such dog or cat would be endangered by sterilization;
provided, however, that such reason shall not consist solely of the youth
of such dog or cat, if such dog or cat is at least eight weeks of age;
B. Dogs.
(1) If such dog, within the time period provided for by law, rule or
regulation, is claimed by a person claiming ownership thereof, and
such person demonstrates to the satisfaction of the shelter that
such dog has a breed ring show record from the American Kennel
Club or United Kennel Club or other similar registry association,
dated no more than 12 months prior to the date such dog entered
such shelter, or such person claiming ownership is able to provide
proof that such dog has successfully completed the requirements of
the American Kennel Club or United Kennel Club or other similar
registry association, for the title of champion or its equivalent, at
any time prior to the arrival of the dog at the shelter; or
(2) If, within the time period provided for by law, rule or regulation, the
dog is claimed by a person claiming ownership thereof, and such
person demonstrates to the satisfaction of the shelter that such dog
is certified to provide the following services: guide dog, hearing
dog, service dog, therapy dog, or law enforcement work dog; or
(3) If such dog is under the age of 12 months and is claimed by a
person claiming ownership thereof and such person demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that such dog is of a lineage
of at least one parent animal that would qualify for exemption
under Subsection B(1) or (2) above.
C. Cats.
(1) If such cat, within the time period provided for by law, rule or
regulation, is claimed by a person claiming ownership thereof, and
such person demonstrates to the satisfaction of such shelter that
such cat has a breed show record from the Cat Fancier Association
or other similar registry association dated no more than 12 months
prior to the date such cat entered such shelter or such person
claiming ownership is able to provide proof that such cat has
successfully completed the requirements of the Cat Fancier
Association or other similar registry association for the title of
champion, grand champion or its equivalent, at any time prior to
the arrival of the cat at the shelter; or
(2) If such cat is under the age of 12 months and is claimed by a person
claiming ownership thereof and such person demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the shelter that such cat is of a lineage of at least one
parent animal that would qualify for exemption under Subsection
C(1) above.
§ 135-7.1 SMITHTOWN CODE § 135-8
1:214
§ 135-8. Surrender of animals. [Amended 8-14-2018 by L.L. No.
4-2018]
§ 135-9. Adoption of animals. [Amended 8-14-2018 by L.L. No.
4-2018]
A. In addition to the powers granted by law, the Smithtown Animal Shelter
and Adoption Center may accept an animal owned by a resident of the
Town of Smithtown for euthanasia or adoption, provided that such
resident signs a release upon the surrender of the animal, an affidavit
attesting to ownership and any other documentation required by the
Smithtown Animal Shelter and Adoption Center. The determination that
additional documentation or material is necessary to determine proof of
ownership of any animal shall be left to the discretion of the personnel
of the Department of Public Safety, Smithtown Animal Shelter and
Adoption Center Division, the determination of which shall be
conclusive and final.
(1) Any animal surrendered for euthanasia pursuant to this section,
which animal is maimed, diseased, disabled, infirm or, in the sole
opinion of the owner, unfit for any useful purpose, may be
immediately euthanized if the personnel of the Department of
Public Safety, Smithtown Animal Shelter and Adoption Center
Division, obtains from the owner of the animal a statement that the
animal is maimed, diseased, disabled, infirm, or, in the sole opinion
of the owner, unfit for any useful purpose. Final determination as to
whether euthanasia is appropriate shall be left to the sole
discretion of the personnel of the Department of Public Safety,
Smithtown Animal Shelter and Adoption Center Division, after
examination of the animal.
(2) Any animal otherwise surrendered shall not be euthanized until a
minimum of five days shall have passed, unless extenuating
circumstances exist, as determined by the personnel of the
Department of Public Safety, Smithtown Animal Shelter and
Adoption Center Division. The surrendered animal must be made
available for adoption from the time the animal is surrendered to
the Smithtown Animal Shelter and Adoption Center until a
minimum of five days shall have passed. After waiting the requisite
five days, the surrendered animal may then be euthanized.
A. Any person or group wishing to adopt an animal from the Smithtown
Animal Shelter and Adoption Center shall pay to the personnel of the
Department of Public Safety, Smithtown Animal Shelter and Adoption
Center Division, a nonrefundable fee per the applicable fee schedule or
such other fee as may be established by the Town Board from time to
time.
B. All animals which have not been spayed or neutered and are of spay or
neuter age and are adopted from the Smithtown Animal Shelter and
§ 135-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-9
1:215
§ 135-10. Presumptions.
§ 135-11. Town and employees not liable. [Amended 8-14-2018 by
L.L. No. 4-2018]
No liability shall be imposed upon any personnel of the Department of
Public Safety, Smithtown Animal Shelter and Adoption Center Division, the
Town, or any employee of the Town for the euthanasia of any animal or
animals pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law,
ordinance, rule or regulation.
§ 135-12. Penalties for offenses.
Adoption Center must be spayed or neutered at the point of adoption,
prior to taking possession of the animal, unless:
(1) There is a veterinarian's determination that the adopted animal
should not be spayed or neutered due to medical reasons and a
written statement from a veterinarian is provided to the Smithtown
Animal Shelter and Adoption Center prior to the adoption of the
animal.
C. All animals adopted from the Smithtown Animal Shelter and Adoption
Center shall be implanted with a microchip and receive any ageappropriate
vaccinations, as determined by the Smithtown Animal
Shelter and Adoption Center veterinarian, at no additional cost to the
adopter.
(1) Animals that have not achieved age/weight requirements to receive
a rabies vaccination by the time of adoption shall be furnished with
a voucher to have the animal vaccinated when he/she reaches age/
weight requirements.
D. Notwithstanding any of the forgoing, no adoption of any animal from
the Smithtown Animal Shelter and Adoption Center shall be authorized
or permitted by any college, educational, research or similar institution
for purposes of research or experimentation on animals.
A. The fact that a dog is without an identification tag attached to a collar,
as provided by the Town Code and Article 7 of the New York State
Agriculture and Markets Law, shall be presumptive evidence that the
dog is unlicensed.
B. The person who last obtained a license for a dog pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter and Article 7 of the New York State
Agriculture and Markets Law shall be presumed, for the purposes of
this chapter, to be the owner of such dog.
C. For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be presumed that any
unlicensed dog harbored in a one-family dwelling is owned by all adults
residing in the one-family dwelling.
§ 135-9 SMITHTOWN CODE § 135-12
1:216
§ 135-13. Exemptions.
§ 135-14. Interpretation of provisions.
This chapter shall be deemed not to restrict in any manner the powers
and authority conferred upon the Town by Article 7 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law of the State of New York.
§ 135-15. Town Board authorized to modify fees. [Added 9-5-201738;
amended 8-14-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
A. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person violating any
provisions of this chapter of the Code of the Town of Smithtown shall be
subject to a penalty of $75 for the first violation, $150 for the second
violation, and $300 for the third and all subsequent violations.
B. The Town Attorney is authorized and directed to institute any and all
actions and proceedings necessary to enforce this chapter. The Town
Attorney is also authorized to seek damages and any civil penalties in
any civil action, and such penalties shall be in addition to and not in lieu
of any criminal prosecution and penalty.
A. Hunting dogs. The provisions of § 135-4E of this chapter shall not apply
to dogs actually used by persons while actually hunting during the
seasons prescribed therefor by the laws of the State of New York.
B. Police canine dogs. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
police canine dogs while performing a police service.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to guide dogs while under
the control of the person needing assistance and police work dogs
utilized by law enforcement agencies while under the control of law
enforcement for law enforcement purposes. The Town Clerk shall
furnish an identification tag bearing an official identification number
without payment of a fee. [Amended 8-14-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
A. The Town Board may modify, from time to time, any charge or fee set
forth under this chapter by Town Board resolution.
B. The current Animal Shelter Fee Schedule is as follows:
(1) Flat fees:
(a) Dogs: $60.
(b) Puppies: $60.
(c) Cats: $60.
(d) Kittens (single or as litter mates): $60.
38.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 135-15 as § 135-16.
§ 135-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-15
1:217
§ 135-16. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
Chapter 138
DREDGING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Board — See Ch. 21.
Department of Environment and
Waterways — See Ch. 27.
Beaches and parks — See Ch. 101.
Boat basin and mooring areas — See Ch. 108.
Environmental and coastal quality
review — See Ch. 151.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 170.
Shellfish — See Ch. 233.
Water pollution — See Ch. 315.
Waterways — See Ch. 318.
§ 138-1. Title. [Amended 7-14-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Wetlands and Surface
Waters Law of the Town of Smithtown."
§ 138-2. Word usage; definitions.
(2) Miscellaneous services:
(a) Trap rental returned binder: $40.
(b) Microchips (residents): $25.
C. In all situations, the final determination regarding fee calculations shall
be made by Smithtown Animal and Adoption Center Personnel on an
approved form. All fees shall be waived for senior citizens aged 65 and
older and for qualified rescues. All fees, except for licensee
requirements and a registration fee of $10, shall be waived for geriatric
dogs over the age of 10 years old and geriatric cats over the age of 12
years old, animals that have been in the shelter for over a year, and
animals with either behavioral or medical special needs.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
§ 135-15 SMITHTOWN CODE § 138-2
1:218
§ 138-3. Permit required; exceptions.
Notwithstanding the prior granting of permission, no person shall remove
from or deposit in the bed of any watercourse or wetland, nor remove from
any watercourse or wetland to deposit on any upland, privately owned or
owned by the Town or any other municipal or governmental authority, any
material without obtaining from the Town Clerk a written permit therefor,
issued upon the order of the Town as hereinafter provided. This chapter
shall not apply to the removal or deposition of material in connection with
the harvesting of shellfish for commercial purposes.
§ 138-4. Permit application.
A permit may be issued upon the written verified application of the person
proposing to remove or cause the removal or proposing to deposit or cause
the deposition of material. An original and 11 conformed copies of the
application shall be submitted to the Town Clerk. Such application shall
include the following information:
LAMBERT PROJECTION — Lambert Polyconic Conformal Projection,
New York State Coordinate System, Long Island Zone.
MATERIAL — Includes soil, sand, gravel, clay, bog and mud.
OPERATION — Removal or deposition operations or a combination of
both.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal
corporations or governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
REMOVE — Includes dig, dredge, suck and bulldoze.
TOWN — The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown or its successors.
UPLAND — All that land or area above the mean high-water mark.
WATERCOURSES — Any waterway or other body of fresh, brackish
or salt water (having reasonably well-defined banks), including but
not limited to sounds, bays, rivers, creeks, rivulets, lakes, ponds and
streams.
WETLANDS — Lands generally covered or intermittently covered with
water to a depth of six feet or less with fresh, brackish or salt water,
including but not limited to Thatch Meadows, salt marshes, salt
meadows, marshes, swamps and bogs.
A. The name and address of the applicant and the source of the applicant's
right to dredge and/or deposit (e.g., whether the applicant is owner,
lessee, licensee, etc.). In all cases where the applicant is not the owner,
the consent of the owner, duly acknowledged, must be attached.
B. The purpose of the proposed dredging or deposition.
C. The amount of material proposed to be removed or deposited.
§ 138-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-4
1:219
§ 138-5. Fees.
Each application shall be filed with the Town Clerk and accompanied by an
application fee of $100.
§ 138-6. Hearing. [Amended 2-21-1984 by L.L. No. 3-1984]
Upon receipt of the application, the Town Clerk shall forward such
application to the Conservation Board of the Town of Smithtown. The
Conservation Board of the Town of Smithtown shall seek the guidance of
all governmental agencies which may be concerned with the application,
including but not limited to the Water Resources Commission of the State
D. The description of the area from which removal or in which deposition
is proposed. The description shall be by bearing distance and shall be
based on the Lambert Projection. The north and east coordinates of the
starting point based on the Lambert Projection shall be given. If
approved by the engineer for the Town, the description may be based
on a local coordinate system instead of the Lambert Projection;
provided, however, that the starting point of the description shall be
appropriately referenced to a permanent reference point or monument.
E. The depth to which such removal or deposition is proposed throughout
the area and the proposed angle of repose of all slopes.
F. The manner in which the material will be removed and deposited.
G. Survey maps:
(1) A survey and topographical map, with contours at one-foot
intervals showing the area from which removal or in which
deposition is proposed, certified by a registered land surveyor or
professional engineer, both licensed by the State of New York. Such
survey and topographical map shall show the soundings of the area
from which removal or in which deposition is proposed. The
horizontal control of said survey shall be based on the Lambert
Projection or an approved local coordinate system. The vertical
control for elevations and soundings shall be based on United
States Coast and Geodetic Survey datum.
(2) A survey and topographical map with contours at one-foot intervals
of the area in which the material removed is to be deposited,
certified by a registered land surveyor or registered professional
engineer licensed by the State of New York. The horizontal control
of said survey shall be based on the Lambert Projection or an
approved local coordinate system. The vertical control for
elevations and soundings shall be based on United States Coast and
Geodetic Survey datum.
H. The name and address of all owners of land within a radius of 200 feet
from the perimeter of the area in which removal or deposition is
proposed, as shown on the current Town of Smithtown assessment roll.
§ 138-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 138-6
1:220
of New York, the New York State Conservation Department, the Fish and
Wildlife Service of the Department of the Interior and the Corps of
Engineers of the Department of the Army. A copy of the application shall
be forwarded to such agencies for their information and review. The Board
shall review said application and shall hold a public hearing on such
application upon not less than 10 days' notice to be published in the official
newspaper of the Town. In addition, all owners of lands within a radius of
200 feet from the perimeter of the area in which removal or deposition is
proposed shall be notified by the applicant of the hearing by certified mail,
return receipt requested, mailed to the address shown on the current Town
of Smithtown assessment roll not less than 10 days before the hearing.
An affidavit to that effect, together with the receipts, shall be filed with
the Board at the time of the hearing. At such public hearing all interested
persons or groups may appear. After the public hearing, the Conservation
Board of the Town of Smithtown shall report within reasonable time to
the Town its findings and make recommendations with respect to the
application for permit.
§ 138-7. Findings on permit.
The Town may adopt a resolution directing the issuance of a permit
hereunder for the removal and/or deposition of material if it finds that
the proposed removal and/or deposition will not violate the provisions of
§ 138-14 hereof and that the public interest will not otherwise be adversely
affected thereby.
§ 138-8. Conditions upon approval.
The Town shall, upon the adoption of a resolution directing the issuance of
a permit:
A. Impose conditions on the manner and extent of the proposed removal
and deposition.
B. Fix the time by which removal or deposition operations must be
commenced and within which they must be completed.
C. If payments are required under § 138-11 of this chapter, require a
deposit of $0.10 per cubic yard based on the number of estimated yards
of material to be removed, to be applied on account of the payments
required in § 138-11 of this chapter.
D. Require the applicant to file with the Town a performance bond in an
amount and with sureties and in a form to be approved by the Town
conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
with the conditions, if any, imposed in the resolution directing the
issuance of the permit.
E. Require the payment of an inspection fee in an amount to be fixed by
the Town.
§ 138-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-9
1:221
§ 138-9. Bond; insurance; indemnification of Town.
The applicant for a permit hereunder shall, before the issuance of said
permit by the Town Clerk, file with the Town Clerk a bond, if required, in
an amount and with sureties and in a form approved by the Town Board,
conditioned on compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with the
conditions, if any, imposed in the resolution directing the issuance of the
permit, and a certificate that the applicant has public liability insurance
against any liability which may arise from the removal or deposition of
material pursuant to such permit and covering any and all damage which
may occur within three years after the completion of the operations under
such permits, in an amount of $500,000 for all accidents resulting in bodily
injury or death and for property damage in an amount not less than
$100,000 for all accidents. The applicant shall also submit to the Town Clerk
an indemnification agreement in which the applicant shall agree to assume
the defense of and indemnify and save harmless the Town and its officers
and employees from any and all claims arising out of or connected with the
operations under such permit and from all acts, omissions or negligence on
the part of the applicant, his agents or employees.
§ 138-10. Issuance of permit; fee; approval of other authorities.
Upon the adoption of a resolution directing the issuance of a permit, the
Town Clerk shall issue a permit upon the payment of a fee of not less
than $150 and upon compliance with all provisions of this chapter or the
resolution directing the issuance of the permit. Such permit shall contain
the following statement:
"The validity of this permit is or may be subject to the approval of other
governmental or municipal authorities. The Town accepts no responsibility
in applying for or obtaining such approval. In the event that such approval
is necessary, the holder of this permit may not commence operations
hereunder until such approval has been obtained. The failure to obtain
such approval, when required, prior to the commencement of operations
hereunder shall subject this permit to immediate revocation upon order of
the Town."
§ 138-11. Payments to Town.
The applicant shall pay to the Town such sum as may be fixed by the Town,
but in any event not less than $0.35 per cubic yard for all salable soil,
sand, gravel or other material removed from the bed of any watercourse or
wetland owned by the Town as a result of his operations under such permit,
shown by the certifications required by § 138-12 hereof. Such payments
shall be made within five days after delivery of the certifications. Final
payment shall be made within 30 days after the work under the permit
shall have been completed or within 30 days after the date specified by the
resolution authorizing the issuance of the permit for the completion of the
work, whichever shall occur first. If the Town shall find that the proposed
removal of Town land will benefit the Town substantially as a necessary
§ 138-9 SMITHTOWN CODE § 138-11
1:222
improvement of any area affected thereby, the resolution adopted under
§ 138-7 hereunder may waive all or a portion of the payments required by
this section.
§ 138-12. Reports; inspections.
§ 138-13. Certificate of amount removed.
The final payment under § 138-11 hereunder shall be accompanied by a
certificate by a registered land surveyor or registered professional engineer
duly licensed by the State of New York of the amount of material removed
and that the removal operations have been in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and the conditions imposed by the resolution
directing the issuance of the permit. In computing the amount of material
removed, the Town may, in its discretion, accept a certification of the
amount of material deposited or stored, as a result of such removal
operations, as the equivalent of the amount removed.
§ 138-14. Standards.
All operations under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
done in such a manner that the removal and/or deposition of material and
the redepositing and storage thereof will neither undermine, weaken nor
deprive of support other lands in the vicinity nor otherwise adversely affect
the watercourses and wetlands of the Town and the lands abutting nor,
unless the permit issued pursuant hereto shall expressly provide otherwise,
substantially change the course of any channel or the natural movement or
flow of any waters or cause or accelerate the drift of soil, shale, mud or bog,
upland or underwater, nor adversely affect fish, shellfish, wildlife or other
natural resources.
§ 138-15. Certificate of compliance; survey.
Upon completion of the operations authorized hereunder, the person to
whom the permit has been issued shall submit to the Town a certificate from
a registered land surveyor or registered professional engineer duly licensed
A. Commencing on the second Friday after the issuance of a permit
hereunder, whether or not operations have commenced, the person to
whom such permit is issued shall furnish once every two weeks
certifications by a registered land surveyor or registered professional
engineer duly licensed by the State of New York of the quantities of
material removed or deposited or, if none has been removed or
deposited, a certification to that effect, and there shall be attached to
such certification a sketch showing the progress of the operations and
any deviation from the terms of such permit. Such reports and
certifications shall be filed with the Conservation Board of the Town of
Smithtown. [Amended 2-21-1984 by L.L. No. 3-1984]
B. The Town at any time may inspect the area from which material is being
removed and/or the area in which it is being deposited.
§ 138-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-15
1:223
by the State of New York that the work has been completed in accordance
with this chapter and with the resolution of the Town Board directing the
issuance of the permit. A survey and topographical and hydrographical map
shall include soundings of such area. The survey and topographical map
shall show the depth of the area from which material has been removed and/
or in which it has been deposited and the slopes from which the material
has been removed and/or on which it has been deposited, connecting with
adjoining lands. The horizontal control of said survey shall be based on the
Lambert Projection or an approved local coordinate system. The vertical
control for elevations and soundings shall be based on United States Coast
and Geodetic Survey datum.
§ 138-16. Suspension of work.
If any person to whom a permit shall have been issued hereunder shall
fail at any time to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with the
conditions imposed by the resolution of the Town directing the issuance of
such permit, he shall, upon the direction of the Town, immediately suspend
all operations under such permit for such period as may be prescribed
by the Town. Upon direction of the Town, such person shall cease all
operations and remove all equipment used in connection therewith, and
upon the direction of the Town, such permit shall be void. The suspension
or revocation of such permit shall not relieve the holder of the permit of any
of the obligations thereunder.
§ 138-17. Civil penalties. [Amended 7-14-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
Any person who shall erect, reconstruct, remove or repair any structure
without having been issued a valid and effective permit pursuant to this
chapter or who shall remove from and/or deposit material on Town-owned
lands in the bed of a watercourse or wetland and any person who shall
cause such material to be removed and/or deposited without having been
issued a valid and effective permit pursuant to this chapter shall be liable
for the payment to the Town of Smithtown the sum of $1,000 for each day
or part thereof during which such removal or deposition shall take place
for the material removed or deposited during such day, in addition to any
penalties prescribed by law and any other damages for which he may be
liable.
§ 138-18. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-14-1992 by L.L. No.
4-1992]
A. Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of any local laws of the Town of Smithtown shall be guilty of
an offense punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both; however, for the
purpose of confirming jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers,
such violations shall be deemed to be misdemeanors, and for such
purposes only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply
to such violations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm,
association or corporation violating any provision of any local law of the
§ 138-15 SMITHTOWN CODE § 138-18
1:224
§ 138-19. Approval of other agencies.
A permit issued hereunder may be subject to the approval of the Corps
of Army Engineers and may be subject to the issuance of permits by
appropriate federal and state agencies.
§ 138-20. Exemptions for municipalities.
No municipality shall be required to pay any fee required by this chapter.
No municipality shall be required to submit a performance bond as required
by this chapter; provided, however, that if such municipality contracts with
a private firm to perform the proposed removal and/or deposition, suitable
evidence must be furnished to the Town of the existence of the performance
bond. The Town of Smithtown shall be exempted from all provisions of this
chapter.
§ 138-21. Dams, docks or impounded structures.
Town of Smithtown shall be subject to a penalty in a sum of $500 for
the first such violation and $1,000 for the second such violation and in a
sum not exceeding $5,000 for any subsequent violations. Said penalties
to be recoverable in a civil action in the name of the Town of Smithtown
as damages.
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
C. In addition to any penalties which may be imposed pursuant to this
chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any
conditions imposed upon the issuance of a permit pursuant to this
chapter may be ordered to restore the premises to such suitable
conditions as the Town Board may require. In the event that such
person refuses or fails to restore such real property in conformity with
the requirements of the Town Board, the Town may undertake and
perform said restoration. In the event that the Town of Smithtown is
compelled to restore such real property, all costs incurred incidental to
such restoration shall be assessed against the real property in question.
A. No dam or impoundment structure, including any artificial
construction, temporary or permanent, nor any dock, pier, wharf or
other structure, temporary or permanent, used as a landing place on
waters, nor any bulkhead shall be erected, reconstructed, removed or
repaired by any person in or across lands underwater without a permit
issued pursuant to Subsection B hereof. [Amended 7-14-1992 by L.L.
No. 4-1992]
B. Permit. A person desiring to construct, remove, reconstruct or repair
such dam or impoundment structure or such dock, pier, wharf or
bulkhead shall apply to the Town for a permit. An original and 11
conformed copies of the application for the permit shall be submitted to
the Town Clerk. [Amended 7-14-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
§ 138-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-21
1:225
Chapter 145
(1) Such application shall contain the following information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The purpose of this proposed structure.
(c) The name of all owners of contiguous land and their addresses
as shown on the then-current Town of Smithtown assessment
roll.
(2) Such application shall be accompanied by a complete set of plans
and specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer
licensed by the State of New York. The location of the proposed
structure shall be clearly indicated on the plans by reference to
either the Lambert Projection or, if approved by the Engineer for
the Town, a local coordinate system; provided, however, that the
starting point of such description shall be appropriately referenced
to a permanent reference point or monument.
C. Hearing. The Town Clerk shall forward such application to the
Conservation Board of the Town of Smithtown. The fee for filing of such
application shall be $50. The proceedings before the Conservation
Board of the Town of Smithtown shall be conducted in accordance with
§ 138-6 of this chapter. [Amended 2-21-1984 by L.L. No. 3-1984]
D. Issuance of permit. The Town Board may adopt a resolution directing
the issuance of a permit for the construction of a structure under this
chapter if it finds that the proposed structure will not violate the
provisions of § 138-14 hereof. The permit shall contain a statement
similar to that provided by § 138-10 of this chapter. Before the applicant
may begin to commence construction, he must apply for and receive a
permit from the Building Department of the Town. A performance bond,
however, shall not be required in the event that the estimated cost of
the improvement is less than $5,000. An annual permit shall not be
required for seasonal docks after the issuance of the original permit,
unless the person owning or maintaining such seasonal docks changes
the size, dimension or location of such dock. However, the Conservation
Board of the Town of Smithtown may, in its discretion, provide that the
permit is effective for a specified period of years and may require
renewal at the expiration thereof. [Amended 2-21-1984 by L.L. No.
3-1984]
E. Waiver of certain requirements. Where, in the judgment of the Town
Board of the Town of Smithtown, a project is proposed within the
regulatory provisions of this chapter, the enforcement of which would
create a hardship because of the minimal size of the contemplated
project, the Town Board may adopt a resolution waiving or lowering the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 138-21 SMITHTOWN CODE § 138-21
1:226
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 115.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 164.
§ 145-1. Title and administration. [Amended 6-9-1998; 5-8-2007]
This chapter shall be known as the "Electrical Code of the Town of
Smithtown" and shall be administered under the supervision of the Building
Director of the Town of Smithtown.
§ 145-2. Statement of purpose.
Since there is danger to life and property inherent in the use of electrical
energy, this electrical chapter is enacted to regulate the installation and
alteration of wiring for electric light, heat or power and signal systems
operating on 50 volts or more in or on all real property within the Town of
Smithtown.
§ 145-3. Adoption of standards by reference.
All electrical installations heretofore mentioned shall be made in conformity
with the requirements of the National Electrical Code, except where the
provisions of this chapter or any other local law, ordinance or Building
Code of the Town of Smithtown shall differently prescribe, in which event
compliance with the provisions of such local law, ordinance or Building
Code shall be recognized as proper compliance with this chapter. The
requirements of the National Electrical Code shall be those known as the
"National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet No. 70," as approved and
adopted by the American Standards Association.
§ 145-4. Electrical Inspector. [Amended 6-9-1998]
A. The duly appointed Inspectors of qualifying organizations may be
designated as Electrical Inspectors by Town Board resolution and
authorized and deputized as agents of the Town of Smithtown to make
inspections and reinspections of all electrical installations, alterations
and repairs heretofore and hereafter described and to approve or
disapprove the same. In no event, however, will the cost or expense of
such inspections and reinspections be a charge against the Town of
Smithtown.
B. All organizations and Inspectors applying for authorization under this
chapter must meet or comply with the following requirements:
(1) Inspectors shall have a minimum of 10 years' field experience in the
maintenance, installation or inspection of electrical systems.
§ 138-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-4
1:227
§ 145-5. Powers and duties of Inspector. [Amended 6-9-1998;
5-8-2007]
It shall be the duty of the Inspector to report, in writing, to the Building
Director, whose duty it shall be to enforce all provisions of this chapter,
all violations of or deviations from or omissions of the electrical provisions
of the National Electrical Code, and of all local laws, ordinances and the
Building Code as referred to in this chapter insofar as any of the same
apply to electrical installations, alterations and repairs. The Inspector shall
make inspections and reinspections of electrical installations, alterations
and repairs in and on properties in the Town of Smithtown upon the written
request of an authorized official of the Town of Smithtown or as herein
provided. The Inspector is authorized to make inspections and reinspections
of electrical installations, alterations and repairs in and on properties within
the Town of Smithtown where he deems it necessary for the protection of
life and property. In the event of an emergency, it is the duty of the Inspector
to make electrical inspections upon the oral request of an official or office
of the Town of Smithtown. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to furnish
written reports to the proper officials of the Town of Smithtown and the
owners and/or lessees of property where defective electrical installations,
alterations and repairs are found upon inspection. He shall authorize the
issuing of a certificate of compliance when electrical installations,
alterations and repairs are in conformity with this chapter. He shall direct
(2) Inspectors shall hold and maintain a certification from the
International Association of Electrical Inspectors (IAEI) for oneand
two-family dwellings and for general electrical.
(3) Inspectors shall be familiar with the National Electrical Code and
New York State and Town of Smithtown laws, rules and regulations
to the extent that they relate to electrical inspections.
(4) Inspectors shall shelve active electrician licenses during the period
of appointment, if there may be a conflict of interest.
(5) The organization shall maintain policies of insurance from an
insurance company(ies) duly licensed by the State of New York
meeting or exceeding the following minimum coverage
requirements and shall provide a certificate of insurance
evidencing the same and naming the Town of Smithtown as an
additional insured:
(a) General liability: $1,000,000 per occurrence; $2,000,000
aggregate.
(b) Excess liability: $1,000,000 per occurrence.
(c) Workers compensation: statutory requirements.
(6) The organization shall file a verified application with the Building
Director on the form provided by the Town Clerk. [Amended
5-8-2007]
§ 145-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 145-5
1:228
that the certificate of compliance be sent to the Town of Smithtown to the
attention of the Building Director.
§ 145-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes an individual, copartnership, society, association, jointstock
company, club, corporation and any combination of individuals within
the Town of Smithtown, Suffolk County, New York.
§ 145-7. Prohibited acts. [Amended 6-9-1998]
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to install or cause to
be installed or to alter electrical wiring for light, heat or power in or on
properties in the Town of Smithtown until a Building Department permit
has been issued and an application for inspection has been filed with any
authorized organization hereunder. It shall be a violation of this chapter for
a person to connect or cause to be connected electrical wiring in issuance
of a temporary certificate or a certificate of compliance by any authorized
organization hereunder.
§ 145-8. Penalties for offenses.
§ 145-9. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the electrical installations
in mines, ships, railway cars or automotive equipment or the installations
or equipment employed by a railway, electrical or communication utility in
the exercise of its function as a utility and located outdoors or in buildings
used exclusively for that purpose. This chapter shall not apply to any
work involved in the manufacture, assembly, test or repair of electrical
machinery, apparatus, materials and equipment by a person engaged in
electrical manufacturing as his principal business. It shall not apply to any
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of an offense punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both; however, for
the purpose of confirming jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers,
such violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and for such purposes
only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such
violations. In lieu of the foregoing, any person violating any provision of
this chapter shall be subject to a penalty in a sum not exceeding $500
for the first violation and in a sum not exceeding $1,000 for any
subsequent violation. Said penalties shall be recovered in a civil action
in the name of the Town of Smithtown. [Amended 7-14-1992;
6-9-1998]
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
§ 145-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-9
1:229
building which is owned or leased in its entirety by the Government of the
United States or the State of New York.
§ 145-10. No waiver or assumption of liability. [Amended 6-9-1998]
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing
electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for loss of life or damage
to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the Town of
Smithtown be deemed to have assumed any such liability by reason of any
inspection made pursuant to this chapter.
Chapter 148
ENTERTAINMENT REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 105.
Games of chance — See Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 322.
§ 148-1. Clothing requirements.
It shall be unlawful for any female to appear in public clothed or costumed
in such a manner that the portion of her breast below the top of the
areola is not covered with a fully opaque covering. Any person shall be
guilty of violating this section who, in any capacity, knowingly directs, gives,
manages, participates in, prepares or presents, or who employs others so to
do, any live public show in which a female appears clothed or costumed in
such a manner that the portion of her breast below the top of the areola is
not covered with a fully opaque covering.
§ 148-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
IN PUBLIC — Any place to which the general public has a right to resort;
not necessarily a place devoted solely to the uses of the public, but a place
which is in point of fact public rather than private; a place accessible to the
public to gather or pass to and from.
LIVE PUBLIC SHOW — A public show in which human actors, dancers
or other performers, employees or other persons appear in person before
spectators or customers. A bona fide drawing, painting, photography,
sculpture or other art class utilizing human models and admitting only
participating instructors, students and models shall not be deemed a "live
public show."
§ 145-9 SMITHTOWN CODE § 148-2
1:230
PUBLIC SHOW — Any entertainment or exhibition advertised or in other
fashion held out to be accessible to the public, whether or not an admission
or other charge is levied or collected; an entertainment or exhibition shall
be deemed a "public show" although access to it is only granted to members
of a club or other association when membership in such organization is
obtained upon the payment of an admission price or contribution or token
dues or other small fee and the organization in fact exists primarily for
sponsoring or arranging admissions to such performances.
§ 148-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall be subject to
imprisonment not to exceed 15 days or a fine, to be fixed by the court, not
to exceed $250, or both.
Chapter 151
ENVIRONMENTAL AND COASTAL QUALITY REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Board — See Ch. 21.
Department of Environment and
Waterways — See Ch. 27.
Dredging — See Ch. 138.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 170.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 248.
Water pollution — See Ch. 315.
Zoning — See Ch. 322.
§ 148-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-3
1:231

ARTICLE I
Environmental Quality Review Fees
[Adopted 12-27-1984 by L.L. No. 18-1984]
§ 151-1. Fees imposed. [Amended 12-10-2002 by L.L. No. 7-2002]
Pursuant to the provisions of Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation
Law of the State of New York, the Town of Smithtown hereby adopts the
following fee schedule to be paid by applicants to the Town of Smithtown
for determination of significance review and the preparation and/or review
of environmental impact statements when the same are required pursuant
to the provisions of SEQRA (State Environmental Quality Review Act). Such
fees shall be required in addition to any other fee due and payable to the
Town of Smithtown in regard to such applications or petitions. The fees
under this chapter may be changed from time to time by resolution of the
Town Board.
§ 151-2. Schedule of fees. [Amended 9-24-1985 by L.L. No. 11-1985;
10-25-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988; 7-22-1997 by L.L. No. 5-1997;
5-13-2003; 10-9-2018]
The following fee schedule shall be adhered to and such payment shall be
made by applicants to the Town of Smithtown for preliminary environmental
assessments and review of applications, and the preparation or review of
environmental impact statements pursuant to the provisions of SEQRA:
A. Preliminary environmental assessments and review of applications.
(1) Residentially zoned land subdivision applications.
(a) Applications involving up to but less than one acre: $1,100.
(b) Applications involving one or more acres, but less than four
acres: $1,650.
(c) Applications involving four or more acres, but less than seven
acres: $2,100.
(d) Applications involving seven or more acres, but less than 10
acres: $2,550.
(e) Applications involving 10 or more acres: $3,500.
(2) Commercially or industrially zoned land subdivision applications.
(a) Applications involving up to but less than two acres: $1,650.
(b) Applications involving two or more acres, but less than five
acres: $2,300.
(c) Applications involving five or more acres, but less than 10
acres: $3,500.
§ 151-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-2
1:233
(d) Applications involving 10 or more acres: $45,500.
(3) Site plan approval applications.
(a) Applications involving modifications to existing facilities which
will result in the addition of less than 1,000 square feet of floor
space or paved area: $1,400.
(b) Applications involving up to but less than one acre: $1,400.
(c) Applications involving one or more acres, but less than two
acres: $1,850.
(d) Applications involving two or more acres, but less than five
acres: $2,300.
(e) Applications involving five or more acres, but less than 10
acres: $3,500.
(f) Applications involving 10 or more acres but less than 25 acres:
$5,000.
(g) Applications involving 25 acres or more: $8,200.
(4) Site plan exemptions.
(a) Any site plan exemption: $500.
(5) Change of zone and special exception petitions.
(a) Petitions involving up to but less than one acre: $1,400.
(b) Petitions involving one or more acres, but less than two acres:
$1,850.
(c) Petitions involving two or more acres, but less than five acres:
$2,300.
(d) Petitions involving five or more acres, but less than 10 acres:
$3,500.
(e) Petitions involving 10 or more acres, but less than 25 acres:
$5,000.
(f) Petitions involving 25 acres or more: $8,200.
(6) All other petitions and/or applications involving land use.
(a) Petitions and/or applications involving up to but less than two
acres of residentially zoned land: $70.
(b) Petitions and/or applications involving two or more acres of
residentially zoned land: $130.
(c) Petitions and/or applications involving up to but less than one
acre of nonresidentially zoned land: $70.
§ 151-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 151-2
1:234
(d) Petitions and/or applications involving one or more acres, but
less than two acres, of nonresidentially zoned land: $130.
(e) Petitions and/or applications involving two or more acres, but
less than five acres, of nonresidentially zoned land: $275.
(f) Petitions and/or applications involving five or more acres of
nonresidentially zoned land: $650.
B. Environmental impact statement review, in-depth review and SEQRA
coordination:
(1) Residentially zoned land subdivisions:
(a) Proposals involving up to but less than four acres: $8,500.
(b) Proposals involving four or more acres, but less than seven
acres: $17,500.
(c) Proposals involving seven or more acres, but less than 10
acres: $24,000.
(d) Proposals involving 10 or more acres, but less than 20 acres:
$35,500.
(e) Proposals involving 20 or more acres: $45,500.
(2) Commercial and industrially zoned land subdivisions, applications
for site plan approval, change of zone and special exception
petitions:
(a) Proposals involving up to but less than two acres: $8,500.
(b) Proposals involving two or more acres, but less than five acres:
$17,500.
(c) Proposals involving five or more acres, but less than 10 acres:
$24,000.
(d) Proposals involving 10 or more acres, but less than 15 acres:
$35,500.
(e) Proposals involving 15 or more acres: $45,000.
§ 151-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-2
1:235

ARTICLE II
Environmental Quality and Coastal Consistency Review
[Adopted 6-6-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989]
§ 151-3. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Town of Smithtown Environmental
Quality and Coastal Consistency Review Law."
§ 151-4. Authority.
This article is adopted under the authority of the Municipal Home Rule Law
and the Waterfront Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act of the State
of New York (Article 42 of the Executive Law) and the State Environmental
Quality Review Act (Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law).
§ 151-5. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to implement the State Environmental Quality
Review Act, the town's Local Waterfront Revitalization Program and its
consistency review regulations and procedures for the Town of Smithtown,
thereby incorporating environmental and social factors and the
consideration of coastal resources into existing planning and
decisionmaking processes.
§ 151-6. Applicability.
All boards, departments, officers, other bodies or officers of the Town of
Smithtown must comply with the State Environmental Quality Review Act,
and its regulations as they are amended from time to time, and the Town
of Smithtown Environmental Quality and Coastal Consistency Review Law
of this Article to the extent applicable, prior to carrying out, approving or
funding any action other than an exempt or excluded action, as those terms
are defined in Part 617 of the Official Compilation of Codes, Rules and
Regulations of the State of New York (NYCRR), or a Type II Action, as that
term is defined in this Article.
§ 151-7. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIONS —
Projects or physical activities, such as construction or other activities,
that may affect the environment by changing the use, appearance or
condition of any natural resource or structure, which:
(1) Are directly undertaken by an agency;
(2) Involve funding by an agency; or
A.
§ 151-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-7
1:237
AGENCY — Any board, agency, department, office, other body or official or
officer of the Town of Smithtown.
APPLICANT — Any person making an application or other request to an
agency to provide funding or to grant an approval or a permit in connection
with a proposed action.
COASTAL AREA — The New York State coastal waters and adjacent
shorelines, as defined in Article 42 of the Executive Law, which are located
within the boundaries of the Town of Smithtown, as shown on the coastal
area map on file in the office of the Secretary of State and as delineated in
the Town of Smithtown Local Waterfront Revitalization Program.
COASTAL ASSESSMENT FORM (CAF) — The form used by the Town Board
to assist it in determining the consistency of an action with the LWRP.
CONDITIONED NEGATIVE DECLARATION — A negative declaration issued
by a lead agency for an unlisted action, involving an applicant, in which the
action as initially proposed may result in one or more significant adverse
environmental effects; however, mitigation measures identified and
required by the lead agency, pursuant to the procedure in 6 NYCRR Part
617, will modify the proposed action so that no significant adverse
environmental impacts will result.
CONSISTENT — That the action will fully comply with and not hinder any
of the Town of Smithtown LWRP standards and conditions and, whenever
practicable, will advance one or more of such policies.
CRITICAL ENVIRONMENTAL AREA — A specific geographic area
designated by the Town Board having exceptional or unique characteristics
that make the area environmentally important.[Amended 7-9-1996 by
L.L. No. 2-1996]
DIRECT ACTION OR DIRECTLY UNDERTAKEN — An action planned and
proposed for implementation by an agency or the town. "Direct actions"
include but are not limited to capital projects, promulgation of agency rules,
regulations, laws, codes or ordinances and policy-making which commits an
agency to a course of action.
ENVIRONMENT — A physical condition which will be affected by a
proposed action, including but not limited to land, air, water, minerals,
flora, fauna, noise, resources of agricultural, archaeological, historical or
Require one or more permits or approvals from an agency or
agencies.
(3)
Agency planning and policy-making activities that may affect the
environment and commit the agency to a course of future conduct or
decisions.
B.
The adoption of agency rules, regulations and procedures, including
local laws, codes, ordinances, executive orders and resolutions, that
may affect the environment.
C.
D. Any combinations of the above.
§ 151-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 151-7
1:238
aesthetic significance, existing patterns of population concentration,
distribution or growth, existing community or neighborhood character and
human health.
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT FORM (EAF) — The long form appearing
at 6 NYCRR Part 617, used by an agency to assist it in determining the
environmental significance or nonsignificance of actions. A properly
completed "EAF" shall contain enough information to describe the proposed
action, its location, its purpose and its potential impacts on the
environment. In the event that the Department of Environment and
Waterways of the Town of Smithtown promulgates another "environmental
assessment form" different from that appearing at 6 NYCRR Part 617, then
that "environmental assessment form" shall be used so long as it is no less
protective of the environment than the form found at 6 NYCRR Part 617.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT (EIS) — A written document
prepared in accordance with 6 NYCRR Part 617. An "environmental impact
statement" may either be in draft or final form. A "draft EIS" is the initial
statement prepared by either the applicant or the lead agency and
circulated for review and comment. A "generic EIS" or "supplemental EIS"
may also be prepared in accordance with 6 NYCRR Part 617.[Amended
7-9-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
EXCLUDED ACTION — An action to which the requirements of 6 NYCRR
Part 617 do not apply.
EXEMPT ACTION — Any one of the following:
FUNDING — Any financial support given by an agency, including contracts,
grants, subsidies, loans or other forms of direct or indirect financial
assistance in connection with the proposed action.
Civil or criminal enforcement proceedings, whether administrative or
judicial, including a particular course of action specifically required
to be undertaken pursuant to a judgment or order or the exercise of
prosecutorial discretion.
A.
B. Official acts of a ministerial nature involving no exercise of discretion.
Maintenance or repairs involving no substantial changes in an existing
structural facility.
C.
Emergency actions which are immediately necessary on a limited and
temporary basis for the protection or preservation of life, health,
property or natural resources, provided that such actions are directly
related to the emergency and are performed to cause the least change
or disturbance practicable under the circumstances to the
environment. Any decision to fund, approve or directly undertake other
activities after the emergency has expired is fully subject to the review
procedures of this Article and of the State Environmental Quality
Review Act.
D.
Actions of the Legislature of the State of New York or of any court.
Actions of the town are not exempt.
E.
§ 151-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-7
1:239
LEAD AGENCY — The agency principally responsible for carrying out,
funding or approving an action and therefore responsible for determining
whether an EIS is required in connection with the action and for causing
the preparation and filing of the EIS if one is required.
LOCAL WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION PROGRAM (LWRP) — The Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program of the Town of Smithtown, as approved
by the Secretary of State pursuant to the Waterfront Revitalization and
Coastal Resources Act (Executive Law Article 42), a copy of which is on file
in the office of the Clerk of the Town of Smithtown.
MINISTERIAL ACT — An action performed upon a given state of facts in a
prescribed manner, proposed by law without the exercise of any judgment
or discretion as to the propriety of the act, such as the granting of a hunting
or fishing license; nor shall "ministerial acts" be deemed to include the site
plan, subdivision, change of zone or special exception review process or
approval.
NEGATIVE DECLARATION — A written determination by a lead agency
that the implementation of the action as proposed will not result in any
significant adverse environmental effects. "Negative declarations" must be
prepared and filed in accordance with 6 NYCRR Part 617.
PERMIT — A permit, lease, license, certificate or other entitlement for use
or permission to act, that may be granted or issued by an agency.
PERSON — Any agency, individual, corporation, government entity,
partnership, association, trustee or other legal entity.
PHYSICAL ALTERATION — Includes the following activities but shall not
be limited to vegetation removal; demolition; stockpiling materials; grading
and other forms of earthwork; dumping, filling or depositing; discharges
to air or water; excavation or trenching; the application of pesticides,
herbicides or other chemicals; the application of sewage sludge; dredging;
flooding; draining or dewatering; paving; the construction of buildings,
structures or facilities; and extraction, injection or recharge of resources
below the ground.
POSITIVE DECLARATION — A written statement prepared by the lead
agency indicating that implementation of the action as proposed may have
a significant adverse effect on the environment and that an environmental
impact statement will be required. "Positive declarations" must be prepared
and filed in accordance with 6 NYCRR Part 617.
STATE ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW ACT (SEQRA) — Article 8 of
the Environmental Conservation Law of the State of New York.
STATE ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW REGULATIONS (PART 617)
— 6 NYCRR Part 617.
TOWN — The Town of Smithtown.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown.
TYPE I ACTION — Includes all those actions listed in 6 NYCRR Part 617
and all critical areas of environmental concern as the Town Board shall have
§ 151-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 151-7
1:240
designated pursuant to the authority and procedure of 6 NYCRR Part 617.
In addition, any proposed action to be located within 500 feet of the mean
high-water level of any tidal waters within the Town shall be considered a
"Type I action," except for those actions categorized as Type II actions.
TYPE II ACTION — Includes all those listed in 6 NYCRR Part 617, except as
otherwise noted in this article.
UNLISTED ACTION — All actions not listed as Type I or Type II actions and
not exempt or excluded actions as those terms are defined in 6 NYCRR Part
617 and this article.
§ 151-8. Initial review; funding or approval.
§ 151-9. Initial review; direct actions or undertakings.
A. With regard to an application for an action involving funding or
approval or the issuance of a permit by the town, the Planning Director
or the Building Director, as the appropriate case may be, shall advise
such applicant whether a proposed action is located within the coastal
area, and if so, the applicant shall be provided with a coastal
assessment form (CAF), pursuant to § 151-10 of this article, and the
applicant shall file a completed CAF. [Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No.
5-2007]
B. The Planning Director shall not accept any application for any proposed
action unless such application is accompanied by a completed
environmental assessment form (EAF). Upon receipt of a completed
EAF, the Planning Director shall forward the completed EAF, along with
all accompanying applications, maps and plans, to the Supervisor of
Environment and Waterways for review and for the appropriate SEQRA
determination and classification.
A. With regard to an action which is proposed to be directly undertaken by
the town or any agency, the agency proposing such direct action shall
notify and consult with the Planning Director and the Supervisor of
Environment and Waterways.
B. The Planning Director shall advise the agency proposing such direct
action whether the proposed direct action would be located within the
coastal area, and if so, the agency proposing such direct action shall
complete and file a coastal assessment form pursuant to § 151-10 of this
Article.
C. The Supervisor of Environment and Waterways shall advise the agency
proposing such direct action that the proposed direct action is subject
to the provisions of SEQRA, and the agency proposing such direct
action shall complete and file an environmental assessment form
pursuant to § 151-10 of this Article. The Supervisor of Environment and
Waterways shall then review the proposed action for the appropriate
SEQRA determination and classification.
§ 151-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-10
1:241
§ 151-10. Environmental and coastal assessment forms.
A. When any agency contemplates directly carrying out, funding or
approving any Type I or unlisted action, an environmental assessment
form (EAF) must be prepared by the applicant or on the applicant's
behalf.
B. When an applicant submits an application for funding or a permit or
other approval of a Type I or unlisted action to any agency of the town,
an EAF must accompany the application. An applicant may choose to
prepare a draft EIS in place of an EAF.
C. When, pursuant to § 151-8 or 151-9, the initial review determines that
such Type I or unlisted action is contemplated within the coastal area,
the applicant or agency shall prepare a coastal assessment form (CAF)
to assist the Town Board in determination of consistency of the action
with the LWRP.
D. The coastal assessment form (CAF) referred to in this section shall be in
the following form:
COASTAL ASSESSMENT FORM
A. INSTRUCTIONS (Please print or type all answers.)
1. Applicants or, in the case of direct actions, town agencies
shall complete this CAF for proposed actions which are
subject to Chapter 151, Article II, Environmental Quality
and Coastal Consistency Review. This assessment is
intended to supplement other information used by the
Town Board in making a determination of consistency.
2. Before answering the questions in Section C, the preparer
of this form should review the policies and explanations
of policy contained in the Local Waterfront Revitalization
Program (LWRP), a copy of which is on file in the Town
Clerk's office. A proposed action should be evaluated as
to its significant beneficial and adverse effects upon the
coastal area.
3. If any question in Section C on this form is answered
"yes," then the proposed action may affect the
achievement of the LWRP policy standards and conditions
contained in the consistency review sections of the
chapter. Thus, the action should be analyzed in more
detail and, if necessary, modified prior to making a
determination that it is consistent with the LWRP policy
standards and conditions. If an action cannot be certified
as consistent with the LWRP policy standards and
conditions, it shall not be undertaken.
B. DESCRIPTION OF SITE AND PROPOSED ACTION
1. Type of town agency action (check appropriate response):
§ 151-10 SMITHTOWN CODE § 151-10
1:242
(a) Directly undertaken (e.g., capital construction,
planning activity, agency regulation, land
transaction): __________________________
(b) Financial assistance (e.g., grant, loan, subsidy):
_____________
(c) Permit, approval, license, certification: ____________
(d) Agency undertaking action: _________________
2. Describe nature and extent of action:_____________
__________________________________________________
__________________________________________________
3. Location of action: ______________________________
__________________________________________________
__________________________________________________
4. Size of site: ____________________________________
5. Present land use: ________________________________
6. Present zoning classification: ___________________
7. Describe any unique or unusual land forms on the project
site (i.e., bluffs, dunes, swales, ground depressions, other
geological formations):
___________________________________
__________________________________________________
__________________________________________________
8. Percentage of site which contains slopes of 15% or
greater: _______________________________
__________________________________________________
__________________________________________________
9. Streams, lakes, ponds or wetlands existing within or
contiguous to the project area:
(1) Name:___________________________________
(2) Size (in acres): ____________________________
10. If an application for the proposed action has been filed
with the town agency, the following information shall be
provided:
(a) Name of applicant: __________________________
(b) Mailing address: ____________________________
(c) Telephone number: Area code ()____________
(d) Application number, if any: _________________
11. Will the action be directly undertaken or require funding
or approval by a state or federal agency?
§ 151-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-10
1:243
Yes ________No ________ If yes, which state or federal
agency? _________________________________________________
C. Coastal assessment. (Check either Yes or No for each of the
following questions):
Yes No
1. Will the proposed action be
located in or contiguous to or
have a potentially adverse effect
upon any of the resource areas
identified on the coastal area
map?
_____ _____
(a) Significant fish or wildlife
habitats?
_____ _____
(b) Scenic resources of local or
statewide significance?
_____ _____
(c) Important agricultural
lands?
_____ _____
(d) Natural protective features
in an erosion hazard area?
_____ _____
If the answer to any question above is
yes, please explain in Section D any
measures which will be undertaken to
mitigate any adverse effects.
2. Will the proposed action have
the potential to have a
significant effect upon:
Yes No
(a) Commercial or recreational
use of fish and wildlife
resources?
_____ _____
(b) Scenic quality of the coastal
environment?
_____ _____
(c) Development of future or
existing water-dependent
uses?
_____ _____
(d) Operation of the state's
major ports?
_____ _____
(e) Land or water uses within
small harbor area?
_____ _____
(f) Stability of the shoreline? _____ _____
(g) Surface or ground water
quality?
_____ _____
(h) Existing or potential public
recreation opportunities?
_____ _____
§ 151-10 SMITHTOWN CODE § 151-10
1:244
(i) Structures, sites or districts
of historic, archaeological
or cultural significance to
the town, state or nation?
_____ _____
3. Will the proposed action involve
or result in any of the following:
Yes No
(a) Physical alteration of land
along the shoreline, land
under water or coastal
waters?
_____ _____
(b) Physical alteration of two(2)
acres or more of land
located elsewhere in the
coastal area?
_____ _____
(c) Expansion of existing public
services or infrastructure in
undeveloped or low-density
areas of the coastal area?
_____ _____
(d) Energy facility not subject
to Article VII or VIII of the
Public Service Law?
_____ _____
(e) Mining, excavation, filling
or dredging in coastal
waters?
_____ _____
(f) Reduction of existing or
potential public access to or
along the shore?
_____ _____
(g) Sale or change in lieu of
publicly owned lands
located on the shoreline or
under water?
_____ _____
(h) Development within a
designated flood or erosion
hazard area?
_____ _____
(i) Development on a beach,
dune, barrier island or
other natural feature that
provides protec tion against
flooding or erosion?
_____ _____
(j) Construction or
reconstruction of erosion
protective structures?
_____ _____
(k) Diminished surface or
ground water quality?
_____ _____
§ 151-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-10
1:245
(l) Removal of ground cover
from site?
_____ _____
4. Project
(a) If project is to be located
adjacent to shore:
Yes No
(1) Will water-related
recreation be
provided?
_____ _____
(2) Will public access to
the foreshore be
provided?
_____ _____
(3) Does the project
require a waterfront
site?
_____ _____
(4) Will it supplant a
recreational or
maritime use?
_____ _____
(5) Do essential public
services and facilities
presently exist at or
near the site?
_____ _____
(6) Is it located in a flood
prone area?
_____ _____
(7) Is it located in an area
of high erosion?
_____ _____
(b) If the project site is publicly
owned:
(1) Will the project
protect, maintain and/
or increase the level
and types of public
access to waterrelated
recreation resources
and facilities?
_____ _____
(2) If located in the
foreshore, will access
to those and adjacent
lands be provided?
_____ _____
(3) Will it involve the
siting and
construction of major
energy facilities?
_____ _____
§ 151-10 SMITHTOWN CODE § 151-10
1:246
(4) Will it involve the
discharge of effluents
from major steam
electric generating
and industrial
facilities into coastal
facilities?
_____ _____
(c) Is the project site presently
used by the community?
_____ _____
(d) Does the present site offer
or include scenic views or
vistas known to be
important to the
community?
_____ _____
(e) Is the project site presently
used for commercial fishing
or fishing processing?
_____ _____
(f) Will the surface area of any
waterways or wetland areas
be increased or decreased
by the proposal?
_____ _____
(g) Does any mature forest
(over100 years old) or other
locally important vegetation
exist on this site which will
be removed by the project?
_____ _____
(h) Will the project
involve any waste
discharges into
coastal waters?
_____ _____
(i) Does the project
involve surface or
subsurface liquid
waste disposal?
_____ _____
(j) Does the project
involve transport,
storage, treatment or
disposal of solid waste
or hazardous
materials?
_____ _____
(k) Does the project
involve shipment or
storage of petroleum
products?
_____ _____
§ 151-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-10
1:247
(l) Does the project
involve discharge of
toxics, hazardous
substances or other
pollutants into coastal
waterways?
_____ _____
(m) Does the project
involve or change
existing ice
management
practices?
_____ _____
(n) Will the project affect
any area designated
as a tidal or
freshwater wetland?
_____ _____
(o) Will the project alter
drainage flow,
patterns or surface
water runoff on or
from the site?
_____ _____
(p) Will best management
practices be utilized
to control stormwater
runoff into coastal
waters?
_____ _____
(q) Will the project utilize
or affect the quality or
quantity of sole source
or surface water
supplies?
_____ _____
(r) Will the project cause
emissions which
exceed federal or
state air quality
standards or generate
significant amounts of
nitrates or sulfates?
_____ _____
D. REMARKS OR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION (Add any
additional sheets necessary to complete this form.)
______________ (____) __________
Preparer's Name
(print)
Telephone No.
______________ ________________ _______________
Title Agency Date
§ 151-10 SMITHTOWN CODE § 151-10
1:248
§ 151-11. Determination of lead agency; referral for consistency.
FALSE STATEMENTS MADE HEREIN ARE PUNISHABLE AS A
CLASS A MISDEMEANOR PURSUANT TO § 210.45 OF THE PENAL
LAW, STATE OF NEW YORK.
__________
Signature of Preparer
__________
Date
Sworn to before me this
______________ day of ______________ 19______
______________
Notary Public,
State of New York
A. Upon receipt from the Planning Director of an application including a
completed EAF and, where appropriate, a completed CAF, the
Supervisor of Environment and Waterways will determine whether it
involves one or more agencies. The Supervisor of Environment and
Waterways will distribute a copy of the application and completed EAF
and/or CAF to all involved agencies for the designation of lead agency
in accordance with the procedures set forth in 6 NYCRR Part 617.
B. Where a CAF is required, the Planning Director or Building Director
shall refer the completed EAF/CAF and all accompanying maps, plans
and applications to the Town Board for a decision as to consistency of
the action pursuant to the procedures set forth in § 151-15. [Amended
5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
C. Town Board.
(1) The Town Board shall be the lead agency for the following actions:
(a) The adoption, amendment or change of zoning and land use
regulations.
(b) The construction or expansion of municipal buildings,
structures and other facilities, including highways within the
town.
(c) The purchase, sale and/or lease of real property by the town.
(d) Special exceptions.
(e) All applications before the Board of Site Plan Review.
(f) Intermunicipal agreements and arrangements.
(g) All other actions not specifically covered by the Town Code.
§ 151-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-11
1:249
§ 151-12. Determination of environmental significance.
(2) The Town Board shall also be designated lead agency when there is
more than one involved agency, as that term is used in 6 NYCRR
Part 617, and the Town Board is one of those agencies,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary found in this article.
D. The Board of Appeals will be the lead agency for the determination of
environmental significance for those actions which are within its scope
of authority as defined and found in Chapter 322 of the Town Code.
E. The Planning Board will be lead agency for the determination of
environmental significance for those actions which are within its scope
of authority as defined and found in Chapter 248 of the Town Code.
A. The lead agency must determine the environmental significance of any
Type I or unlisted action, in writing, in accordance with 6 NYCRR Part
617. This determination must be based on the EAF, the
recommendation of the Supervisor of Environment and Waterways and
on such other information as the lead agency may require. The criteria
listed in 6 NYCRR Part 617 must be considered by the lead agency in
making its determination of significance. The determination must be
made within 20 calendar days of the date of lead agency designation or
within 20 calendar days of its receipt of all information required by the
lead agency to make its determination, whichever is later. No
determination of significance shall be made until such time as the Town
Board determines the consistency of an action located in the coastal
area pursuant to § 151-15 of this article.
B. If the lead agency makes a determination that there will be no adverse
environmental effect or that identified environmental effects will not be
significant, it shall make a negative declaration and proceed in
accordance with the requirements of 6 NYCRR Part 617.
C. For unlisted actions involving an applicant, the lead agency has the
option to issue a conditioned negative declaration in accordance with
requirements of 6 NYCRR Part 617.
D. If the lead agency makes a determination that the action may have the
potential for at least one significant effect on the environment and the
action is to be located within the coastal area, the lead agency shall
issue a positive declaration and proceed in accordance with the
requirements of 6 NYCRR Part 617. If the lead agency issues a positive
declaration and the proposed action is to be located within the coastal
area, an environmental impact statement will be required and the
provisions of §§ 151-13 through 151-15, inclusive, of this article shall
apply.
E. If the lead agency makes a determination that the action may have a
significant effect on the environment and the action is not located
within the coastal area, the lead agency shall issue a positive
§ 151-11 SMITHTOWN CODE § 151-12
1:250
§ 151-13. Environmental impact statement.
§ 151-14. Notices; filing.
All notices, EAF's, CAF's, draft EIS's, final EIS's and all other documents
shall be prepared, filed, circulated and made available as prescribed under
6 NYCRR Part 617 and this article.
§ 151-15. Consistency.
declaration and proceed in accordance with the requirements of 6
NYCRR Part 617. If the lead agency issues a positive declaration and
the proposed action is not located within the coastal area, an
environmental impact statement will be required and the provisions of
§§ 151-13 and 151-14, inclusive, of this article shall apply.
A. EIS preparation and procedures. When required, pursuant to § 151-12
of this article, an EIS must be prepared in accordance with:
(1) The environmental impact statement procedures as provided for in
6 NYCRR Part 617.
(2) When the EIS is prepared for a proposed action located within the
coastal area, it must also contain an analysis of the LWRP policy
standards and conditions as required by § 151-15 and a discussion
of the effects of the proposed action on such LWRP standards and
conditions.
B. When an applicant submits a draft environmental impact statement, the
lead agency shall not accept the proposed draft environmental impact
statement until the Supervisor of Environment and Waterways renders
a recommendation on the scope, adequacy and sufficiency of the
proposed draft environmental impact statement.
C. Decisions and findings for actions subject to EIS's. Each agency of the
Town involved in undertaking, approving or funding an action which is
the subject of an EIS shall make detailed written findings in accordance
with the provisions of 6 NYCRR Part 617 prior to making its decision.
A. The Town Board is authorized to review and make determinations
regarding the consistency of proposed actions with the LWRP policy
standards and conditions set forth in Subsection F below.
(1) Whenever a proposed action is located in the town's coastal area,
the Town Board shall make a written determination of consistency
in accordance with the LWRP policy standards and conditions. No
agency shall undertake, approve or fund any action, Type I action,
unlisted action or otherwise, in the coastal area without first
obtaining this determination.
(2) No building, sign, tree-clearing, demolition or excavation permit
for an activity which is reviewed under this section shall be issued
§ 151-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-15
1:251
until a determination of consistency has been made by the Town
Board.
B. Whenever an agency receives an application for approval or funding of
an action to be located in the coastal area, the applicant shall prepare a
coastal assessment form (CAF) to assist the Town Board with its
consistency review. The Planning Director or Building Director, as the
appropriate case may be, shall refer a copy of the completed CAF and
all accompanying maps, plans and applications to the Town Board
within 10 days of its submission for the determination of consistency.
[Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
C. As early as possible in an agency's formulation of a direct action which
is proposed to be located within the coastal area, the agency shall
prepare a coastal assessment form (CAF) to assist the Town Board with
consistency review.
D. After receipt of a completed CAF and all documentation the Town Board
or Planning Director requires for an action, the Town Board shall
determine whether the proposed action is consistent with the LWRP
policy standards and conditions set forth in Subsection F below. The
Town Board or the Planning Director shall require the applicant to
submit any completed applications, EAF's and any other information
deemed to be necessary to its consistency determination.
E. The Town Board shall render its written determination and reasons
thereof within 30 days following the referral of the CAF and all required
documentation from the applicant, the Planning Director or Building
Director, unless either an EIS is being prepared or is under review in
accordance with § 151-13 of this article or the time period is extended
by the Town Board for good cause. The time period for a Town Board
determination of consistency shall be suspended pending receipt by the
Town Board of any EIS and any explicit findings related to a proposed
project as may be required pursuant to SEQRA. The Town Board shall
have the authority in its findings of consistency to impose practicable
and reasonable conditions on any action to ensure that it is carried out
in accordance with this article. [Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No.
5-2007]
F. Actions to be undertaken within the coastal area shall be evaluated for
consistency in accordance with the following LWRP policy standards
and conditions which are derived from and further explained and
described in Section III of the Town of Smithtown LWRP, a copy of which
is on file in the Town Clerk's office and available for inspection during
normal business hours. Agencies which directly undertake actions shall
also consult with Section IV of the LWRP in preparing the CAF for those
actions. The action shall be consistent with the policy to:
(1) Revitalize and redevelop deteriorating institutional, commercial
and residential structures (Policies 1, 1A, 1B and 1C).
§ 151-15 SMITHTOWN CODE § 151-15
1:252
(2) Retain and promote recreational water-dependent uses (Policies
1B, 1C and 2).
(3) Ensure that development occurs where adequate public
infrastructure is available to reduce health or pollution hazards
(Policies 5 and 5A).
(4) Prohibit the location of a cross-sound bridge in the Town (Policy
5B).
(5) Streamline development permit procedures (Policy 6).
(6) Protect significant fish and wildlife habitats from human disruption
and chemical contamination (Policies 7, 7A, 7B, 7C, 7D and 8).
(7) Maintain and expand shellfish populations for commercial and
recreational use (Policies 9, 9A and 10).
(8) Minimize flooding and erosion hazards through nonstructural
means and carefully selected long-term structural measures
(Policies 11, 12, 13, 14, 14A, 15, 16, 17, 17A and 21A).
(9) Maintain and improve public access to the shoreline and to waterrelated
recreational facilities while protecting the environment
(Policies 2, 19, 20, 21 and 22).
(10) Protect and restore archeological resources (Policies 23 and 23A).
(11) Protect and upgrade scenic resources (Policies 24, 25A, 25B, 25C
and 25D).
(12) Conserve and protect remaining agricultural land and prime soils
(Policy 26A).
(13) Operate existing power plants in an environmentally sound manner
and expand them only if compatible with the waterfront. The
waterborne shipment and transfer of fuel for power plants is
prohibited (Policy 27).
(14) Protect surface and ground waters from direct and indirect
discharge of pollutants and from other overuse (Policies 30, 30A,
31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 37A, 38, 38A and 38B).
(15) Perform dredging and dredge soil disposal in a manner protective
of natural resources (Policies 15, 35, 35A and 35B).
(16) Eliminate non-water-dependent handling of petroleum and
hazardous materials from the waterfront (Policies 36 and 36A).
(17) Handle and dispose of hazardous waste in a manner which will not
adversely affect the environment nor expand existing landfills
(Policies 39 and 39A).
(18) Protect air quality (Policies 11, 12 and 13).
§ 151-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-15
1:253
§ 151-16. Integrated municipal review of actions located within
coastal area.
In the event that the location of a proposed action is within the area
as delineated in Chapter 151, Article III, Integrated Municipal Review of
Actions Located Within Coastal Area, then the requirements of Chapter 151,
Article III, shall be followed for an integrated review of action.
§ 151-17. Fees for review and preparation of EIS.
The fees for the publication of notices and for the review or preparation of
an EIS shall be in accordance with the requirements found in Chapter 151,
Article I, of the Town Code.
§ 151-18. Fees for consistency review. [Amended 1-8-2019]
The fees for consistency reviews shall be as follows:
(19) Protect tidal fresh water wetlands (Policies 44 and 44A).
G. Findings.
(1) If the Town Board determines that the action would not be
consistent with one or more of the LWRP policy standards and
conditions, such action shall not be undertaken unless the Town
Board determines with respect to the proposed action that:
(a) No reasonable alternatives exist which would permit the action
to be undertaken in a manner which will not substantially
hinder the achievement of such LWRP policy standards and
conditions;
(b) The action would be undertaken in a manner which would
minimize all adverse affects on such LWRP policy standards
and conditions to the maximum extent practicable;
(c) The action will advance one or more of the other LWRP policy
standards and conditions; and
(d) The action will result in overriding town, regional or statewide
public benefit.
(2) Such finding shall constitute a determination that the action is
consistent with the LWRP policy standards and conditions.
H. The Town Board shall maintain a file for each action made the subject of
the consistency determination and any findings made pursuant to this
article. Such files may be made available for public inspection upon a
properly made Freedom of Information request.
A. For residential zoned property, the consistency review fee shall be
$250.
§ 151-15 SMITHTOWN CODE § 151-18
1:254
§ 151-19. Enforcement. [Amended 9-7-1993 by L.L. No. 6-1993;
5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
The Building Director in the Building Department, the Director of Public
Safety in the Department of Public Safety and their designated deputies,
Building Inspectors, Ordinance Inspectors, the Director of Environment
and Waterways, the Planning Director and their designated deputies, the
Town Attorney, the Senior Assistant Town Attorney and all Assistant Town
Attorneys, shall be responsible for enforcing this article. No work or activity
on a project in the coastal area which is subject to review under this article
shall be commenced or undertaken until the Building Department has been
presented with a written determination from an applicant or agency that the
action is consistent with the town's LWRP policy standards and conditions.
In the event that work or any activity is not being performed in accordance
with this article or any conditions imposed thereunder, the Building Director
shall issue a stop-work order, and all work shall immediately cease. No
further work or activity shall be undertaken on a project so long as a stopwork
order is in effect.
§ 151-20. Penalties for offenses.
B. For business or industrial zoned property, the consistency review fee
shall be $500.
A. A person who violates any of the provisions of or who fails to comply
with any condition imposed by this article shall have committed a
violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 for a conviction of a
first offense and punishable by a fine of $1,000 for a conviction of a
second or subsequent offense. Each week of a continuing violation shall
constitute a separate and additional violation.
B. The Town Attorney is authorized and directed to institute any and all
actions and proceedings necessary to enforce this article. The Town
Attorney is also authorized to seek damages and any civil penalties in
any civil action, and such penalties shall be in addition to and not in lieu
of any criminal prosecution and penalty.
(1) In the event of any actual or pending violation of this article, the
Town Attorney may, in addition to other remedies, institute any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct or
abate such violation.
(2) In addition to other remedies provided by law, any appropriate
action or proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise, may
be instituted or taken to prevent the unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to
prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land; or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such
premises.
§ 151-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-20
1:255
(3) In addition to any fine or penalty imposed, the defendant shall pay
all costs and expenses incurred by the Town in determining such
violation.
§ 151-20 SMITHTOWN CODE § 151-20
1:256
ARTICLE III
Integrated Municipal Review of Actions Located Within Coastal
Area
[Adopted 6-6-1989 by L.L. No. 3-1989]
§ 151-21. Title.
This Article shall be known as the "Town of Smithtown Integrated Municipal
Review of Actions Located Within the Coastal Area Law."
§ 151-22. Authority.
This Article is adopted pursuant to Article IX, § 1 of the New York State
Constitution, Article 5-G of the General Municipal Law and § 10 of the
Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New York and expressly
supersedes any inconsistent general or local law regarding consistency
review, zoning and waterways. Consistency reviews by the Town Board of
proposed actions to be undertaken by the Villages of Head-of-the-Harbor or
Nissequogue shall be considered to be a Type II Action under 6 NYCRR Part
617 for consistency review purposes only.
§ 151-23. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to foster a cooperative relationship between
the Town of Smithtown and the Villages of Head-of-the-Harbor and
Nissequogue in order to provide for the coordinated review and efforts of
actions located within the Town and villages' coastal areas so that the Town
and village may advance the policies, standards and conditions of their
respective LWRP's.
§ 151-24. Definitions.
All words or terms found herein shall be defined as those words or terms
as defined in Chapter 151, Article II, Environmental Quality and Coastal
Consistency Review.
§ 151-25. Applicability.
The procedures in this article shall be used to implement an intermunicipal
cooperative agreement for the consistency review of actions by the Town
of Smithtown and the Villages of Head-of-the-Harbor and Nissequogue and
are in addition to the LWRP consistency laws of the Town of Smithtown and
the Villages of Head-of-the-Harbor and Nissequogue and apply to the LWRP
areas of Stony Brook Harbor, the Nissequogue River from the southernmost
municipal and jurisdictional boundaries of the Village of Nissequogue and
the Town of Smithtown northward to Smithtown Bay and Smithtown Bay
1,500 feet offshore from the Nissequogue River's confluence with
Smithtown Bay, easterly 1,500 feet from the shore to the confluence of
Stony Brook Harbor with Smithtown Bay.
§ 151-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-26
1:257
§ 151-26. Notification procedures.
§ 151-27. Review procedures.
A. When any Town of Smithtown agency is considering an action in the
areas described above in Stony Brook Harbor, Nissequogue River or
Smithtown Bay, the Town Planning Director or Building Director, as the
case may be, shall notify the Villages of Head-of-the-Harbor and
Nissequogue Joint Village Coastal Management Commission of such
action; when a Village of Nissequogue agency is considering an action
in Stony Brook Harbor, the Nissequogue River or Smithtown Bay or a
Village of Head-of-the-Harbor agency is considering an action in Stony
Brook Harbor, the Joint Village Coastal Management Commission shall
notify the Town of Smithtown Planning Director of such action.
[Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
B. The notification of a proposed action:
(1) Shall fully describe the nature and location of the action.
(2) Shall stipulate the dates and times of hearings, meetings and
review and comment periods.
(3) Shall be accomplished by the exchange of coastal assessment
forms, environment assessment forms, copies of all applications
and all supporting documentation.
(4) Should be provided as early in the planning stages of the action as
possible, but in any event at least 30 days prior to the agency's
decision on the action.
A. Village action.
(1) Upon receipt of the notification by the Town Planning Director from
the villages' Joint Village Coastal Management Commission, the
Town Planning Director shall forward a copy of the notification to
other interested and involved Town agencies and the Town Board
for review and comment.
(2) The Town Board shall review the notification describing the
proposed village action against the policies and standards of the
town's LWRP and shall receive and review comments from any
other interested and involved Town agency on the consistency of
such action within 15 days of such referral from the Town Planning
Director.
(3) If the Town Board cannot identify any conflicts between the
proposed village action and the applicable policies and standards of
the town's LWRP, it shall notify the Town Planning Director of such
finding, who shall notify the Joint Village Coastal Management
Commission of the Town Board's finding.
§ 151-26 SMITHTOWN CODE § 151-27
1:258
§ 151-28. Resolution of conflicts.
The following procedures shall apply whenever a proposed action conflicts
with the policies and standards of the Villages of Head-of-the-Harbor and
Nissequogue LWRP's or the Town of Smithtown LWRP:
(4) If the Town Planning Director does not notify the village officials, in
writing, of the town's finding within 25 days of receipt of the
notification, the village may assume that the proposed action does
not conflict with the town's approved LWRP.
(5) If the Town Planning Director notifies village officials, in writing,
that the proposed action does conflict with the policies and
standards of the town's approved LWRP, the village shall not
proceed with the action until identified conflicts have been resolved
in accordance with the procedures set forth herein.
B. Town action.
(1) Upon receipt of notification by the villages' Joint Village Coastal
Management Commission from the Town Planning Director, the
Commission Chairperson or the Chairperson's designee shall
forward a copy of the notification to other interested and involved
agencies.
(2) The Joint Village Coastal Management Commission shall review the
notification of the proposed town action against the policies and
standards of the village's approved LWRP.
(3) If the Joint Village Coastal Management Commission cannot
identify any conflicts between the proposed town action and the
applicable policies and standards of the village's approved LWRP,
the Chairperson shall notify the Town Planning Director of the
village's findings.
(4) If the Chairperson does not notify town officials, in writing, of the
village's finding within 25 days of receipt of the notification, the
town may assume that the proposed action does not conflict with
the village's approved LWRP.
(5) If the Chairperson notifies town officials, in writing, that the
proposed action does conflict with the policies and standards of the
village's approved LWRP, the town shall not proceed with the action
until identified conflicts have been resolved in accordance with the
procedures set forth herein.
A. The Chairperson of the Joint Village Coastal Management Commission
or the Chairperson's designated representative and the Supervisor of
the Town Board or the Supervisor's designated representative, within
15 days of receipt of written notification of a finding that a proposed
action conflicts with an LWRP policy or standard, may meet to resolve
§ 151-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-28
1:259
§ 151-29. When effective.
This Article shall take effect upon the filing with the Secretary of State of
the State of New York and when the Villages of Nissequogue and Head-ofthe-
Harbor shall have in effect an approved LWRP and only when the exact
same provisions of this Article shall have been duly enacted by the Village
of Nissequogue and Head-of-the-Harbor.
such conflicts with respect to the consistency of the proposed action
with the relevant LWRP.
B. If the Chairperson of the Joint Village Coastal Management Commission
or the Chairperson's designated representative and the Supervisor of
the Town Board or the Supervisor's designated representative can
settle the conflicts by a mutually agreeable decision and the respective
Commission and Town Board approve of such decision by resolution,
the originating agency may proceed with the implementation of the
action. In passing the resolution approving such decision, the
Commission and Town Board shall act within 15 days from the date of
the referral of the proposed conflict settlement decision; failure to act
within this time frame shall be deemed to be an approval of the action.
C. If the conflicts cannot be resolved by a mutually agreeable decision or
the Chairperson of the Joint Village Coastal Management Commission
or the Chairperson's designated representative and the Supervisor of
the Town Board or the Supervisor's designated representative shall fail
to have met within the required time as set forth in this Article, then the
matter shall be referred to the respective Village Boards of Trustees
and Town Board for resolution pursuant to the procedures of this
Article. The municipality which determines that the proposed action
conflicts with its LWRP may prepare and file with the Clerk of the
municipality proposing the action a memorandum of protest with
regard to the inconsistency of the proposed action. The memorandum of
protest must contain a statement indicating the reasons for the
inconsistency of the proposed action and recommend reasonable
alterations, alternatives or modifications to the proposed action. When
such memorandum of protest is filed, the municipality proposing the
action shall not act contrary to such memorandum of protest, except by
a vote of a majority, plus one, of all the Board members thereof. Such
action shall be subject to judicial review, pursuant to the law providing
for the review of acts of such municipal agencies, commenced within 30
days of its adoption or passage.
D. The Town Board and the Joint Village Coastal Management Commission
may mutually agree to extend any time limitation designated in this
Article. Failure to act within the time requirements of this Article shall
be deemed to be the equivalent of approval of such action by the
nonacting municipality.
§ 151-28 SMITHTOWN CODE § 151-29
1:260
Chapter 153
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boat basin and mooring areas — See Ch. 108.
Dredging — See Ch. 138.
Environmental and coastal quality
review — See Ch. 151.
Excavations and regrading — See Ch. 154.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 168.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 170.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 248.
Zoning — See Ch. 322.
§ 151-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-29
1:261

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 153-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Chapter 153, Stormwater Management and
Erosion and Sediment Control, of the Code of the Town of Smithtown."
§ 153-2. Findings of fact.
It is hereby determined by the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown that:
A. Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition.
B. Stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne
pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other
desirable species.
C. Clearing and grading during construction tend to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat.
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby
increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation.
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow.
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the Town.
G. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities.
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety.
I. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
§ 153-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-3
1:263
§ 153-3. Statutory authority.
In accordance with § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State
of New York, the Town Board has the authority to enact local laws and
amend local laws for the purpose of promoting the health, safety or general
welfare of the Town of Smithtown and for the protection and enhancement
of its physical environment. The Town Board may include in any such local
law provisions for the appointment of any municipal officer, employees, or
independent contractor to effectuate, administer and enforce such local
law. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the requirements of Section 402
of the Clean Water Act (CWA), which deemed stormwater discharges from
certain construction activities unlawful unless they are authorized by a
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit or by a
state permit program. New York's State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System is a NPDES-approved program with permits issued pursuant to
Article 17, Titles 7, 8, and Article 70 of the Environmental Conservation Law
(ECL).
§ 153-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Town of
Smithtown and to address the findings of fact in § 153-1. This chapter seeks
to meet those purposes by achieving the following objectives:
A. Meet the minimum construction site stormwater runoff control and
post-construction stormwater management requirements of the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation State Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges from Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s),
Permit Number GP-02-02 or as amended or revised.
B. Require land development activities that will discharge stormwater to
the waters of the Town to conform to the substantive requirements of
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation State
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System General Permit for
Construction Activities, Permit Number GP-02-01 or as amended or
revised.
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels.
D. Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development activities, which would otherwise degrade local water
quality.
§ 153-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 153-4
1:264
§ 153-5. Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter or in documents prepared or reviewed under
this chapter shall have the meanings as set forth in this section.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land development activity.
BOARD OF SITE PLAN REVIEW — A board of the Town of Smithtown as
defined in Chapter 322 of the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
BUILDING — Any structure meeting the definition of "building" as defined
in Chapter 322 of the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY(IES) — See "land development activity(ies)."
CONSTRUCTION SITE — A parcel of land or part thereof upon which a land
development activity(ies) is taking place.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual, most recent version, including applicable updates, that serves
as the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and
practices.
DEVELOPER — Any person who undertakes land development activities.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — The part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan that includes the erosion and sediment control
component specific measures and sequencing to be used to control erosion
and sediment on a development site during construction.
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff, which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable.
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management
practices and ensure that these management practices are properly
maintained and eliminate threats to public safety as well as minimize
the potential to hinder the conveyance ability or storage capacity of a
Town-owned drainage system.
§ 153-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-5
1:265
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control Manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material or any other soil disturbance,
including the resulting conditions thereof.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements, and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snow melt and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries, which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY(IES) — Construction activity including
clearing, demolition, grading, excavating, stockpiling, soil disturbance or
placement of fill that results in land disturbance of equal to or greater
than one acre, or activities disturbing less than one acre of total land
area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that will
ultimately disturb one or more acres of land, even though multiple separate
and distinct land development activities may take place at different times
on different schedules, or activities disturbing less than one acre of total
land area where the Town has determined there is a potential for significant
contribution of pollutants to surface waters of the Town.
LANDOWNER (OR OWNER) — The person in whom is vested the
ownership, dominion, title or control of property, including but not limited to
the landowner's duly authorized agent, proprietor, mortgagee or vendee in
possession, assignee of rents, tenant or lessee, purchaser, devisee, fiduciary
and any other person having a vested interest in the property in question.
LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE — A contiguous
area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are
occurring, or will occur, under one plan. The term "plan" in "larger common
plan of development or sale" is broadly defined as any announcement or
piece of documentation (including a sign, public notice or hearing, sales
pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, State Environmental
Quality Review Act application, zoning request, computer design, etc.) or
physical demarcation (including SPDES General Permit for Stormwater
Discharge from MS4s, GP-0-08-002 boundary signs, lot stakes, surveyor
markings, etc.) indicating that construction activities may occur on a
specific plot. For discrete construction projects that are located within a
larger common plan of development or sale that are at least 1/4 mile apart,
each project can be treated as a separate plan of development or sale,
§ 153-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 153-5
1:266
provided any interconnecting road, pipeline or utility project that is part of
the same "common plan" is not concurrently being disturbed.
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT — A site design strategy with a goal of
maintaining or replicating the predevelopment hydrologic regime through
the use of design techniques to create a functionally equivalent hydrologic
landscape. Hydrologic functions of storage, infiltration, and groundwater
recharge, as well as the volume and frequency of discharges, are
maintained through the use of integrated and distributed microscale
stormwater retention and detention areas, reduction of impervious
surfaces, and the lengthening of flow paths and runoff time. Other
strategies include the preservation/protection of environmentally sensitive
site features such as riparian buffers, wetlands, steep slopes, valuable
(mature) trees, floodplains, woodlands and highly permeable soils. Lowimpact
development principles are based on controlling stormwater at the
source by the use of microscale controls that are distributed throughout
the site. This is unlike conventional approaches that typically convey and
manage runoff in large facilities located at the base of drainage areas.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains):
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, mining, construction,
subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
PLANNING BOARD — A board of the Town of Smithtown as defined in
Chapter 248 of the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
Owned or operated by the Town of Smithtown or other public body
(created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal
of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including
special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control
district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an
authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved
management agency under Section 208 of the CWA, that discharges to
surface waters of the state;
A.
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40
CFR 122.2.
D.
§ 153-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-5
1:267
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator
residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste
and ballast discharged into water and as defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A
component of the stormwater pollution prevention plan that includes the
specific practices to be used and maintained for post-construction
stormwater management on a development site after construction.
PROJECT — Land development activity(ies) as defined herein.
QUALIFIED INSPECTOR — A person who is knowledgeable in the principles
and practices of erosion and sediment control, such as a professional
engineer, certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC),
landscape architect, or other New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYSDEC) endorsed individual(s). It also means someone
working under the direct supervision of the professional engineer or
landscape architect, provided that person has training in the principles
and practices of erosion and sediment control. "Training in the principles
and practices of erosion and sediment control" means that an individual
performing a site inspection has received four hours of training, endorsed
by the NYSDEC, from a Soil and Water Conservation District, CPESC, Inc.,
or other NYSDEC-endorsed entity in proper erosion and sediment control
principles. After receiving the initial training, an individual working under
the direct supervision of the professional engineer or landscape architect
shall receive four hours of training every three years. Inspections of any
post-construction stormwater management practices that include structural
components, such as a dam for an impoundment, shall be performed by a
Professional Engineer.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person who is knowledgeable in the
principles and practices of stormwater management and treatment, such
as a professional engineer, landscape architect or other New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) endorsed
individual(s). Individuals preparing stormwater pollution prevention plans
that require the post-construction stormwater management practice
component must have an understanding of the principles of hydrology,
water quality management practice design, water quantity control design,
and, in many cases, the principles of hydraulics in order to prepare a
SWPPP that conforms to the NYSDEC's technical standard. All components
of the SWPPP that involve the practice of engineering, as defined by Article
145 of the New York State Education Law, shall be prepared by, or under
the direct supervision of, a professional engineer licensed to practice in the
State of New York.
§ 153-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 153-5
1:268
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SECTION 303(d) LIST OF IMPAIRED WATERS — Section 303(d) is part of
the federal Clean Water Act that requires the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation to periodically prepare a list of all surface
waters of the state for which beneficial uses of the water, such as for
drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial use, are impaired by
pollutants. These are water-quality-limited estuaries, lakes, and streams
that fall short of state surface water quality standards, and are not expected
to improve within the next two years.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Includes but is not limited to cold water fisheries,
shellfish beds, swimming beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water
supply reservoirs, and habitats for threatened, endangered or special
concern species.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land that discharge stormwater to the
surface waters of the State of New York.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal
separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality
standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all land
development activities on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — The Town Engineer or
his/her duly authorized deputy or representatives. The SMO is designated
by the Town Board to accept and review stormwater pollution prevention
§ 153-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-5
1:269
plans for conformance with this chapter, forward approved plans to the
applicable board, and inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (SMP) — A measure(s), either
structural or nonstructural, that is determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan
prepared by a qualified professional that formalizes the selection and design
of stormwater management measures that control stormwater runoff and
pollutants from a site during and after construction activities. The SWPPP
includes an erosion and sediment control component, and, in most cases,
a post-construction stormwater control component. All stormwater controls
prescribed in the SWPPP must conform to the technical standards specified
in the New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual and the
New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control
or meet equivalent standards.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow of water on the surface of the ground,
resulting from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria
of this definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water, which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL) — The sum of the allowable loads
of a single pollutant from all contributing point and nonpoint sources. It
is a calculation of the maximum amount of a pollutant that a water body
can receive on a daily basis and still meet water quality standards, and an
allocation of that amount to the pollutant's sources.
TOWN — The Town of Smithtown.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown.
TOWN ENGINEER — The Town Engineer of the Town of Smithtown.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
WATERSHED — An area bounded peripherally by a divide and draining
ultimately to a particular watercourse.
§ 153-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 153-5
1:270
WATERS OF THE TOWN — Any surface waters of the State of New York
or groundwater that is wholly or partially located within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the Town of Smithtown.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 153-6. Applicability.
§ 153-7. Exemptions.
A. This chapter shall be applicable to all land development activities as
defined in § 153-5.
B. All land development activities subject to review and approval of site
plans by the Board of Site Plan Review pursuant to Chapter 322 of the
Town Code, subdivisions by the Planning Board pursuant to Chapter
248 of the Town Code, building permits pursuant to Chapter 112 of the
Town Code, tree preservation and land clearing permits pursuant to
Chapter 285 of the Town Code, or permits pursuant to Chapter 154 of
the Town Code shall be reviewed subject to the standards contained in
this chapter. No permit shall be issued and no approval by any board
shall be granted for a land development activity without due
consideration of the findings and purpose of this chapter.
C. Any person engaged in a grading activity for which a SWPPP is not
required pursuant to this chapter, shall, at a minimum, employ
stormwater management practices to control erosion and sediment in
proportion to the scale of the activity and file with the Stormwater
Management Officer a SWPPP waiver certification and agreement.
A. The following activities may be exempt from review under this chapter:
(1) Agricultural activity as defined in this chapter.
(2) Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and
are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity or original purpose of a facility.
(3) Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Stormwater Management Officer.
(4) Any part of a site plan that has been approved by the Board of Site
Plan Review or subdivision that has been approved by the Planning
Board on or before September 30, 2008.
(5) Land development activities for which any permit has been
approved on or before the September 30, 2008.
(6) Cemetery graves.
(7) Installation of a fence, sign, utility poles and other kinds of posts or
poles, excluding monopoles.
§ 153-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-7
1:271
(8) Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property
or natural resources.
(9) Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetable and other plants primarily for use by that person
and his or her family.
(10) Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an
existing structure.
B. Any person engaged in any land-disturbing activity that is exempt
pursuant to this section shall comply with the purpose and intent of this
chapter, regardless of whether or not the activity requires approval. At
a minimum, such person shall employ stormwater management
practices for erosion and sediment control in proportion to the scale of
the activity.
§ 153-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 153-7
1:272
ARTICLE II
Stormwater Control
§ 153-8. Stormwater pollution prevention plan.
A. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement. No application for a
land development activity shall be approved by the appropriate board
until a stormwater pollution prevention plan prepared in accordance
with the specifications in this chapter has been reviewed and approved
by the Stormwater Management Officer. The Stormwater Management
Officer may:
(1) Review the SWPPP; or
(2) Upon approval by the Town Board, engage the services of a
registered professional engineer to review the SWPPP; or
(3) Accept the certification of a qualified professional that the SWPPP
conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
B. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans
(1) Erosion and sediment control component. All stormwater pollution
prevention plans, at a minimum, shall provide the following
background information and erosion and sediment controls:
(a) Background information about the scope of the project,
including location, type and size of project.
(b) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project at a scale no
smaller than one inch equals 100 feet, including a general
location map. At a minimum, the site map should show the total
site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that
will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent
off-site surface water(s); wetlands and drainage patterns that
could be affected by the construction activity; existing and final
slopes; locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or
equipment storage areas; and location(s) of the stormwater
discharge(s).
(c) Description of the soil(s) present at the site pursuant to the Soil
Survey of Suffolk County.
(d) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing,
excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation
and any other activity at the site that results in soil
disturbance. Consistent with the Erosion Control Manual, not
more than five acres shall be disturbed at any one time unless
pursuant to an approved SWPPP.
§ 153-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-8
1:273
(e) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be
used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction
debris from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff.
(f) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on-site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials, including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response.
(g) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures
to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment
control for each stage of the project from initial land clearing
and grubbing to project close-out.
(h) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control
practice.
(i) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting
and sizing of any temporary sediment basins.
(j) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent
control measures.
(k) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in
place.
(l) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice.
(m) Name(s) of the receiving water(s) and approximate distance to
the project.
(n) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site.
(o) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows
from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and
the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to
the degree attainable.
(p) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the
site.
(2) Post-construction stormwater management component. A
stormwater pollution prevention plan shall also include a postconstruction
stormwater management component (water quantity
and water quality controls) as set forth in § 153-8B(3), as
§ 153-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 153-8
1:274
applicable, where a land development activity as defined in § 153-5
of this chapter meets Condition A, or B or C below:
(a) Condition A: stormwater runoff from land development
activities discharging a pollutant of concern to either an
impaired water identified on the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation 303(d) list of impaired waters or a
total maximum daily load designated watershed for which
pollutants in stormwater have been identified as a source of
the impairment.
(b) Condition B: stormwater runoff from land development
activities disturbing five or more acres.
(c) Condition C: stormwater runoff from land development activity
disturbing between one acre and five acres of land during the
course of the project, exclusive of the construction of singlefamily
residences and construction activities at agricultural
properties.
(3) Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements for Conditions
A, B and C:
(a) An erosion and sediment control component as described in
§ 153-8B(1).
(b) Description of each post-construction stormwater management
practice.
(c) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific
location(s) and size(s) of each post-construction stormwater
management practice.
(d) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural
components of the stormwater management system for the
applicable design storms.
(e) Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff conditions
to pre-development conditions.
(f) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
each post-construction stormwater management practice.
(g) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each post-construction stormwater management
practice.
(h) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection
and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall
remain in effect with transfer of title to the property.
§ 153-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-8
1:275
§ 153-9. Performance and design criteria.
All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance
and design criteria:
(i) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all
subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater
management measures in accordance with § 153-10 of this
chapter.
C. Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other
applicable environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the
land development activity prior to approval of the final stormwater
design plan.
D. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the stormwater
pollution prevention plan who will be involved in soil disturbance
and/or stormwater management practice installation shall sign and
date a copy of the following certification statement before
undertaking any land development activity:
"I hereby certify that I understand and agree to comply with
the terms and conditions of the SWPPP and agree to implement
any corrective actions identified by the qualified inspector during
a site inspection. I also understand that the owner or operator
must comply with the terms and conditions of the New York State
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System general permit for
stormwater discharges from construction activities and that it is
unlawful for any person to cause or contribute to a violation of
water quality standards. Furthermore, I understand that certifying
false, incorrect or inaccurate information is a violation of the
referenced permit and the laws of the State of New York and could
subject me to criminal, civil and/or administrative proceedings."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made.
(3) The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for
the land development activity.
E. A copy of the stormwater pollution prevention plan shall be retained at
the site of the land development activity during construction from the
date of initiation of construction activities to the date of final
stabilization.
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are
§ 153-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 153-9
1:276
§ 153-10. Maintenance, inspection, and repair of stormwater
facilities.
designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
chapter:
(1) The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most
current version).
(2) New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control, (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, most current version).
B. Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management
practices are not in accordance with technical standards, the
stormwater pollution prevention plan must demonstrate equivalence to
the technical standards set forth in § 153-9A.
C. Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause
an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to
natural conditions in surface waters of the State of New York.
A. Maintenance and inspection during construction.
(1) The applicant or developer of the land development activity or his
or her representative shall at all times properly operate and
maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and
related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the applicant
or developer to achieve compliance with the conditions of this
chapter. Sediment shall be removed from sediment traps or
sediment ponds whenever their design capacity has been reduced
by 50%.
(2) For land development activities as defined in § 153-5 of this chapter
and meeting Condition A, B or C in § 153-8B(2), the applicant shall
have a qualified professional conduct site inspections and
document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control
practices every seven days and within 24 hours of any storm event
producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more. Inspection reports
shall be maintained in a site log book that shall be available for
review by the Stormwater Management Officer.
(3) The applicant or developer or his or her representative shall be on
site at all times when construction or grading activity takes place
and shall inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices.
B. Maintenance easement(s). Prior to the issuance of any approval that
has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the
applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement
§ 153-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-10
1:277
§ 153-11. Severability.
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision
or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or
clause of this chapter.
agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served
by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for
access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
Town of Smithtown to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper
working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this chapter. The easement shall be recorded by the
grantor in the Office of the Suffolk County Clerk after approval by the
Town Attorney.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
chapter shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the
goals of this chapter. Proper operation and maintenance also includes,
as a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this chapter.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the stormwater management practices shall not
exceed design criteria or cause or contribute to water quality
standard violations in accordance with § 153-9C.
D. Maintenance agreements. The Town of Smithtown shall approve a
formal maintenance agreement for stormwater management facilities
binding on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the office of the
Suffolk County Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to final
plan approval. The maintenance agreement shall be in a form approved
by the Town Attorney. The Town of Smithtown, in lieu of a maintenance
agreement, at its sole discretion, may accept dedication of any existing
or future stormwater management facility, provided such facility meets
all the requirements of this chapter and includes adequate and
perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for
inspection and regular maintenance.
§ 153-10 SMITHTOWN CODE § 153-11
1:278
ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement
§ 153-12. Construction inspection.
A. Erosion and sediment control inspection.
(1) The Town of Smithtown Stormwater Management Officer may
require such inspections as necessary to determine compliance
with this chapter and may either approve that portion of the work
completed or notify the applicant wherein the work fails to comply
with the requirements of this chapter and the SWPPP as approved.
To obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the Town of
Smithtown Engineering Department at least 48 hours before any of
the following:
(a) Start of construction activity(ies).
(b) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures.
(c) Completion of site clearing.
(d) Completion of rough grading.
(e) Completion of final grading.
(f) Close of the construction season.
(g) Completion of final landscaping.
(h) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(2) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
issued a notice of inspection by the Stormwater Management
Officer stating the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted except for
site stabilization until any violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the Stormwater
Management Officer.
B. Stormwater management practice inspections. The Town of Smithtown
Stormwater Management Officer is responsible for conducting
inspections of stormwater management practices (SMPs). All applicants
are required to submit "record" plans for any stormwater management
practices located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan
must show the final design specifications for all stormwater
management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer
or land surveyor licensed in the State of New York.
C. Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection
programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including, but
not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection
§ 153-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-12
1:279
§ 153-13. Performance guarantees.
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges
of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are
more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or
federal water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES stormwater
permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under
environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not
limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling
discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in
drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage
control facilities and other stormwater management practices.
D. Submission of reports. The Town of Smithtown Stormwater
Management Officer may require monitoring and reporting from
entities subject to this chapter as are necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter.
E. Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new stormwater management
facility is installed on private property or when any new connection is
made between private property and the public stormwater system, the
landowner shall grant to the Town of Smithtown the right to enter the
property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the
purpose of inspection as specified in § 153-12C.
A. Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Town of Smithtown in its
approval of the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the Town of
Smithtown may require the applicant or developer to provide, prior to
construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of
credit from an appropriate financial or surety institution which
guarantees satisfactory completion of the project and names the Town
of Smithtown as the beneficiary. The security shall be in an amount to
be determined by the Town of Smithtown based on submission of final
design plans, with reference to actual construction and landscaping
costs. The performance guarantee shall remain in force until the surety
is released from liability by the Town of Smithtown, provided that such
period shall not be less than one year from the date of final acceptance
or such other certification that the facility(ies) has been constructed in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications and that a oneyear
inspection has been conducted and the facilities have been found
to be acceptable to the Town of Smithtown. Per-annum interest on cash
escrow deposits shall be reinvested in the account until the surety is
released from liability.
B. Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the
developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or
§ 153-12 SMITHTOWN CODE § 153-13
1:280
§ 153-14. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required
to provide the Town of Smithtown with an irrevocable letter of credit
from an approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper
operation and maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion
control facilities both during and after construction, and until the
facilities are removed from operation. If the developer or landowner
fails to properly operate and maintain stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control facilities, the Town of Smithtown may
draw upon the account to cover the costs of proper operation and
maintenance, including engineering and inspection costs.
C. Recordkeeping. The Town of Smithtown may require entities subject to
this chapter to maintain records demonstrating compliance with this
chapter.
A. Notice of violation.
(1) When the Town of Smithtown determines that a land development
activity is not being carried out in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, it may issue a written notice of
violation to the landowner. The notice of violation shall be either
hand delivered or sent certified mail and shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the landowner, developer or
applicant.
(b) The address, when available, or a description of the physical
location of the building, structure or land upon which the
violation is occurring.
(c) A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
(d) A description of the recommended remedial measures
necessary to bring the land development activity into
compliance with this chapter and a time schedule of 15 days
for the completion of such remedial action.
(e) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed.
(f) A statement that the determination of violation may be
appealed to the Stormwater Management Officer by filing a
written notice of appeal within 15 days of service of the notice
of violation.
(2) Failure to address a notice of violation in a timely manner may
result in a stop-work order or in civil, criminal, or monetary
penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized
in this chapter.
§ 153-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-14
1:281
B. Stop-work orders. The Stormwater Management Officer may issue a
stop-work order for violations of this chapter. Persons receiving a stopwork
order shall be required to halt all land development activities,
except those activities that address the violations leading to the stopwork
order. The stop-work order shall be in effect until the SMO
confirms that the land development activity is in compliance and the
violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to comply with a
stop-work order may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this chapter.
C. Violation and penalties.
(1) The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter of the Code of
the Town of Smithtown shall be punishable by a fine or
imprisonment, or both; however, for the purpose of conferring
jurisdiction upon the courts and judicial officers, such violations
shall be deemed to be misdemeanors and for such purposes only, all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such
violations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm,
association or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter
of the Code of the Town of Smithtown shall be guilty of a violation
punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both, for conviction of a first
offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of which were
committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not
less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed six months, or both; and for conviction of a third or
subsequent offense all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each week
the violation continues.
(2) The Town Attorney is authorized to institute any and all actions and
proceedings necessary to enforce this chapter. The Town Attorney
is also authorized to seek damages and any civil penalties in any
civil action, and such penalties shall be in addition to and not in lieu
of any criminal prosecution and penalty.
(a) In the event of any actual or pending violation of this chapter,
the Town Attorney may, in addition to other remedies, institute
any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate such violation.
(b) In addition to other remedies provided by law, any appropriate
action or proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise,
may be instituted or taken to prevent the unlawful
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use or to restrain or correct such violation or
to prevent the occupancy of said site, structure or land or to
§ 153-14 SMITHTOWN CODE § 153-14
1:282
§ 153-15. Fees for services; disposition.
§ 153-16. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon filing with the
Secretary of State of the State of New York.
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about
such premises.
(c) In addition to any fine or penalty imposed, the defendant shall
pay all costs and expenses incurred by the Town in determining
such violation.
(3) Except as provided otherwise by law, such a violation shall not be a
crime, and the penalty or punishment imposed therefor shall not be
deemed for any purpose a penal or criminal penalty or punishment
and shall not impose any disability upon or affect or impair the
credibility as a witness, or otherwise, of any person convicted
thereof.
D. Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this
chapter the Stormwater Management Officer, by written notification to
the Building Director, may prevent the occupancy of said building or
land.
E. Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its
undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken
within a reasonable time after notice, the Town of Smithtown may take
necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon
the property until paid.
A. Any person undertaking land development activities regulated by this
chapter shall be required to pay a fee to the Town to pay for review of
stormwater pollution prevention plans, inspections, or SMP
maintenance performed by the Town of Smithtown or performed by a
third party at the direction of the Town. A fee schedule shall be
established by the Town Engineer and adopted by resolution by the
Town Board. The fee schedule may be amended annually as deemed
necessary by the Town Engineer.
B. All fees generated by this chapter shall be credited to a revenue
account identified as "Stormwater Management." Monies accumulated
by this account will be used by the Engineering Department to support
stormwater management and erosion and sediment control within the
Town of Smithtown.
§ 153-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-16
1:283
Chapter 154
EXCAVATIONS AND REGRADING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dredging — See Ch. 138.
Excavations in streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 245, Art. IV.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 248.
§ 153-16 SMITHTOWN CODE § 153-16
1:284
ARTICLE I
Regrading and Excavating
[Adopted as Ch. 30 of the 1964 Code]
§ 154-1. Declaration of policy; short title.
§ 154-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EARTH PRODUCTS — Includes such material as topsoil, sand, gravel, stone
and other minerals.
EXCAVATION — Any hole, pit, sidehill cut, stripping or similar condition,
except that the provisions of this article shall not apply when the extent of
such excavation shall be limited to the requirements for actual construction
A. The regulation and control of the general regrading of land, the
extraction and removal of earth products and other excavations are
necessary to protect and to prevent serious and irreparable damage to
the public health, safety and general welfare, as well as to make
effective the general purposes of comprehensive planning and zoning.
B. These regulations and controls are intended to prevent the following
conditions from occurring:
(1) The interruption and diversion of natural watersheds and drainage
lines resulting in inadequate and improper surface water drainage.
(2) The erosion of soil by water and wind.
(3) The decrease in or destruction of the fertility of the land.
(4) The removal of the lateral support of abutting streets, land and
premises.
(5) The creation of dust storms and mosquito breeding places.
(6) The creation of dangerous banks, depressions or pits.
(7) The interruption of suitable access roads to other lands and the
disruption of the future road pattern.
(8) The rendering of lands unfit or unsuitable for their most
appropriate uses.
(9) The depreciation of property values.
(10) The creation of other deterrents to the coordinated and
harmonious physical development of the Town of Smithtown.
C. The short title for this article shall be the "General Regrading and
Excavating Ordinance."
§ 154-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-2
1:285
of a wall, driveway or sidewalk, or to the requirements for actual
construction of a building or structure or part thereof for which the Board
of Site Plan Review has approved a site plan or to a cesspool, septic
tank or recharge basin excavation or to a residential site of less than two
acres.[Amended 10-24-1967]
EXTRACTION — All the various methods used in excavating or mining earth
products.
GENERAL REGRADING — Any rearrangement of the topography of a
property, except that the provisions of this article shall not apply when
the extent of such regrading shall be limited to the requirements for the
actual construction of a wall, driveway or sidewalk or to the requirements
for actual construction of a building or structure or part thereof for which
the Board of Site Plan Review has approved a site plan or to a cesspool,
septic tank or recharge basin or to a residential site of less than two
acres.[Amended 10-24-1967; 1-22-1974; 2-25-1986]
PROCESSING OF MATERIALS — The passing of sand and gravel as
excavated through any portable or permanent machinery or other structure
so as to separate, segregate or otherwise change the natural composition
or size makeup of the material. Any process or system which washes the
natural material obtained at the site shall also be considered a system which
processes materials under the provisions of this article.[Added 5-11-1971]
REMOVAL — The transport of earth products from the property upon which
they are naturally located to some other property, whether they remain in
their original form or become changed in any way and whether or not such
removal is for profit.
SUBDIVIDER — A person or corporation who proposes a subdivision under
the provisions of the Smithtown Planning Board's Rules and Regulations
for the Subdivision of Land, whether such subdivision is for residential
purposes or some other use.
§ 154-3. Approval required; permit procedure.
A. No regrading, extraction or excavating shall be permitted in the Town
of Smithtown, except pursuant to Article III of this chapter or Chapter
245, Article IV, or Chapter 248 of the Town Code, the provisions of this
article or pursuant to site plans approved by the Board of Site Plan
Review or a building, foundation, pool or other similar permit issued
pursuant to the Town Code. [Amended 5-11-1971; 1-21-1986]
B. Processing of subdivisions. The procedure for a subdivider who
proposes to do general regrading in conjunction with the construction
of a subdivision which is shown on the final plat and which has received
the approval of the Planning Board of the Town of Smithtown shall be as
follows: [Amended 5-11-1971]
(1) Planning Board: Approve the final plat or other proposed land
development under the authority granted by § 277, 278 and 280-a
of the Town Law.
§ 154-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 154-3
1:286
(2) Subdivider: Certify that the proposed plat will be constructed to the
line and grade as shown on the approved modifications to the
approved regrading plan.
(3) Additional requirements: Approval of a final plat by the Planning
Board of the Town of Smithtown and the subsequent filing of the
final plat with the Clerk of Suffolk County must be accomplished
prior to the start of any regrading operation. Limited regrading for
the construction of models or to provide access to interior portions
of the property being subdivided may be accomplished with the
written permission of the Town Engineer prior to the filing of the
plat with the Clerk of Suffolk County and after a preliminary map
has been reviewed and approved by the Planning Board.
(4) Extent of work permitted in subdivisions: The following regrading
operations are considered necessary in the construction of
subdivisions and may be carried out, provided that the necessary
map approvals have been obtained: [Amended 2-25-1986]
(a) The construction of roads and other required public
improvements, including the excavations required for the
installation of drainage lines, appurtenances, etc.
(b) The regrading of lots for the purpose of constructing a
dwelling, including excavations required for cesspools, septic
tanks, retaining walls, walks, drainages, appurtenances, etc.
(c) The construction of a recharge basin or other undergrounddrainage
storage system.
(d) The installation of any other improvements, either public or
private, which are required by any authorized agency of the
Town of Smithtown.
(e) The installation of required utility services.
(5) Certification: Prior to the release of the performance bond, the
subdivider shall submit a certification by a duly licensed
professional engineer or land surveyor in the State of New York
that the finished grade of the land and the elevations of buildings
are substantially those which were shown on the general regrading
plan or approved modifications to the general regrading plan.
Foundation elevation plans, when approved by the Building
Department and the Engineering Department, shall be accepted as
the approved grades for the building shown thereon.
(6) No regrading, extraction, excavating or removal of earth products
shall be permitted where the Town Board or the Planning Board
determines that sand mining (and not a subdivision development) is
the primary purpose of the subdivision application. [Added
2-25-1986]
§ 154-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-3
1:287
§ 154-4. Application, supplementary documents and drawing.
C. Responsibility for permit. No contractor, agent for or subdivider of
property or property owner shall cause, allow or permit any general
regrading, extracting or removing of earth products or other
excavating, as defined in this article, to be done in the Town of
Smithtown, except in conformity with this article and all other
applicable ordinances. [Amended 2-25-1986]
A. The Town Engineer, the Board of Site Plan Review, with respect to site
plans, and the Planning Board, with respect to subdivisions, may
require the following documentation with respect to regrading,
excavating or the removal of earth products: [Amended 2-25-1986]
(1) A duly acknowledged notarized consent, in writing, of the owner or
owners of the premises, including his or their addresses.
(2) A certified estimate, prepared by a professional engineer and land
surveyor licensed in the State of New York, showing the total
number of cubic yards of material to be generally regraded,
excavated or removed from the property during each of the
described stages of the proposed operation and the time schedule.
(3) Drawing.
(a) A drawing at a scale of 100 feet to an inch or larger on a sheet
not larger than 36 by 48 inches shall be prepared by a
professional engineer or land surveyor licensed in the State of
New York, showing the following information:
[1] The location and survey data of the premises where it is
proposed to generally regrade, excavate or remove earth
products.
[2] All streets adjoining and within 200 feet of the premises.
[3] All existing buildings or structures on the premises or
within 200 feet of the premises.
[4] Existing and proposed elevations at each described stage
in the proposed operation for the premises and all land
within 200 feet of its boundaries, shown on a horizontal
grid system with a fifty-foot interval and also on a crosssection
derived from that grid system. Additional
elevations shall be shown at each break in the grades and
along the center line of all adjoining streets.
[5] Present and proposed surface-water drainage and natural
drainage features.
[6] A key map at the scale of 600 feet to one inch indicating
the relationship to the highway pattern, school and Town
boundaries and zoning districts.
§ 154-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 154-4
1:288
§ 154-5. Standards.
[7] A certification by a duly licensed professional engineer or
land surveyor in the State of New York that the existing
grades and elevations are based on an actual field survey.
(b) The Board of Site Plan Review or the Planning Board may
require additional data or waive requirements in appropriate
cases.
B. Required supplementary documents. The following supplementary
documents are required: [Amended 5-11-1971]
(1) A duly acknowledged notarized consent, in writing, of the owner or
owners of the premises, including his or their addresses.
(2) A certified estimate, prepared by a professional engineer or land
surveyor licensed in the State of New York, showing the total
number of cubic yards of material to be generally regraded,
excavated or removed from the property during each of the
described stages of the proposed operation and the time schedule.
A. Excavation. The following standards shall apply in the absence of
standards applicable pursuant to Article III of this chapter and
Chapters 112, Article II; 245, Article IV; 248; 252; 322; or other
chapters of the Town Code. [Amended 5-11-1971; 2-25-1986]
(1) No excavation shall be located within 20 feet of any property line.
(2) The bottom of an excavation shall not be below the established
grade at the property boundaries, unless the sidewalls have a
naturally stabilized slope, but in no case greater than one vertical
on two horizontal or, in special cases, retaining structures, but in
any case the Town Engineer shall require a standard specified in
good practice.
(3) Before any excavation is started, the area to be excavated shall be
enclosed by a six-foot-high wire mesh fence and gate. The gate
shall be securely locked, except when actually in use. The fence
shall consist of a six-foot-high wire mesh fence on posts complete
with top rail and bottom coil springs. The line posts, corner posts
and gateposts, the wire mesh, the bracing and all other fence posts
shall meet the specifications for six-foot-high fencing established by
the Town of Smithtown for the recharge-basin fence and gate, as
more specifically described in the Subdivision Regulations.39
Where required by the Town Board, galvanized steel-rod ties will be
substituted for the coil-spring brace wire. These galvanized steel
rods shall be installed at the rate of three tie points per panel at the
bottom of the wire mesh. The rod shall be clinched to the fabric and
anchored in concrete.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 248, Subdivision of Land.
§ 154-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-5
1:289
(4) Adequate provisions shall be made for the prevention of flying dust
and other types of air pollution.
(5) The boundaries of the work area shall be flagged with two-by-twoinch
wood stakes three feet high or suitable metal rods three feet
high, spaced at not more than one-hundred-foot intervals. Stakes
that are knocked down or otherwise not easily visible shall be
replaced by the permit holder.
(6) No excavation shall be permitted without an adequate plan for
finished grading and general rehabilitation of the area consistent
with the declared policy of the Town of Smithtown, as found in
§ 154-1 of this article. Such finished grading and general
rehabilitation shall be covered by the performance bond.
B. Topsoil stripping.
(1) No stripping or removal of topsoil shall be made within 10 feet of
any property line.
(2) The collection and storage upon the property of the original topsoil
to permit general regrading and excavation work shall be so
carried out that it shall not be buried or mixed with material of
inferior quality.
(3) When topsoil has been stripped, collected and stored or removed
from the property, there shall be left or replaced not less than six
inches of topsoil upon the surface of the land.
(4) Dust-down, or its equal, shall be spread to prevent dust from flying.
(5) No topsoil shall be stripped between the first day of October and
the first day of April in the following year.
(6) All areas from which topsoil is stripped shall, during the period
between August 20 and October 1, inclusive, be reseeded as
provided in Subsection D of this section, except when the stripping
is preliminary to general regrading or excavation.40
C. Surface water drainage.
(1) No stormwater runoff or natural drainage water shall be so
diverted as to overload existing drainage systems or create flooding
or the need for additional drainage structures on other private
properties or public lands.
(2) Where necessary, the required drawing shall indicate adequate
drainage structures to carry off and store or discharge the
stormwater runoff and natural drainage water which originates not
only within the property boundaries but also that which originates
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 154-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 154-5
1:290
beyond the property boundaries. Such structures shall be
constructed according to the specifications of the Town Engineer.
D. Finished grading and general rehabilitation.
(1) After the completion of excavating or stripping, the property shall
be finish-graded with a surface layer of not less than six inches of
topsoil of a quality native to the site.
(2) The finish grade shall promote and be consistent with the declared
policy of the Town of Smithtown as found in § 154-1 of this article.
(3) No excavation shall be made either below or beyond the finish
grades indicated on the site plan approved by the Town Engineer.
Exceptions to this requirement over limited areas may be
recommended by the Town Engineer for approval by the Town
Board in the event that the type and technique of backfill is
acceptable to the Town Engineer.
(4) The finish grade shall form an appropriate part of the natural
drainage area or some positive drainage system.
(5) During the period between August 20 and October 1, inclusive, all
finish-graded areas shall be prepared into a loose level seed bed,
limed, fertilized and seeded in the following steps or in accordance
with good landscape practice:
(a) Apply ground limestone at the rate of one ton per acre.
(b) Apply 5-10-5 fertilizer at the rate of 600 pounds per acre.
(c) Disc area to work limestone and fertilizer into the soil to a
depth of at least three inches.
(d) Smooth area with a smoothing harrow.
(e) Sow the following seed mixtures at the rate of 100 pounds per
acre:
Type Number of Pounds
Timothy 30
Kentucky bluegrass 25
Redtop 10
Perennial ryegrass 30
Alsike clover 4
Wild white clover 1
_____
Total 100
(f) Brush in seed lightly.
§ 154-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-5
1:291
§ 154-6. Prohibited hours of operation. [Added 8-9-1983; amended
2-25-1986]
The following provisions shall apply to any regrading, excavating, extraction
or processing or removal of materials or earth products that may be
permitted pursuant to this article or other provisions of the Town Code:
§ 154-7. Fees for removal of earth products. [Added 2-25-1986]
§ 154-8. Stop-work orders. [Added 8-24-1982; amended 2-25-1986]
Whenever the Town Engineer has reasonable grounds to believe that
regrading and excavating is being prosecuted in violation of any of the
provisions of the Code of the Town of Smithtown or not in conformity
with the provisions of any application, required supplementary documents
and drawings, on the basis of which a regrading and excavating is being
conducted, or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, he shall notify the owner
of the property or the owner's agent or the person performing the work
to suspend all work, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work
and suspend all regrading and excavating activities until the stop order
has been rescinded. Such order and notice shall be in writing, shall state
the conditions under which the work may be resumed and may be served
upon a person to whom it is directed either by delivering it personally to
such person or by posting the same in a conspicuous place on the site and
sending a copy of the same to such person by registered mail.
(g) Roll firm with ground roller.
A. No regrading, excavating, extraction or processing of materials shall be
permitted between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. No regrading, excavating or extraction, processing or removal of earth
products shall be permitted between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.
A. The following fees shall be paid to the Town Engineer prior to the
removal of earth products, including those removed pursuant to
permits issued under Article III of this chapter or Chapters 112, Article
II; 245, Article IV; 248, 252; 322; or other chapters of this Code.
B. The fees shall be as follows:
(1) Other than topsoil removal: $0.11 per cubic yard in excess of the
first 10,000 cubic yards.
C. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, no fee shall be
charged for the removal of earth products when such removal is
necessary to install drainage improvements, such as recharge basins,
which are required pursuant to the Town Code or applicable statutes,
rules or regulations. [Added 5-6-1986]
§ 154-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 154-9
1:292
§ 154-9. Failure to comply with stop-work orders. [Added
8-24-1982; amended 5-24-1983]
Any person who shall fail to comply with a stop-work order issued by the
Town Engineer shall be subject to a penalty in a minimum sum of $1,000 for
each day that such violation continues.
§ 154-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-11-1971]
A. Each violation of this article or any regulation, order or ruling
promulgated hereunder or any permit issued hereunder shall be
punishable by a minimum fine of $500 or imprisonment not exceeding
15 days, or both, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition
to such fine, the defendant shall pay all costs and expenses incurred by
the Town in determining such violation. Each violation of this article
shall constitute disorderly conduct, and every person violating the same
shall be a disorderly person. The foregoing shall be in addition to all
other remedies available under the law to the Town or the Town Board.
[Amended 5-24-1983]
B. The Town Engineer is designated as administration and enforcement
officer for matters covered by this article.
§ 154-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-10
1:293

ARTICLE II
Excavated Lands
[Adopted as Ch. 16 of the 1964 Code]
§ 154-11. Title.
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "Excavated Lands
Ordinance."
§ 154-12. Filling of hazardous lands.
The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown may direct the filling in of
excavated lands and property in any district in the Town if, after a hearing
upon publication of notice in at least one newspaper having general
circulation in the Town of Smithtown, the existence of such lands and
property are determined by the Town Board to constitute a hazard to public
safety.
§ 154-13. Filling procedure.
Prior to the filling in of any excavated lands and property, the Town Board
shall provide as follows:
A. For an inspection and report by an official of the Town duly appointed
by the Town Board.
B. For a public hearing, after notice of such hearing by the publication of a
notice in at least one newspaper circulating in the Town specifying the
time when and the place where such hearing will be held and
identifying the property which is the subject of the report of the
appointed Town official.
C. For a determination by the Town Board as to whether the existence of
such excavated lands and property constitute a hazard to the public
safety.
D. In the event that the Town Board deems such lands and property to
constitute a hazard to public safety, for 30 days' notice, by registered
mail, to the owner of record of such lands and property at the address
shown on the last preceding assessment roll, containing a description of
the premises, a statement of the particulars in which said excavated
lands and property are hazardous to public safety and an order
requiring such excavated lands and property to be filled in by or on
behalf of such owner within such thirty-day period.
E. In the event of the failure of such owner to commence and complete the
filling in of such excavated lands and property as required by said order,
for the filling in by or under the direction of the Town of Smithtown of
such excavated lands and property and for the assessment of the cost
thereof against such lands and property in accordance with the
provisions of § 157 of the Highway Law of the State of New York.
§ 154-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-13
1:295

ARTICLE III
Minor Excavations and Regrading
[Adopted 10-24-1967; amended in its entirety 12-12-1967]
§ 154-14. Title.
A short title for this article shall be the "Minor Excavations and Regrading
Ordinance."
§ 154-15. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MINOR EXCAVATION OR REGRADING — An excavation or regrading
project involving residential lots containing less than two acres and having
existing homes, where earth is to be removed or rearranged by the taking
away or adding of material to the extent that an existing elevation is
changed by more than four feet or where earth is affected within 10 feet
of the property line. The provisions of this article shall not apply when the
extent of such excavation shall be limited to the requirements for the actual
construction of a wall, driveway or sidewalk or to the requirements for the
actual construction of a building or structure or part thereof for which the
Building Director has issued a building permit or to a cesspool or septic
tank.[Amended 5-8-2007]
§ 154-16. Permits.
The Town Engineer is authorized to issue permits for minor excavations
and regrading, as defined above, without prior public hearing or Town
Board approval, upon the conditions set forth hereinafter for a term not
exceeding 90 days and upon such other additional conditions as he may
deem necessary and proper.
§ 154-17. Required submissions.
An applicant for a permit under the provisions of this article shall submit
the following items along with an application to the Town Engineer:
§ 154-18. Application fee.
An application fee of $25 shall be paid to the Town of Smithtown on the
submission of the application.
§ 154-19. Permit approval.
Upon receipt of the application, sketch and application fee, the Town
Engineer shall review the submissions and make a determination as to
A. A sketch of the proposed excavation or regrading operation, showing
the limits of the proposed work, including grade changes.
§ 154-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-19
1:297
whether the permit should be granted. The approval, if granted, shall
be indicated by the Town Engineer's signature on a permit which shall
specify any additional conditions which he may deem necessary and proper.
The permittee shall have the permit available, upon request, to the Town
Engineer or any of his authorized inspectors.
§ 154-20. Permit renewals.
The Town Engineer may extend or renew the permit sought for herein for
successive ninety-day periods, provided that the applicant reapplies and
pays a new application fee for each such period.
§ 154-21. Finished grade.
Within the time of the permit, unless the same is extended by the Town
Engineer, the bottom of an excavation shall not fall below the established
grade at the property boundaries unless the sidewalls have a naturally
stabilized slope which does not exceed one vertical on two horizontal. In
special cases, the sidewalls may be contained by retaining walls or other
structures which meet with the approval of the Town Engineer and which
do not violate the provisions of the Building Zone Ordinance of the Town of
Smithtown.41
§ 154-22. Fence.
A four-foot-high chain link fence, having steel upright posts spaced not
more than 10 feet on center and equipped with a toprail, must be erected
between the property line and excavation wherever an excavation having a
depth of more than four feet is dug within 10 feet of any property line.
§ 154-23. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of any ordinances of the Town of Smithtown shall be guilty of
an offense punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both; however, for the
purpose of confirming jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers,
such violations shall be deemed to be misdemeanors, and for such
purposes only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply
to such violations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm,
association or corporation violating any provisions of any ordinance of
the Town of Smithtown shall be subject to a penalty in a sum not
exceeding $50 for the first such violation and in a sum not exceeding
$100 for any subsequent violation, said penalties to be recoverable in a
civil action in the name of the Town of Smithtown as damages.
B. The Town Engineer or his duly authorized assistants are designated as
administration and enforcement officers for matters covered by this
article.
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Zoning.
§ 154-19 SMITHTOWN CODE § 154-23
1:298
Chapter 160
FIREARMS
§ 160-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as an "Ordinance Regulating the Discharge of
Firearms in the Town of Smithtown."
§ 160-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall govern the interpretation of this chapter
unless otherwise expressly defined herein:
FIREARM — Includes a weapon which acts by the force of gunpowder or
from which a shot is discharged by the force of an explosion, as well as an
air rifle, an air gun, a BB gun, a slingshot and a bow and arrow.[Amended
1-9-1990]
TOWN — Includes all areas within the Town of Smithtown, exclusive of
areas wholly within any incorporated village.
§ 160-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit any person from discharging a
firearm in those areas of the Town of Smithtown in which such activity may
be hazardous to the general public or nearby residents.
§ 160-4. Prohibited areas. [Amended 12-4-1973]
The discharge of firearms is deemed hazardous to the general public and,
therefore, prohibited in all areas of the Town of Smithtown except those
areas as stipulated under § 160-5, Exceptions.
§ 160-5. Exceptions. [Added 10-29-1968; amended 12-4-1973]
A. Firearms may be discharged upon one’s own property and upon the
property of another with the written consent of the landowner, provided
that any such discharge of firearms does not occur within 500 feet from
a dwelling, school or occupied structure, or a park, beach, playground
or any other place of outdoor recreational or nonrecreational activities;
and further provided that any such discharge of firearms does not
violate the provisions of the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law. [Amended 1-9-1990; 4-3-2012]
B. Firearms may be discharged on the Nissequogue River only in the area
defined as being within 50 feet of the high-water mark of the west bank
and northward to Long Island Sound from a line formed by the westerly
extension of the southerly boundary line of the Village of Nissequogue
to the west bank.
§ 154-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-6
1:299
§ 160-6. Posting.
Each area designated as a locality, wherein the discharge of a firearm is
deemed prohibited, shall be posted with no fewer than two signs giving
notice of such prohibition.
§ 160-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-9-1990]
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine or
imprisonment, or both. However, for the purpose of confirming jurisdiction
upon courts and judicial officers, such violation shall be deemed to be a
misdemeanor, and for such purposes only all provisions of law relating to
misdemeanors shall apply to such violation. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
any person, firm, association or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a penalty in a sum not exceeding $250 for the
first such violation and in a sum not exceeding $500 for any subsequent
violation, said penalties to be in addition to any other damages that may be
recovered by the Town of Smithtown in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Chapter 164
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Environment and
Waterways — See Ch. 27.
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 145.
Junkyards — See Ch. 194.
Washing and dry-cleaning
establishments — See Ch. 308.
§ 160-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § 160-7
1:300
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 164-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Fire Prevention Code
of the Town of Smithtown."
§ 164-2. Authority.
This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Municipal Home Rule
Law and the Executive Law (Article 18) of the State of New York.
§ 164-3. Purpose.
A. The present level of loss of life, injury to persons and damage to
property as a result of fire demonstrates that the people of the Town of
Smithtown and their guests are in a need to receive the basic level of
protection to which they are entitled, due to the unique circumstances
presented in the Town of Smithtown in connection with the
construction and maintenance of buildings.
B. New York State, with its size and vast differences in characteristics
among its counties, cities, towns and villages, duly enacted the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code to provide a
basic minimum level of safety standards. This code was adopted to
provide at least some form of uniformity throughout the state. However,
Smithtown, due to its population and size, as well as its unique
characteristics, warrants a more stringent Fire Prevention Code.
C. Occupying approximately 140 square miles, Smithtown has a daytime
population exceeding a quarter of a million people. As host to one of the
largest industrial parks in the United States, Smithtown attracts many
industries, employing over 100,000 individuals in over 600 businesses
and industries. Among them are high tech, manufacturing, chemical,
biological and hazardous materials enterprises. Many of these
enterprises develop, as products or wastes, hazardous, toxic or
radioactive materials or wastes which are found to be in a solid, liquid
or gaseous state.
D. Many of Smithtown's access roads were built to handle vehicles
designed in the 1930's and 1940's, and much of the Town's road system
is narrow and difficult to traverse. Today's vehicles, especially
commercial and emergency equipment apparatus, are much larger and
more cumbersome. Combined with the tremendous volume of traffic
that the roads of Smithtown handle everyday, these unique
circumstances diminish the response time for emergency service
equipment and personnel.
E. The Town of Smithtown has densely populated areas, and often times,
commercial, industrial, retail and residential uses converge in a
§ 164-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-3
1:301
§ 164-4. Applicability.
relatively small area. Smithtown, while providing unique advantages
to its population, is in need of unique and more stringent safety
requirements and standards in order to ensure that the unique
characteristics that Smithtown has to offer may continue to exist in a
safe and healthy atmosphere.
F. Therefore, it is the expressed intent of the Town Board of the Town of
Smithtown to provide for the enactment of this chapter in order to
provide a basic minimum level of protection to all people of the Town of
Smithtown from hazards of fire, explosion and inadequate road and
building construction.
G. It is further the intent of the Town Board to enact this chapter as an
expression of its desire to prescribe standards consistent with
nationally recognized practices for the safeguarding, to a reasonable
degree, of life and property.
H. Now, therefore, the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown hereby
enacts this chapter to provide for the protection of life and property.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to new and existing
conditions and structures, except that existing conditions and
structures not in strict compliance with the terms of this chapter shall
be permitted to continue where the existing condition or structure does
not constitute an imminent and distinct hazard to life or property in the
opinion of the Fire Prevention Division. In the event that the Fire
Prevention Division shall determine an existing condition to be an
imminent and distinct hazard to life or property, then the Fire
Prevention Division may order immediate corrective actions to be
undertaken. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
(1) If, after the effective date of this chapter, a building or structure is
not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the Fire
Prevention Division has determined that the building, structure or
condition does not present an imminent and distinct hazard to life
or property, then that condition, building or structure may continue
to exist as is.
(2) If, after the effective date of this chapter, a building or structure not
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be altered,
modified, changed, constructed, enlarged or otherwise adapted,
modified, repaired, restored or changed to an extent exceeding
50% of the fair market value of such building or structure, then the
entire building or structure shall be constructed and used in full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable laws, rules and regulations.
B. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as applying to the
transportation of any article or thing shipped under the jurisdiction of
§ 164-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-4
1:302
§ 164-5. Adoption of standards by reference.
§ 164-6. Definitions. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLIANCES — All gas-burning appliances for use with liquefied petroleum
gas.
APPROVED — Accepted by the Director or Fire Prevention Division as a
result of investigation and/or experience or by reason of a test, listing
or approval by the Underwriters' Laboratory, Incorporated, the National
Bureau of Standards, the American Gas Association Laboratories or other
nationally recognized testing or approval agency.
BOARD OF FIRE COMMISSIONERS — The Fire District Boards within the
Town of Smithtown.
CARRIER — Persons who engage in the transportation of articles or
materials by air, water, rail or highway.
CENTRAL ALARM STATION — Any entity which receives signals from fire
alarm systems and relays information pertaining to such fire alarm systems
to the appropriate Fire Department headquarters.
CERTIFICATE OF BUSINESS REGISTRATION — A form and/or certificate
filed with the Town, indicating various information regarding use,
individuals, occupancy, storage of hazardous or flammable materials,
contact persons in case of emergency and other information required in
order to effectuate the purposes and intent of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A written approval certificate granted
and issued by the Department of Public Safety or Fire Prevention Division,
and in compliance with the regulations prescribed by the Interstate
Commerce Commission, unless specifically stated otherwise, nor shall
this chapter apply to any recognized division of the Armed Services of
the United States of America.
A. This chapter adopts the Fire Prevention Codes of the NFPA and all of its
incorporated standards and codes as published in the National Fire
Codes of the NFPA. The same are hereby adopted and incorporated as if
fully set forth herein.
B. This chapter adopts the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code as set forth in 9 NYCRR. The same is hereby adopted and
incorporated as if fully set forth herein.
C. Not fewer than one copy of the National Fire Prevention Code of the
NFPA and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk, the Building
Department and the Fire Prevention Division.
§ 164-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-6
1:303
indicating that an occupied building or space is in compliance with this
Code.
CERTIFICATE OF FITNESS — A license to perform a specific function as
indicated on the certificate.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A document certifying that a premises
complies with provisions of Zoning and/or Building Codes for a particular
purpose or use.
CODE — The Code of the Town of Smithtown.
COMBUSTIBLE — Capable of undergoing a chemical process that involves
oxidation sufficient to produce light or heat.
COMBUSTIBLE FIBERS — Readily ignitable and free-burning fibers, such
as cotton, sisal, henequen, ixtle, jute, hemp, tow, cocoa fiber, oakum, baled
waste, baled wastepaper, kapok, hay, straw, Spanish moss, excelsior and
other like materials.
CONGESTED DISTRICT — Any area where there are buildings, under
separate ownership, not over 100 feet apart.
CORROSIVE LIQUID — Those acids, alkaline, caustic and other corrosive
liquids which, when in contact with living tissue, will cause severe damage
of such tissue by chemical action; or in case of leakage will materially
damage or destroy other containers or other hazardous commodities by
chemical action and cause the release of their contents; or are liable to
cause fire when in contact with organic matter or with certain chemicals.
"Corrosive liquids" are those that have a pH less than four or greater than
10.
CORROSIVES — Those materials that cause harm to living organisms by
destroying body tissue or causing damage thereto.
CURIE — An expression of the quantity of radiation in terms of the number
of atoms which disintegrate per second; a "curie" is that quantity of
radioactive material which decays such that 37,000,000,000 atoms
disintegrate per second.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY — The Department of Public Safety of
the Town of Smithtown.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Public Safety.
DISTRIBUTING PLANT — A facility, the primary purpose of which is the
distribution of gas and which receives liquefied petroleum gas in tank
car, truck transport or truck lots, distributing this gas to the end user by
portable container (package) delivery, by tank truck or through gas piping.
Such plants have bulk storage (2,000 gallons' water capacity or more) and
usually have container-filling and truck-loading facilities on the premises.
So-called "bulk plants" are considered as being in this category. Normally,
no person other than the plant management or plant employees have access
to these facilities.
DIVISION — The Fire Prevention Division.
§ 164-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-6
1:304
DRY CLEANING — The process of removing dirt, grease, paints and other
stains from wearing apparel, textiles, fabrics, rugs and other materials
or fabrics by the use of nonaqueous liquid solvents, flammable or
nonflammable, and it shall include the process of dyeing clothes or other
fabrics or textiles in a solution of dye colors and nonaqueous liquid solvents.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm activation to which Fire Department personnel
respond which is not the result of fire, smoke or other emergency.
FIRE ALARM DEVICE — Any device, including manually operated ones,
which, when activated by fire, smoke or other emergency requiring Fire
Department response, transmits a signal to local Fire Department
headquarters or a central alarm station and/or produces any audible or
visible signal to which the local Fire Department is expected to respond.
Excluded from this definition and from the provisions of this chapter are
devices designed to alert the occupants of a building of an emergency
condition therein and which do not produce any audible or visible signal
which is perceptible outside of such building.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS — Any arrangement of fire alarm devices,
connected together and to a control panel or panels, designed so that the
activation of any one device will cause an appropriate signal to operate.
FIRE ALARM TECHNICIAN — Any person licensed by the State of New York
who maintains, installs, repairs, tests, inspects or otherwise performs work
on fire alarm systems.
FIRE AREA — That area of a building between the outside walls and/or
interior fire walls.
FIRE LANE — A fire zone.
FIRE LINE — The boundary of a temporary fire zone established by a Fire
Chief, fire person or duly authorized agent, pursuant to his or her authority,
acting in an official capacity.
FIRE MARSHAL — An individual charged with carrying out the duties of
the Fire Prevention Division and responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter.
FIRE PREVENTION DIVISION — A division of the Department of Public
Safety of the Town of Smithtown charged with the responsibilities of
carrying out the mandates of this chapter.
FIRE WALL — A wall with a specified degree of fire resistance that is
designed to prevent the spread of fire within a structure or between
adjacent structures.
FIREWORKS — Any combustible or explosive combination or any substance
or composition or combination of substances or articles prepared for the
purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion,
deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols,
toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, the type
balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers,
torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, dago bombs, sparklers or other
§ 164-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-6
1:305
devices of like construction and any devices containing any explosive or
flammable compound or any tablets or other devices containing any
explosive substance; except that the term "fireworks" shall not include auto
flares, paper caps containing not in excess of an average of 0.25 of a
grain of explosive content per cap and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or
other devices for the use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be
permitted at all times.
FIRE ZONE — An area permanently or temporarily marked for the purpose
of access by emergency vehicles, equipment and personnel.
FLAMMABLE GAS — Any gas which will burn in the normal concentration
of oxygen in the air.
FLAMMABLE LIQUID — Any liquid having a flash point below 200° F.
FLAMMABLE SOLID — A solid substance, other than one classified as an
explosive, which is liable to cause fires through friction, through absorption
of moisture, through spontaneous chemical change or as a result of retained
heat from manufacturing or processing.
FLASH POINT — The lowest temperature at which sufficient vapors are
produced from a flammable liquid to form an ignitable mixture.
HIGHLY TOXIC MATERIAL — A material so toxic to man as to afford an
unusual hazard to life and health during fire-fighting operations or during
an unintended release of said material in the environment. Examples are
parathion, TEPP (tetraethyl phosphate), HETP (hexaethyl tetraphosphate)
and similar insecticides and pesticides; shall also include those substances
so designated by manufacturers' required material safety data sheets.
INFORMATION STORAGE CABINET — A cabinet-style vault, approved by
the Chief Fire Marshal, installed in an accessible location for the purpose
of storing information and documents related to the storage of hazardous
materials, site plans, building plans, emergency notification information
or any other information as may be required by the Chief Fire Marshal
which is deemed to be pertinent to the operations of the responding Fire
Department.
INSTITUTIONAL OCCUPANCY — Indicates the occupancy or use of a
building or structure or any portion thereof by persons harbored or
detained to receive medical, charitable or other care or treatment or by
persons involuntarily detained.
KEY LOCK BOX — A container of a type approved by the Chief Fire Marshal
installed in an accessible location for the purpose of containing keys to gain
necessary access to areas of the premises.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS EQUIPMENT — All apparatus, appliances,
piping and equipment pertinent to the use of liquefied petroleum gas.
LPG — Liquefied petroleum gas.
LPG SYSTEM — An assembly consisting of one or more containers with a
means for conveying LPG from the container(s) to dispensing or consuming
devices, either continuously or intermittently, and which incorporates
§ 164-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-6
1:306
components intended to achieve control of quantity, flow, pressure or state,
either liquid or vapor.
MILLICURIE — One-thousandth of a curie.
MULTIPLE RESIDENCE FACILITY — Any building, structure or portion
thereof in which more than four persons, unrelated to the owner, occupy
space, rooms or suites. This shall include but not be limited to hotels,
motels, apartment houses, rooming houses, boardinghouses, garden
apartments, nursing homes, convalescent homes, adult homes and
residential board and care facilities. This shall not apply to accessory
apartments nor to condominiums nor to cooperatives wherein the living
units are individually owned nor to hospitals.
MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL UNIT DWELLING — Any building or structure
which contains four or more individual dwelling units or spaces with a
common roof or otherwise physically connected, and shall include
structures commonly known as "townhouses," "garden apartments,"
"motels," "hotels," "apartment houses" and "condominiums."
NFPA — The National Fire Protection Association. When used in this
chapter, NFPA shall include the National Electrical Code and the standards
as adopted by the National Fire Protection Association.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE RECEPTACLE — A container constructed of a material
which, under the conditions anticipated, will not aid combustion or add
appreciable heat to an ambient fire and which is Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., listed.
OCCUPANCY — The possession or use of property or premises; the purpose
for which a building or portion thereof is used or intended to be used.
OCCUPANT — A person having possessory rights or a person who can
control what goes on in or on a premises; a person who may for any reason
occupy a building or portion thereof at any time.
OCCUPIED — A building or any portion thereof being used for whatever
purpose or use.
ORGANIC PEROXIDES — Any organic compound having a double oxygen or
peroxy (O-O) group in its chemical structure.
OWNER — The person in whom is vested the ownership, dominion, title or
control of property; proprietor; includes the owner's duly authorized agent,
mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, purchaser, devisee,
fiduciary and any other person having a vested interest in the property in
question, including a tenant or lessee of the property in question.
OXIDIZING MATERIAL — Substances, such as chlorates, permanganates,
peroxides or nitrates, that yield oxygen readily to stimulate combustion.
PERSON — An individual, firm, association, corporation, labor organization,
partnership, legal representative, trustee, trustee in bankruptcy, receiver or
any combination of individuals.
§ 164-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-6
1:307
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY — Any room, space, building or portion thereof
used for gathering together persons for amusement, athletic, civic, dining,
educating, entertainment, patriotic, political, recreational, religious, social,
drinking, awaiting transportation or similar purpose.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY — Any room, space, building or portion
thereof used for gathering together 50 persons or more for such purposes
as deliberation, worship, entertainment, eating, drinking, amusement,
awaiting transportation or similar purposes.
POISONOUS GAS — Any noxious gas of such nature that a small amount of
the gas, when mixed with air, is dangerous to life. Examples are chlorpicrin,
cyanogen, hydrogen, cyanide, nitrogen, peroxide and phosgene.
POISONOUS GASES — Includes such gases that are of a nature that a very
small amount of the gas mixed with air is dangerous to life.
POTENTIALLY EXPLOSIVE CHEMICAL — Any chemical substance, other
than one classified as an explosive or blasting agent, which has a tendency
to be unstable and which can be exploded by heat or shock or a combustion
thereof.
QUALIFIED PERSONNEL — Persons holding a certificate of fitness issued
by the Fire Prevention Division.
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL — Any material or combination of materials that
spontaneously emits ionizing radiation.
RATED (PERTAINING TO DRY-CLEANING FACILITIES ONLY) — As applied
to solvents, classified as to fire hazard in accordance with nationally
recognized good practice.
REPAIR GARAGE — A public garage.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The customary, legal right of a person or vehicle to pass
in front of another.
RUBBISH — Any refuse, trash, garbage or discarded material of whatever
kind or nature.
SCUPPERS — Openings provided to allow runoff.
SEALED SOURCE — A quantity of radiation so enclosed as to prevent
the escape of any radioactive material but, at the same time, permitting
radiation to come out for use.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL HOME — A structure designed, approved
and constructed for the sole use of housing a single family.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on or under the ground or
upon another structure or building or any part thereof.
TANK VEHICLE — Any commercial vehicle designed to transport bulk
liquefied petroleum gas or other flammable liquids.
TERMINAL — Those facilities used by carriers for the receipt, transfer or
temporary storage of articles or materials.
TOWN — The Town of Smithtown.
§ 164-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-6
1:308
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 164-7. Authority to enter premises. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L.
No. 4-2000]
The Fire Prevention Division of the Town of Smithtown may enter the
premises of any building, structure or lot for the purpose of making any
inspection or examination in order to ensure compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 164-8. Powers and duties of Fire Prevention Division. [Amended
3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
A. The Department of Public Safety and the Fire Prevention Division, a
Division of the Department of Public Safety of the Town of Smithtown,
shall be charged with the responsibility of enforcing this chapter. It
shall be the duty of the Fire Prevention Division to inspect all buildings,
lots, structures and premises, except the interiors of single-family
residential homes, as often as may be necessary for the purpose of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any condition liable to cause
fire, explosion or damage or endanger life or property from fire or
explosion. The Fire Prevention Division shall also inspect any building,
lot or structure for any violations of the provisions of this chapter or to
ascertain whether the spirit or intent of this chapter is being
circumscribed.
B. The Fire Prevention Division shall cooperate with the Board of Fire
Commissioners, any Fire Department or fire district officer and any
department, office or division of the government of the Town of
Smithtown in making any inspection within the Town. At the request of
any Fire Department, Fire Chief or the Board of Fire Commissioners or
of any Town official or department, the Fire Prevention Division shall
inspect any building, lot or structure within the Town.
C. It shall be the duty of the Fire Prevention Division to inspect all exterior
areas adjacent to or adjoining any structure, lot or building, except
single-family residential homes, for the purpose of designating said
areas or portions thereof as fire zones. Any areas so designated shall be
plainly defined and marked as such in a manner prescribed by the Fire
Prevention Division and as prescribed by law.
D. It shall be the duty of the Fire Prevention Division to investigate the
origin, cause and circumstances of:
(1) Every fire which the Chief of a Fire Department determines worthy
of investigation due to its size, speed or any unusual conditions.
§ 164-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-8
1:309
§ 164-9. Orders to eliminate hazardous conditions. [Amended
3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
Whenever the Fire Prevention Division shall find in any building, lot or
structure any dangerous or hazardous condition or material, as described
herein, it shall order such dangerous condition or material to be removed
or remedied in such manner as may be specified by a Fire Marshal and
prescribed by law:
(2) Every hazardous condition or occurrence which might present a
clear and present danger to the health, safety and welfare of the
general public.
(3) Every fire or related condition or occurrence when requested by
any local Fire Department, fire district or duly authorized agency.
(4) Every fire involving Town-owned buildings, lots or structures.
E. It shall be the duty of the Fire Prevention Division, upon the request of
any local Fire Department or fire district or upon the request of the
Board of Fire Commissioners, to assist any local Fire Department, fire
district or any other duly authorized agency in the mitigation of any
hazardous condition or occurrence which might present a clear and
present danger to the health, safety and welfare of the general public,
when such event shall occur or may occur within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the Town of Smithtown.
A. Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive or
otherwise hazardous material.
B. Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed
equipment for handling or using combustible, explosive or otherwise
hazardous material.
C. A dangerous accumulation of rubbish, wastepaper, boxes, shavings or
other highly flammable material.
D. An accumulation of dust or waste material in air-handling systems or of
grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts.
E. Obstructions on or to fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or
windows liable to interfere with the operations of the Fire Department
or any rescue personnel or the ingress or egress of any individual in
case of fire or explosion.
F. Any building, lot or structure which, for want of repair or neglect, lacks
adequate exit facilities, automatic or manually operated fire alarm
devices or apparatus or fire-extinguishing equipment or, by reason of
age or dilapidated condition or from any other cause, creates a
hazardous condition.
G. Any violation of this chapter of the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
§ 164-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-10
1:310
§ 164-10. Service of orders.
§ 164-11. Certificates of occupancy and compliance.
A. The service of orders for the correction of any violation of this chapter
shall be made upon the owner, tenant or other person responsible for
the premises or one who purports or presents the appearance of being
responsible or in charge of the premises, either by delivering a copy of
same to such person or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any
person in charge of the premises or, in case no such person is found
upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on
said premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order by
affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon said premises,
another copy thereof shall be mailed, by certified mail with return
receipt requested, within 24 hours of posting, to the person to whom it
is directed at his last known business address or place of residence.
B. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the enforcement of this chapter
against any tenant, subtenant or occupant of any building, lot or
structure, except that no order or enforcement shall be made against
any tenant, subtenant or occupant if such order or enforcement
requires structural additions or changes to the building, lot or
structure. Such order or enforcement shall only be effective against the
owner of such building, lot or structure.
A. No building or structure or part thereof shall be occupied or used until
a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building Director of
the Town of Smithtown. [Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
B. Every building or structure, except single-family residential homes,
shall be inspected by the Fire Prevention Division on an annual basis to
ensure that the structure or building is in full compliance with all
applicable laws, rules and regulations, as well as to ensure that the
structure or building is in compliance with the certificate of occupancy.
[Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
C. If said building or structure is in full compliance with all applicable
laws, rules and regulations, then the Fire Prevention Division shall
issue a certificate of compliance for the structure or building, prior to
the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. No certificate of
compliance shall be issued until such time as all applicable laws, rules
and regulations are being complied with. [Amended 3-14-2000 by
L.L. No. 4-2000]
D. After a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building
Director, the Fire Prevention Division shall conduct annual inspections
to ensure continued compliance with the requirements of this Code.
[Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000; 5-8-2007 by L.L. No.
5-2007]
§ 164-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-11
1:311
§ 164-12. Registration of businesses. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L.
No. 4-2000]
(1) If such annual inspection reveals violations of any law, rule or
regulation, the Fire Prevention Division shall order the owner or
occupant to remedy any violations found in the structure or
building. If, in the opinion of the Fire Prevention Division, any
building or structure is unsafe for occupancy due to a condition
which presents an imminent threat to the health, safety or welfare
of any occupant, the Fire Prevention Division may order all
occupants to vacate the premises forthwith until such time as it is
deemed safe and secure by the Fire Prevention Division.
(2) Except for the owner, no person shall enter premises which have
been ordered vacated unless authorized to perform inspections,
repairs or alterations or to remove or demolish such building or
structure.
A. All persons operating or owning any business or commercial activity in
the Town of Smithtown shall file a certificate of business registration
with the Fire Prevention Division. Such certificate of registration shall
contain the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the landowner.
(2) If a corporation, the name, address and telephone number of the
President, Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer. If a partnership
or association, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all
partners or associates.
(3) The street address of the business or activity.
(4) The Suffolk County Tax Map Number(s) [section, block and lot(s)].
(5) The name, address and telephone number of all tenants.
(6) The type of business or activity presently existing.
(7) A list of all chemicals, flammable liquids, gases or other hazardous
materials kept or used on the premises or in conjunction with the
operation of the business or activity.
(8) The name, address and phone number of a contact person in the
event of an emergency.
(9) Any other information reasonably needed in order to effectuate the
purposes of this chapter.
B. A new certificate of business registration shall be filed with the Fire
Prevention Division whenever any of the following conditions occur:
(1) There is any change in the ownership of the land, business, activity,
corporation, association or partnership.
§ 164-11 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-12
1:312
(2) There are any changes in the type of business or activity conducted
on the subject premises.
(3) There is any change in the information supplied in a previously filed
certificate of business registration, including but not limited to any
change or addition to the type of chemicals, explosives, flammable
liquids, gases or other hazardous materials used or stored on the
subject premises which were not included in any previously issued
certificate of business registration.
C. Upon the request of any governmental agency, department or political
subdivision, including but not limited to the Suffolk County Department
of Health Services, the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation and the Department of Environment and Waterways of
the Town of Smithtown, the Fire Prevention Division shall furnish a
copy of any certificate of business registration to the requesting agency.
§ 164-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-12
1:313

ARTICLE II
Safeguards
§ 164-13. Right-of-way. [Amended 9-7-1993 by L.L. No. 5-1993;
3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
Any official vehicle, fire truck, paramedic vehicle, ambulance, police
vehicle, emergency vehicle or Fire Marshal or public safety vehicle of the
Town of Smithtown, when operated in the performance of official business,
shall have the right-of-way of any other vehicle.
§ 164-14. Yielding to official vehicles.
§ 164-15. Parking near firehouse.
No vehicle, except a vehicle owned by a member of the Fire Department
engaged in the performance of his or her duties, shall be parked upon any
street, avenue or highway within 100 feet of an entrance to a firehouse.
§ 164-16. Parking near fires.
No vehicles, except emergency vehicles, fire apparatus or Town vehicles,
shall park or stop at anytime within 100 feet of any building, structure or
lot which is on fire. Any vehicle which is found to be in violation of this
section may be summarily removed by the Fire Department, police or Town
of Smithtown without notice to the owner or operator.
A. No vehicle shall be driven so as to impede or obstruct the progress of
any vehicle when that vehicle is being operated in the performance of
official business or is responding to or from an emergency. Said vehicle
shall have the right-of-way, and no person shall impede the performance
or progress of such vehicle or of any official or employee of any state,
county, city, Town or village official or employee while engaged in the
performance of governmental business.
B. On the approach of an emergency vehicle exhibiting a suitable
continuous or intermittent warning device or by street signals operated
by a Fire Department or district, all nonemergency vehicles shall yield
the right-of-way and shall immediately draw up such vehicle as near as
practicable and parallel to the right-hand curb, bringing said vehicle to
a standstill. Said vehicle shall remain in a stationary position until such
time as the emergency vehicle shall have passed or when instructed to
do so by any police or peace officer, fire personnel or Fire Marshal.
C. No vehicle shall cross over any fire line or park any vehicle within any
fire lane. No vehicle shall ride over or park on any firehose or other fire
apparatus or equipment.
§ 164-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-17
1:315
§ 164-17. Required distance from fires.
No person shall enter any building or structure or enter upon the premises
or upon any lot where a fire exists or in any space within a radius of 100
feet of any building, structure or lot that is on fire without the expressed
consent of a police officer, Fire Chief or fire officer.
§ 164-18. Following fire apparatus.
No person, except a driver of an emergency vehicle or Town vehicle, shall
follow in any vehicle within 500 feet of any emergency vehicle answering an
emergency call.
§ 164-19. Interference with emergency personnel.
No person shall at anytime interfere with the performance, work or
progress of emergency personnel, the Fire Marshal or a representative of a
Board of Fire Commissioners.
§ 164-20. Fire zones.
§ 164-21. Posting address numbers.
All buildings shall have the street or address number of said building
conspicuously posted at the main entrance of the building so that it is
clearly visible from the roadway.
§ 164-22. Compliance required for buildings.
For the safety and protection of life and property, all buildings used for any
commercial activity shall contain adequate fire prevention and protection
equipment in conformance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations.
§ 164-23. Spontaneously ignitable materials.
No person shall deposit hot ashes, smoldering coals, embers or materials,
greasy or oily substances or other materials liable to create spontaneous
ignition, except in an approved metallic noncombustible receptacle. No
such material or receptacle shall be placed within 10 feet of any wooden
or plastered wall, partition, fence, floor, sidewalk, lumber, hay, shavings,
rubbish, stair, stairway, emergency exit or other combustible material.
A. No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle anytime in any area
marked or designated as a fire zone, nor shall any area so designated be
used for the storage of any material or used in any way that will
obstruct the same or render the same inaccessible by fire apparatus.
B. No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle within 10 feet of any
fire hydrant, fire well, cistern or Fire Department connection or
apparatus.
§ 164-17 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-24
1:316
§ 164-24. Flammable liquids.
No person shall dump or spill or allow or cause to be dumped or spilled in,
or in any other fashion place or cause to be dumped, spilled or placed, any
flammable or combustible liquids on the ground or into sewers, drainage
ditches or storm drains.
§ 164-25. Flammable decorations prohibited.
Cotton batting, straw, dry vines, leaves, trees, celluloid, paper or other
readily flammable materials shall not be used for decorative purposes in
show windows, stores or any place of assembly unless such materials shall
have first been treated and rendered flameproof; provided, however, that
nothing in this section shall be held to prohibit the display of salable goods
permitted and offered for sale in stores.
§ 164-26. Waste accumulation prohibited.
No person shall permit or allow the accumulation of any wastepaper, hay,
grass, straw, weeds, litter, rubbish or combustible or flammable material of
any kind in any courtyard, vacant lot, open space, basement or attic.
§ 164-27. Remedial measures. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
Whenever the Fire Prevention Division shall deem it necessary, or upon the
complaint of any person, it shall inspect all buildings, lots, structures and
premises within its jurisdiction. If any building, lot, structure or premises
which, for want of repair or lack of sufficient fire escapes, automatic or
other fire alarm equipment or apparatus, fire-extinguishing equipment or by
reason of age or dilapidated condition or from any other cause, is liable to
ignite or cause a fire or which is so situated as to endanger other property
or the occupants thereof or whenever any Fire Marshal shall find in or upon
any building, lot, structure or premises combustible or explosive material
or flammable conditions dangerous to the safety of life and property, then
the Fire Marshal or Fire Prevention Division shall order such dangerous
conditions or materials to be remedied or removed.
§ 164-28. Drills in health-care facilities.
A. Hospitals, nursing homes, adult homes, convalescent homes, old-age
homes and other buildings or structures used for the inpatient care of
or occupied by the sick, invalid, infirm, disabled or convalescent
persons shall be required to conduct firesafety drills in each building on
a monthly basis. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
B. Said firesafety drills shall be conducted with the personnel of the
hospital, nursing home, adult home, convalescent home, old-age home
or other building or structure used for the inpatient care of or occupied
by the sick, invalid, infirm, disabled or convalescent persons. Said
firesafety drill shall be performed so as to continually educate said
§ 164-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-28
1:317
personnel on proper evacuation techniques and procedures and defendin-
place procedures. All such procedures shall be approved by the Fire
Prevention Division. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
C. A fire drill report, as supplied by the Fire Prevention Division, shall be
filed with the Fire Prevention Division at least 72 hours after any fire
drill. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
D. In the event that an alarm system is tied into or connected to a central
station or other place designed to dispatch a signal to a Fire
Department or other emergency response unit, then it shall be the duty
of the hospital, nursing home, adult home, convalescent home, old-age
home or other building or structure used for the inpatient care of or
occupied by the sick, invalid, infirmed, disabled or convalescent
persons to notify the central station or other place designed to dispatch
a signal to a Fire Department or other emergency response unit prior to
the commencement of any firesafety drill and at the completion of each
firesafety drill.
E. In the event of an alarm activation other than for a fire drill, an incident
report, supplied by the Fire Prevention Division, shall be filed with the
Fire Prevention Division within 72 hours of the incident. [Amended
3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
§ 164-28 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-28
1:318
ARTICLE III
Fire-Protection Equipment
§ 164-29. Survey of buildings and lots.
The Fire Marshal shall survey each building, lot, structure or business,
except the interior of single-family dwellings, and shall specify what firedetecting
devices or -extinguishing appliances shall be provided therein. In
special hazardous processes or storage, appliances of more than one type
or special systems may be required.
§ 164-30. Required protection.
§ 164-31. Sprinklers in health-care facilities.
Every hospital, nursing home, adult home, convalescent home, old-age
home and other building or structure used for the inpatient care of or
occupied by the sick, invalid, infirmed, disabled or convalescent persons
shall be equipped with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system. This
requirement shall be in addition to any other fire-detection or -extinguishing
system required by law.
§ 164-32. Permits required. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
A permit shall be obtained from the Fire Prevention Division for the
installation of any fire alarm, sprinkler or water-spray systems or any other
A. Sprinkler systems.
(1) Every new building or structure exceeding 10,000 square feet in
area within fire areas, fire walls notwithstanding, shall be
protected throughout by an approved automatic fire sprinkler
system.
(2) Every existing building or structure that is altered, modified or
added to so that, when such alteration, modification or addition is
completed, it will create a building or structure exceeding 10,000
square feet in area within fire areas, fire walls notwithstanding,
shall be protected throughout by an approved automatic fire
sprinkler system.
(3) The requirements of Subsection A(1) and (2) of this section, above,
may be in addition to other fire-detecting, -extinguishing or control
systems that may be required pursuant to applicable laws, rules or
regulations.
B. Every building or structure that is not within the scope of Subsection A
above shall be protected throughout by an approved fire-detection
device or systems as specified by the Fire Marshal, in accordance with
applicable laws, rules and regulations.
§ 164-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-32
1:319
special fire-extinguishing or -detection systems which may be required
under this article.
§ 164-33. Approval of systems and equipment. [Amended 3-14-2000
by L.L. No. 4-2000]
No fire alarm or -detection system, sprinkler or water-spray system or any
other special fire-extinguishing system installed pursuant to this section
shall be deemed acceptable or approved for operation until an inspection
of the same has been conducted by the Fire Prevention Division and an
appropriate certificate of compliance of the same has been issued.
§ 164-34. Maintenance of equipment.
§ 164-35. Marking and illumination of accessways and signs.
All signs, accessways, exits, aisles, enclosures, stairways and all
components thereof shall be marked, illuminated and maintained at all
times in accordance with the appropriate standards of the NFPA.
§ 164-36. Smoke detectors.
Any building or structure or portion thereof occupied or used by persons
for whom sleeping accommodations are provided therein, including singleand
multiple-family dwellings, shall be protected by an approved automatic
smoke-detection and alarm device located in or adjacent to all sleeping
quarters or where otherwise specified by the Fire Marshal in accordance
with applicable laws, rules and regulations.
§ 164-37. Fire service access keys.
A. Sprinklers, standpipes, fire alarms and other fire-protection or -
extinguishing systems or appliances which have been installed
pursuant to and in compliance with any permit or order or because of
any law or ordinance shall be maintained in operative condition at all
times.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the
effectiveness of the protection so required, except that this shall not
prohibit the owner or occupant from temporarily reducing or
disconnecting the protection where necessary to make tests, repairs,
alterations or additions. The Fire Prevention Division and Fire
Department shall be notified before any tests, repairs, alterations or
additions are started or the system is temporarily reduced of power or
effectiveness. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
A. Standard elevator key for Fire Department emergency services
systems.
§ 164-32 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-37
1:320
(1) All elevators in buildings more than 30 feet in height shall be
equipped with a fire department emergency service system as
required by 9 NYCRR § 1067.7(b).
(2) Any elevator equipped with a Fire Department emergency system
shall be controlled with a key and lock cylinder which is to be
designated by the Fire Prevention Division. [Amended 3-14-2000
by L.L. No. 4-2000]
B. Standard key for Fire Department emergency access. All access gates
to shopping centers, multiple-residential dwellings, places of public
assembly and rights-of-way shall be controlled with a key and lock
cylinder which is to be designated by the Fire Prevention Division.
[Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
C. The owner of any building or property covered by this section shall
supply the fire district in which said building or property is located with
a key as described in Subsections A and B above. In addition, said
owner shall maintain the same key in an accessible location on or in
said premises and shall notify, in writing, the local fire district of the
location of said key.
D. The owner of any building or property covered by this section shall file
with the Fire Prevention Division written proof of compliance with the
requirements set forth above. Said proof shall be filed with the Fire
Prevention Division no later than six months from the adoption of this
chapter, and such owner shall file annual statements of compliance with
the Fire Prevention Division on a form prescribed by the Fire
Prevention Division. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
E. This section of the chapter shall be effective upon adoption, but
enforcement of this section's provisions shall be commenced six months
from the effective date of adoption.
§ 164-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-37
1:321

ARTICLE IV
General Precautions Against Fire
§ 164-38. Bonfires and rubbish fires.
§ 164-39. Handling combustibles. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
Any person making, using, storing or having in charge or under his control
any shavings, cardboard, corrugated cardboard, excelsior, rubbish, sacks,
bags, litter, hay, straw or combustible waste materials shall, at the close of
each day, cause all such material which is not compactly baled and stacked
in an orderly manner to be removed from the building or stored in suitable
vaults or in metal-lined, covered receptacles or bins. The Fire Prevention
Division shall require suitable baling presses to be installed in all stores,
apartment buildings, factories and similar places where accumulations of
paper and waste materials are not removed at the next regularly scheduled
pickup or collection.
§ 164-40. Receptacles for combustibles.
All receptacles or bins hereinabove referred to in § 164-39 shall be kept
closed at all times and shall be located not less than 15 feet from any
building or structure, unless otherwise specified by the Fire Marshal. Any
A. No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or
authorize such fire to be kindled or maintained in or on any public
property, park, beach, street, alley or road.
B. No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or
authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any privately
owned property.
C. During the construction or demolition of any building or structure, no
waste material or rubbish shall be disposed of by burning.
D. This section shall not apply to normal backyard barbecues.
E. Land clearing. No land-clearing operations involving the burning of
trees, underbrush, shrubs and/or debris of any kind or nature shall be
conducted in the Town of Smithtown.
F. All vegetation uprooted as a result of a land-clearing operation shall
remove to a Town dump or other legal landfill depository within 30 days
after the completion of said land-clearing operation.
G. Any land clearing performed shall only be performed pursuant to a treeclearing
and land-preservation permit, pursuant to the Code of the
Town of Smithtown.42
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 285, Trees.
§ 164-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-40
1:323
such receptacles or bins equipped with wheels shall be enclosed within a
noncombustible sill or wall no less than four inches in height.
§ 164-41. Storage of combustibles.
§ 164-42. Open flames and lights restricted.
§ 164-43. Smoking restrictions.
§ 164-44. Access to ceiling spaces.
Access shall be provided to all spaces above false or luminous ceilings and
similar closed off areas. There shall be a minimum of two access openings
for every 1,500 square feet of ceiling area or portion thereof, one such
opening to provide access from the interior of the building and one such
A. Permit required. No person shall store in excess of 2,500 cubic feet of
gross volume of combustible empty packing cases, boxes, wooden
barrels or similar containers, rubber tires, baled cotton, rubber or cork
or other similar combustible materials in any building, structure or lot
without a permit.
B. Storage requirements. Storage in buildings shall be orderly, shall not be
within two feet of the ceiling or any fire-detection, sprinkler or alarm
system and shall not be located so as to endanger exit from the
building. Storage in the open shall not be more than 20 feet in height,
shall be so located, with respect to adjacent buildings, as not to
constitute a hazard and shall be compact and orderly.
A. No person shall take an open flame or light into any building, barn,
vessel, boat or any other place where highly flammable, combustible or
explosive material is kept, unless such flame or light is of an approved
type.
B. No heating or lighting apparatus or equipment capable of igniting
flammable materials of the types stored or handled shall be used in the
storage area of any warehouse storing rags, excelsior, cardboard,
corrugated cardboard, hair or other highly flammable or combustible
material nor in the work area of any shop or factory used for the
manufacture, repair or renovating of mattresses or bedding nor in the
work area of any establishment used for the upholstering of furniture.
A. The Fire Marshal may, by order, prohibit smoking in any building or
establishment or portion thereof where smoking is liable to endanger
life or property due to the special circumstances of the building or the
nature of use of the building or structure.
B. The owner or operator of any building, structure or portion thereof
where smoking is prohibited shall conspicuously post signs indicating
that smoking is prohibited. Signs may be obtained from the Fire
Prevention Division. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
§ 164-40 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-44
1:324
opening to provide access from the exterior of the building. Said access
openings shall be located as far apart as may be practicable, the exact
location of each to be approved by the Fire Marshal. Each opening must
be a minimum of 30 inches by 48 inches in size and be suitably marked to
afford ready identification.
§ 164-45. Guard dogs. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
§ 164-46. Razor wire.
The use of razor wire, barbed wire, concertina wire or any other similar
wire or device designed to injure persons coming in contact with same shall
be prohibited in or on any building or structure or portion thereof. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to fences erected or constructed
pursuant to the provisions of the Town Code.
A. Any person harboring or maintaining guard dogs on or in any property
shall cause notice of the presence of said guard dogs to be posted
conspicuously on the premises or property. Said notice shall consist of
reflective decals or placards in such form as shall be approved by the
Fire Prevention Division. Said decals or placards shall be placed in
locations specified by the Fire Prevention Division and shall not be
considered signs pursuant to Article X of Chapter 322 of the Code of the
Town of Smithtown.
B. Any person harboring or maintaining guard dogs on any property shall
notify the Fire Prevention Division and the local Fire Department
having jurisdiction over said premises or property of the fact that guard
dogs are present on the premises and shall give the Fire Prevention
Division and said Fire Department the name and phone number of a
person or persons to be contacted in the event of an emergency. When
the services of guard dogs are no longer required, the Fire Prevention
Division and said Fire Department are to be notified, and the placard
shall be removed.
§ 164-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-46
1:325

ARTICLE V
Tire Rebuilding, Recycling or Storage Facilities
§ 164-47. General requirements.
Tire rebuilding, recycling or storage facilities shall conform to all other
applicable requirements of the Town Code, as well as to the following
additional provisions.
§ 164-48. Permit required. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
An operations permit shall be obtained from the Fire Prevention Division to
conduct and maintain any tire recapping, recycling, rebuilding or storage
facility prior to the start of the operation of said plant or facility. Said
permit shall be obtained on an annual basis. The requirement of a permit
under this section shall in no way relieve the applicant, owner or operator
from the requirements of any other permit, license or special permission or
authorization required pursuant to law.
§ 164-49. Construction.
§ 164-50. Residence occupancy prohibited.
No part of any building which is located at a tire rebuilding facility shall be
used for residence occupancy.
§ 164-51. Dust-collection systems.
Buffing machines shall be located in a room separated from the remainder
of the facility by construction having a fire-resistance rating of not less than
two hours, with each door opening protected by an approved self-closing
door. Each machine shall be connected to an ample dust-collecting system,
discharging to a suitable container which shall be cleaned at frequent
intervals.
§ 164-52. Ventilation.
Each room where rubber cement is used or mixed or flammable solvents
are applied shall be equipped with an effective and approved mechanical or
natural ventilation system.
A. Tire facilities shall have all floor openings, such as stairs and elevators,
enclosed in an approved manner.
B. Tire facilities in buildings of wood frame construction shall be
separated from other portions of the building by construction having a
fire-resistance rating of not less than two hours.
§ 164-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-52
1:327

ARTICLE VI
Bowling Establishments
§ 164-53. General requirements.
Bowling establishments shall conform to all other applicable requirements
of the Town Code, including those appropriate NFPA standards, as well as
to the provisions of §§ 164-54 and 164-55 of this chapter.
§ 164-54. Pin refinishing.
No bowling pin(s) shall be refinished with any substance or material that is
flammable.
§ 164-55. Lane resurfacing. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
Bowling lanes shall not be resurfaced or refinished utilizing any flammable
liquid or material. Resurfacing operations shall not be carried on while the
establishment is open for business. The Fire Prevention Division shall be
notified not less than 24 hours prior to commencing any resurfacing. Proper
ventilation shall be provided at all times.
§ 164-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-55
1:329

ARTICLE VII
Combustible Fibers
§ 164-56. Storage permit required.
§ 164-57. Storage of agricultural products on farms.
Unlimited quantities of hay, straw and other agricultural products of a like
nature may be stored in or near farm buildings located outside congested
districts.
A. The storage and handling of combustible fibers shall be in accordance
with the appropriate standards of the NFPA.
B. A permit shall be required for the storage and handling of combustible
fibers in quantities in excess of 100 cubic feet and shall be obtained
from the Fire Prevention Division. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
§ 164-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-57
1:331

ARTICLE VIII
Dry-Cleaning Facilities43
§ 164-58. Permit required. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
No person shall begin the operation of dry cleaning without an operating
permit obtained from the Fire Prevention Division.
§ 164-59. Operation and maintenance.
Dry-cleaning systems shall be constructed, operated and maintained in
accordance with the appropriate standards of the NFPA.
43.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 308, Washing and Dry-Cleaning Establishments.
§ 164-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-59
1:333

ARTICLE IX
Explosives, Ammunition and Blasting Agents
§ 164-60. Scope.
This article shall apply to the manufacture, possession, storage, sale,
transportation and use of explosive and blasting agents, except that nothing
in this Article shall be construed as applying to:
§ 164-61. Permit required.
A permit shall be obtained to:
§ 164-62. General requirements.
A. Any of the Armed Forces of the United States or the state militia.
B. Explosives in forms prescribed by the official United States
pharmacopoeia.
C. The transportation and use of explosives or blasting agents by the
United States Bureau of Mines, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the
United States Secret Service or Police and Fire Departments acting in
their official capacities.
A. Manufacture, possess, store, sell or otherwise dispose of explosives or
blasting agents.
B. Transport explosives or blasting agents for delivery in the Town of
Smithtown.
C. Use explosives or blasting agents.
D. Operate a terminal for handling explosives or blasting agents.
E. Deliver to or receive explosives or blasting agents from a carrier at a
terminal between the hours of sunset and sunrise.
A. The manufacture of explosives or blasting agents shall be prohibited
unless an operating permit is obtained from the Fire Prevention
Division. This section shall not apply to the hand loading of small-arms
ammunition for personal use when not for resale and in accordance
with all other applicable laws, rules and regulations. [Amended
3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
B. The storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited within the
fire limits established by law or regulation, except for the temporary
storage for use in connection with approved blasting operations;
provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to wholesale and
retail stocks of small-arms ammunition, explosives rivets or cartridges
for explosive-actuated power tools in quantities involving less than 500
pounds of explosive material.
§ 164-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-62
1:335
§ 164-63. Conformance with other standards.
The manufacture, storage, transportation and use of all materials in this
Article shall be in accordance with the appropriate standards of the NFPA.
C. The Fire Marshal may limit the quantity of explosives or blasting agents
to be permitted at any location for firesafety and health reasons.
D. No person shall sell or display explosives or blasting agents on
highways, sidewalks, public property or in places of public assembly.
E. The Fire Marshal may designate the location and specify the maximum
quantity of explosives or blasting agents which may be loaded,
unloaded, reloaded or temporarily retained at each terminal where
such operations are permitted.
F. Shipments of explosives or blasting agents delivered to carriers shall
comply with Interstate Commerce Commission regulations.
G. Carriers shall immediately notify the Fire Prevention Division when
explosives or blasting agents are received at terminals in the Town of
Smithtown. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
§ 164-62 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-63
1:336
ARTICLE X
Flammable Finishes
§ 164-64. Scope.
This article shall apply to locations or areas where the following activities
are regularly carried out:
§ 164-65. Permit required. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
A permit shall be required for the application of flammable or combustible
finishes within the scope of this article. Said permit shall be obtained from
the Fire Prevention Division.
§ 164-66. Location of facilities.
Spray-finishing operations shall not be conducted in buildings used for
assembly, education, institutional or residential occupancies, except in a
room designated for said purpose, protected with an approved
extinguishing system and of masonry construction.
§ 164-67. Definitions. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SPRAY AREA — Any area in which dangerous quantities of flammable
vapors or combustible residues, dusts or deposits are present due to the
operation of spraying processes. The Fire Prevention Division may define
the limits of the spraying area in a specific case. A spraying area shall
include:
§ 164-68. Spray booths.
A. The application of flammable or combustible paint, varnish, lacquer,
stain or other flammable or combustible liquids applied as a spray or by
other means, in continuous or intermittent processes.
B. Dip tank operations in which articles or materials are passed through
the contents of tanks, vats or containers of flammable or combustible
liquids, including coating, finishing, treating and similar processes.
A. The interior of spray booths.
B. The interior of ducts exhausting from spraying processes.
Any area in the direct path of spray or any area containing dangerous
quantities of air-suspended combustible residue, dust deposits, spray or
vapor as a result of spraying operations.
C.
A. Spray booths shall be constructed substantially of noncombustible
materials.
§ 164-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-68
1:337
§ 164-69. Conformance with other standards.
The application of flammable and combustible finishes within the scope of
this article shall be conducted in accordance with the appropriate standards
of the NFPA.
B. The interior surfaces of spray booths shall be smooth and continuous,
without edges, and otherwise designed to prevent the pocketing of
residues and facilitate the safe cleaning and washing without injury.
C. The floor of the spray booth and operator's working area, if
combustible, shall be covered with noncombustible, nonsparking
material of such character as to facilitate the safe cleaning and removal
of residues.
D. The distribution of baffle plates, if installed to promote an even flow of
air through a booth or cause the deposit of overspray before it enters an
exhaust duct, shall be of noncombustible material and readily
removable or accessible on both sides for safe cleaning. Such plates
shall not be located in exhaust ducts.
E. Each spray booth having a frontal area larger than nine square feet
shall have a metal deflector or curtain not less than 2 1/2 inches deep,
installed at the upper outer edge of the booth over the opening.
F. Each spray booth shall be separated from other operations by not less
than three feet, or by a greater distance or by such partition or wall as
the Fire Prevention Division may require to reduce the danger from
juxtaposition of hazardous operations.
G. Spray booths shall be so installed that all portions are readily accessible
for cleaning. A clear space of not less than three feet on all sides shall
be kept free from storage or combustible construction.
H. When spraying areas are illuminated through glass panels or other
transparent materials, only fixed lighting units shall be used as a source
of illumination. Panels shall effectively isolate the spraying area from
the area in which the lighting unit is located and shall be of
noncombustible material of such a nature or so protected that breakage
would be unlikely. Panels shall be so arranged that normal
accumulations of residue on the exposed surface of the panel will not be
raised to a dangerous temperature by radiation or conduction from the
source of illumination.
§ 164-68 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-69
1:338
ARTICLE XI
Flammable Liquids
§ 164-70. Classification.
For the purpose of this chapter, flammable liquids are classified as follows:
§ 164-71. Scope.
This article shall apply to all liquids with a flash point below 200° F. and
to liquids with flash points above 200° F. which, when heated, assume the
characteristics of liquids with flash points below 200° F.
§ 164-72. Inspection of installations.
Before any flammable liquid tank or piping is covered from sight, the
installation shall be inspected and approved by the Town of Smithtown.
§ 164-73. Appliances to be approved. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L.
No. 4-2000]
The Fire Prevention Division shall prohibit the sale or use of any heating,
lighting or cooking appliance using flammable liquids which have not been
tested by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or some other competent
authority, and found to have proper safeguard protections against fire
hazards.
§ 164-74. Permit required.
A permit shall be obtained for storing, handling or using any flammable
liquid in excess of one gallon where such storage, handling or use is for
the purpose of sale or use in a business or commercial activity, except that
no permit shall be required for the storage or use of flammable liquids in
the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, mobile power plant or
mobile heating plant.
§ 164-75. Conformance with other standards.
The storing, handling, using or dispensing of flammable and combustible
liquids within the scope of Articles X and XI shall be in accordance with the
appropriate standards of the NFPA.
A. Class I: liquids having a flash point below 25° F., closed-cup tester.
Examples of such are ether, gasoline, naphtha and benzol, etc.
B. Class II: liquids having a flash point above that for Class I and below 70°
F., closed-cup tester. Examples of such are alcohol and amyl acetate,
etc.
C. Class III: liquids having a flash point above that for Class I and Class II
and below 200° F., closed-cup tester. Examples of such are fuel oils and
kerosene.
§ 164-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-76
1:339
§ 164-76. Automatic dispensing prohibited.
The installation or use of coin-operated dispensing devices for Class I
flammable liquids is prohibited.
§ 164-77. Dispensing into containers.
No delivery of any Class I or Class II flammable liquids shall be made
into portable containers unless the container is of sound construction, has
a tight closure with screwed or spring cover and is fitted with a spout
or so designed that the contents can be poured without spilling and is
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. listed for the use it is actually used for.
§ 164-78. Fire-protection equipment.
§ 164-79. Parking of tank vehicles.
A. Every self-service dispensing area shall be equipped with an approved
automatic fixed extinguishing system.
B. Every new or altered service station dispensing area shall be equipped
with an approved fixed extinguishing system.
A. No tank vehicle containing flammable, combustible, corrosive,
poisonous, toxic or hazardous liquids, gases or residues of the same
shall be left unattended on any street, highway, avenue or alley,
provided that this shall not prevent a driver from the necessary absence
from the truck in connection with the delivery of the load or material.
During the actual discharge of the commodity, a responsible person
shall be present at the vehicle. Nothing in this section shall prevent
stops for meals, provided that the street where the vehicle is
temporarily stopped is well-lit and appropriate markers are placed
indicating the presence of such vehicle.
B. Tank vehicles as described above shall not be parked or garaged in any
buildings other than those specifically approved for such use by the Fire
Prevention Division. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
§ 164-76 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-79
1:340
ARTICLE XII
Repair and Private Garages
§ 164-80. General requirements.
Repair garages shall conform to all other applicable requirements of the
Town Code, as well as the provisions of this chapter.
§ 164-81. Permit required.
No person shall use any building, structure, shed or enclosure as a place of
business for the purpose of housing, storing or repairing trucks, trailers or
automobiles, whether or not accessory or incidental to another use, unless
specifically provided for in the Town Code and all appropriate permits,
permissions and authorizations have been obtained from the Town of
Smithtown.
§ 164-82. Conformance with other standards.
The construction, operation and maintenance of all vehicle repair garages
shall be in accordance with the appropriate standards of the NFPA.
§ 164-83. Lighting of private garages.
Artificial light in private garages shall be in accordance with the standards
of the National Electrical Code.
§ 164-84. Repair garages in basements.
When permitted elsewhere by the Town Code, basements used as repair
garages shall be continuously ventilated by mechanical ventilating systems
so constructed as to assure suitable dilution and removal of gasoline vapors
and motor exhaust fumes.
§ 164-85. Storage of gasoline.
Not more than two gallons of gasoline, exclusive of that contained in the
tanks of vehicles, shall be kept in repair garages. Gasoline shall be kept only
in approved containers.
§ 164-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-85
1:341

ARTICLE XIII
Hazardous Chemicals and Materials
§ 164-86. Scope.
This article shall apply to materials not otherwise covered in this chapter
which are highly flammable or which may react to cause fires or explosions
or which by their presence create or augment a fire or explosion hazard
or which, because of their toxicity, flammability or liability to explosion,
render fire fighting abnormally dangerous or difficult. This article shall also
apply to flammable liquids which are chemically unstable and which may
spontaneously form explosive compounds or undergo spontaneous reactions
or explosive violence or, with sufficient evolution of heat, create a fire
hazard. Hazardous chemicals shall include such materials as flammable
solids, corrosive liquids, radioactive materials, oxidizing materials,
potentially explosive chemicals, highly toxic materials and poisonous gases.
In addition, this article shall include all materials listed in Title 40 of the
Code of Federal Regulations.
§ 164-87. Permit required.
§ 164-88. General requirements.
A. A permit shall be required for the storage or handling of any hazardous
chemicals and materials as defined above and in § 164-6.
B. A permit shall be required for the storage and handling at any
installation of more than one microcurie of radium not contained in a
sealed source or more than one millicurie of radium or other radioactive
material in a sealed source or sources or any amount of radioactive
material for which a specific license from the United States Atomic
Energy Commission is required in accordance with nationally
recognized good practice.
C. Every permittee shall display on the premises storing, handling,
manufacturing or using commodities within the scope of this article
approved warning signs/symbols at all entrances to such premises, as
directed by the Fire Prevention Division. [Amended 3-14-2000 by
L.L. No. 4-2000]
A. The manufacturing, storing, handling or use of hazardous chemicals
shall be safeguarded with such protective facilities as public safety
requires.
B. The Fire Prevention Division may require the separation or isolation of
any chemical that in combination with other substances may bring
about a fire or explosion or may liberate a flammable or poisonous gas.
The Fire Prevention Division may require separation from other storage
occupancies or buildings when the quantity stored constitutes a
material hazard. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
§ 164-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-88
1:343
§ 164-89. Oxidizing materials.
Oxidizing materials shall be stored in dry locations and separated from
stored organic materials. Bulk oxidizing materials shall not be stored on
or against wooded surfaces. Oxidizing materials shall be stored separated
from flammable liquids, flammable solids, combustible materials, hazardous
chemicals, corrosive liquids and such other noncompatible materials.
§ 164-90. Radioactive materials.
§ 164-91. Potentially explosive materials.
C. The manufacturing, storing, handling or use of hazardous chemicals
and materials shall be in accordance with the appropriate standards of
the NFPA, except that more restrictive requirements, as specified in
this Article, shall take precedence over any NFPA requirements.
D. The Fire Prevention Division may require the submission of additional
documentation relating to the physical and chemical properties of
hazardous chemicals and materials. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
E. The management or owner of any building or facility wherein hazardous
chemicals or materials are stored or handled shall submit an inventory
of such chemicals or materials, at least annually or whenever the
quantity of the same shall change substantially.
F. Only chemicals or materials listed on the inventory required in
Subsection E above shall be stored or handled, unless the Fire
Prevention Division has first given written permission for the storage or
handling of additional chemicals or materials. [Amended 3-14-2000
by L.L. No. 4-2000]
A. Durable, clearly visible signs warning of radiation dangers shall be
placed at all entrances to areas or rooms where radioactive materials
are used or stored. In addition, each container in which radioactive
materials are used, stored or transported shall bear a durable, clearly
visible, appropriate warning sign. Such signs shall bear the threebladed
radiation symbol in magenta or purple on a yellow background,
in accordance with nationally recognized good practice.
B. When not in use, radioactive materials shall be kept in adequately
shielded fire-resistant containers of such design that gamma radiation
will not exceed 200 milliroentgens per hour, or the equivalent, at any
point of readily accessible surface.
A. Explosives and blasting agents shall not be stored in the same building
or in close proximity to potentially explosive chemicals.
B. Organic peroxides.
§ 164-88 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-91
1:344
(1) A detached, well-isolated, ventilated and unheated storage building
constructed with walls having a fire-resistance rating greater than
two hours, a noncombustible floor and a lightweight insulated room
shall be provided for the storage of 50 pounds or more of organic
peroxides.
(2) If not adequately protected by a fast-acting deluge-type automatic
fire sprinkler system, the storage building shall be located the
following minimum distances from flammable liquid storage and
combustible materials in the open and from any other building or
highway:
Weight of Organic Peroxide
(pounds)
Distance
(feet)
50 to 100 75
100 to 500 100
500 to 1,000 125
1,000 to 3,000 200
3,000 to 5,000 300
(3) The organic peroxides shall be stored in the original shipping
containers, which such containers shall be ICC approved or shall be
ICC containers.
(4) Care shall be taken to avoid rough handling or contamination of
these chemicals.
(5) Readily legible warning signs and placards shall be prominently
placed in the storage and processing areas.
(6) Organic peroxides shall be kept away from all sources of heat,
including steam pipes, radiators, open flames, sparks and solar
radiation. Smoking shall be prohibited in areas where organic
peroxides are stored, handled or used. No sparking tools shall be
used in any area where organic peroxides are stored, mixed or
applied.
C. Nitromethane.
(1) A suitable isolated outdoor storage area shall be provided for
nitromethane. Hazardous processing shall not be permitted in the
vicinity of this storage area.
(2) Nitromethane shall be stored in the drums in which it is received or
in an underground tank with suitable corrosion protection
provisions and a minimum of two feet of earth over the tank or in
barricaded tanks above ground.
(3) If the drum storage is not adequately protected by a fast-acting
deluge-type automatic fire sprinkler system, the storage of 2,000
§ 164-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-91
1:345
pounds or more shall be located the following minimum distances
from inhabited buildings:
Weight
(pounds)
Over But Not Over
Approxi-mate
Number of
Drums
Distance
(feet)
0 2,000 4 100
2,000 10,000 20 200
10,000 20,000 40 300
20,000 40,000 80 400
40,000 80,000 160 500
(4) Care shall be taken to avoid rough handling or contamination of
this chemical.
(5) Readily legible warning signs and placards shall be prominently
placed in the storage and processing areas.
D. Ammonium nitrate.
(1) Each storage pile or other authorized packages and containers of
such materials shall not exceed 12 feet in height, 12 feet in width
and 30 feet in length. Such pile units shall be separated by a clear
space of not less than 36 inches in width from the base to the top of
the piles, serving as cross aisles. At least one service of the main
aisle into the storage area shall not be less than four feet in width.
A clearance of not less than 30 inches shall be maintained from
building walls and partitions and not less than 36 inches from
ceilings or roof structural members, with a minimum of 18 inches
from sprinklers.
(2) Ammonium nitrate storage areas shall be separated by a space of
30 feet or by a tight noncombustible partition from the storage of
organic chemicals, corrosive liquids, compressed gases, flammable
and combustible materials or other contaminating substances such
as sulphur, coal, flour and metallic powders such as zinc, copper
and magnesium.
(3) Quantities of ammonium nitrate or ammonium nitrate fertilizer,
having no organic coating, in the form of crystals, flakes, grains or
prills, including fertilizer grade, dynamite grade, nitrous oxide
grade and technical grade ammonium nitrate and ammonium
nitrate phosphate containing 60% or more ammonium nitrate by
weight or more than 50 tons total weight, shall be stored in a wellventilated
building of fire-resistant or noncombustible construction
or in buildings of other types of construction equipped with an
approved automatic fire sprinkler system. In populated areas,
quantities of 2,500 tons or more shall be stored in well-ventilated
buildings of fire-resistant or noncombustible construction equipped
§ 164-91 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-91
1:346
§ 164-92. Highly toxic materials.
§ 164-93. Poisonous gases.
§ 164-94. Corrosive liquids.
Satisfactory provisions, according to NFPA or trade industry standards,
shall be made for containing and neutralizing any leakage of corrosive
liquids which may occur during storage or handling and for ensuring that
proper precautions are made to protect the environment.
with an automatic fire sprinkler system, and no combustible
materials or ammonium nitrate sensitizing contaminants shall be
stored in this building.
(4) The storage of ammonium nitrate, coated or mixed with organic
anticaking materials, except compounded blasting agents, shall not
be permitted in populated and congested areas. Outside such
areas, quantities of 500 tons or less may be stored in well-vented
buildings of fire-resistant or noncombustible construction equipped
with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
A. Highly toxic materials shall be segregated from other chemicals,
combustibles and flammable substances by storage in a room or
compartment separated from other areas by walls and floor and ceiling
assemblies having fire-resistance ratings of two hours or more. The
storage room shall be provided with adequate natural or mechanical
ventilation to the outside atmosphere. The floor of said room shall be
impermeable to the materials being stored within.
B. Legible warning signs and placards stating the nature and location of
the highly toxic materials shall be posted at all entrances to areas
where such materials are stored or used.
A. The storage of poisonous gases shall be in rooms of at least one hour's
fire-resistant construction and having natural or mechanical ventilation
adequate to remove leaking gas. Such ventilation shall not discharge to
a point where gases may endanger any person.
B. Legible warning signs stating the nature of the hazard shall be placed
at all entrances to locations where poisonous gases are stored or used.
§ 164-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-94
1:347

ARTICLE XIV
Magnesium
§ 164-95. Scope.
The term "magnesium" shall include magnesium alloys where the major
part of the alloy is magnesium, etc. It shall include ingots, scrap, castings,
extrusions, moldings and other forms, whether finished or unfinished.
§ 164-96. Prohibited manufacture.
The manufacture of any magnesium powder in the Town of Smithtown shall
be strictly prohibited.
§ 164-97. Permit required.
§ 164-98. Restrictions.
No permit for the storage, manufacture or working of magnesium articles
shall be issued for any premises which:
§ 164-99. Storage.
A. An operator's permit shall be obtained for the following:
(1) The melting and casting of magnesium where finished or partly
finished parts or articles are in excess of 1,000 pounds.
(2) For any place where magnesium is machined, polished or otherwise
worked upon in quantities exceeding 10 pounds per day.
B. A permit is required for one or both of the above. The applicant must
specifically indicate which permit type is being applied for.
A. Are of wood frame construction.
B. Are occupied as a tenement house, hotel or lodging house.
C. Are situated within 500 feet of the nearest wall of a building occupied
as a school, hospital, theaters or other place of public amusement or
assembly. This restriction, however, shall not apply when the
magnesium is for the temporary storage for repairs, additions or
reconstruction purposes in such quantities as are necessary to be
incorporated within the structure of such building.
D. Are not equipped with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system.
E. Manufacture, store, keep or sell explosives or other material of a highly
flammable nature or, in any case, where more than six people are
employed or likely to congregate at any one time above the maximum
occupancy, if the quantity of magnesium exceeds 2,500 pounds.
§ 164-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-99
1:349
§ 164-100. Working of magnesium.
A. No room or storage space in any building or structure shall be used for
the storage of magnesium in individual piles, in mass or in open
shelving or in tote boxes in an amount exceeding 10 pounds for each
square foot of floor space thus occupied, unless the space so used is
protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system. Where the entire room
or space is not used for the storage of magnesium, the sprinkler
protection shall exceed at least 20 feet beyond the storage space so
occupied.
B. Storage rooms shall be provided with scuppers and doorways and shall
be without saddles.
C. Any room or building used for the storage of magnesium, except
magnesium in cartons, boxes or otherwise packed in containers, shall
be provided with window area or a skylight in the proportion of one
square foot to each 1,000 pounds, but not less than one square foot to
each 20 cubic feet of room space. For magnesium in cartons, boxes or
otherwise packed in containers, the window area or skylights shall be 1/
2 the foregoing requirements.
D. An aisle space of at least 1/2 pile high shall be provided between
material piles, such that one dimension of the pile will be less than 10
feet and such that the maximum dimension for any pile shall be 30 feet.
In no case shall aisle space be less than 10 feet.
E. The height of any pile of magnesium shall be limited to six feet, but this
shall not limit the height of shelving used for storage, provided that the
space between any two shelves shall not exceed six feet, nor shall it
limit the tiering of tote boxes. Storage rooms or spaces shall have
adequate exit facilities, each remote from one another.
A. The melting and casting of magnesium shall be only in rooms or
buildings meeting the following requirements:
(1) Work areas shall be located on the ground floor but may have
basement or cellar beneath, provided that this space is not used for
storage or manufacture and is provided with ample exit facilities on
at least two sides.
(2) There shall be no combustible materials in the melting areas. Oven
rooms shall be of approved fireproof construction.
(3) The room or building shall be separated from other operations and
from any storage by fire walls provided with self-closing fire doors.
(4) Work areas shall have stack or louvered roof monitor or explosion
windows, with vent areas equal to one square foot to each 200
pounds melting capacity.
§ 164-99 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-100
1:350
§ 164-101. Protection.
(5) Work areas shall have ample exitways on two opposite sides of the
room or building. There shall be at least one unobstructed and
direct exit to the outside or public way.
(6) Roofs shall be maintained in nonleaking or waterproof condition.
B. The machining and grinding of magnesium in any premises shall be
done only under the following conditions:
(1) Magnesium machining or grinding operations shall not be located
in the basement or cellar of a building.
(2) The grinding of magnesium shall not be done with equipment or
grinding tools used for working other metal, unless the equipment
and/or grinding tools are cleaned before changing metals.
(3) Work areas shall be provided with satisfactory wet-type dustcollection
systems where grinding or other dust-forming operations
are performed.
C. The machining of magnesium shall be done with liquid coolants
restricted to high-flash-point neutral mineral oils. Under no
circumstances shall water, water-soluble oils or oils containing more
than 0.2% fatty acids be used. The provisions of this Subsection C shall
not apply to any industry located in a building or buildings situated on a
plot of land having an area of not less than 20 acres and at least two
sides of which adjoin a public highway or highways maintained by the
State of New York or by the County of Suffolk or the Town and having a
frontage of at least 100 feet (measured along either a front line or a side
line) upon said highway or highways and which said building or
buildings comprise not more than 50% of the plot area and which said
building or buildings are constructed of steel, concrete, brick, stone
and/or similar fire-resistant material and which said building or
buildings are protected by an approved automatic fire sprinkler system.
D. The heat treating of magnesium shall be conducted only in a furnace
specifically designed for such purpose and equipped with automatic
and adequate heat distributors and temperature measurement and
control devices and with an automatic device (both visual and audible)
for indicating any abnormal temperature rise. Ovens to be used are to
be approved by the New York State Board of Standards and Appeals.
Heat-treating furnaces and high-potential electric equipment are to
have substantially tight, noncombustible shields installed which extend
well over such equipment to afford a working area for fire fighting.
A. An approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed to
protect the entire building, provided that in manufacturing sections of
plants, any existing system of automatic sprinklers may be accepted if
the magnesium does not exceed 50% of the finished product or does not
exceed 10 pounds per square foot of floor area. All water-conveying
§ 164-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-101
1:351
devices (such as overhead service pipes, steam pipes, etc.) shall be
placed in such a position that leakage into metal melting pots is not
possible. No sprinkler heads shall be installed over any melting pots or
crucibles.
B. Dry powder especially approved for use on magnesium fires shall be
provided in such amount and at such locations as shall be specified by
the Fire Prevention Division. In all cases there shall be provided such
powder in any room in which magnesium is melted, cast, shipped or
polished, and scoops and/or power applicators shall be provided for
dispensing dry powder. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
C. An asbestos blanket or a fire shower equipped with a quick-operating
valve shall be located at accessible locations in or immediately outside
of rooms where magnesium is being worked, for use in extinguishing
clothing fires. The location of the asbestos blanket or fire shower shall
be prominently labeled.
D. Housekeeping.
(1) Magnesium refuse, including shavings, borings, turnings, sawdust
and chippings, shall not be permitted to accumulate on floors or
workbenches.
(2) All workbenches where magnesium is handled or stored shall be
covered with or made of noncombustible, nonreactive material.
Where a grinding operation or operations producing fine
magnesium chips or dust are done, a fire-resistive, nonsparking
table covering shall be used.
(3) Metal pans shall be provided under each machine for catching
magnesium shavings and dust and shall be emptied at least twice
every day.
(4) Magnesium scrap, dry or produced with mineral-based oils, shall
be collected from all locations at such frequent intervals to prevent
the accumulation of any large amount and always at the end of
each day's work. Such scrap shall be placed in clean, dry, metalcovered
containers not exceeding 55 gallons' water capacity.
Containers shall be plainly marked MAGNESIUM SCRAP and shall,
when full, be removed to a detached scrap storage building used
for no other purpose. Such buildings shall have explosion vents
equivalent to thin-glass windows or skylights of area at least equal
to one square foot to each 15 cubic feet of room volume. The
amount of accumulated scrap stored in such buildings shall not
exceed five fifty-five gallon water-capacity drums and, when
necessary, shall be removed from the premises.
(5) When detached scrap storage buildings are not provided, the
accumulation of scrap shall be removed from the premises daily.
§ 164-101 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-101
1:352
§ 164-102. Magnesium scrap.
When magnesium scrap is to be transported from one location to another, it
shall be stored in metal containers, the capacity of which shall not exceed
55 gallons (water). Drums are to be marked MAGNESIUM SCRAP in fiveinch
letters. Junkyards and junk dealers shall store and keep magnesium
and articles containing more than 25% of magnesium by weight in piles,
bins, drums or boxes located outside any building, but this shall not prevent
the roofing over such storage, but no sidewalls shall be permitted. No
such storage shall individually exceed 300 square feet in the rear, and
there shall be a separation of not less than five feet between such storage
and the storage of any other combustible materials. Such storage, and
the handling and sorting of magnesium, shall, however, be permitted in
(6) Magnesium scrap which has been collected underwater or other
liquid shall be collected from all points of accumulation at least
once every 24 hours and shall be disposed of promptly in an
approved manner.
(7) Wastepaper and other combustible waste shall not be allowed to
collect near magnesium in storage or in the process of
manufacture.
(8) The machines producing magnesium dust shall be provided with
collecting systems of a type especially designed for the handling of
magnesium dust. Explosion proof lights, electric fixtures and
motors shall be provided within 10 feet of magnesium-grinding or
other dust-producing process, and no open flame shall be allowed
within 25 feet of such processes.
(9) Where there are 10 or more employees, they shall be trained in
such a manner as to cooperate with the Fire Department in case of
fire, in removing exposed metal from the path of fire or in applying
the appropriate extinguishing powder. The person in charge shall
be required to obtain a certificate of fitness.
E. Each container for the storage of magnesium dust or shavings shall be a
tightly covered steel drum marked MAGNESIUM CHIPS--USE NO
WATER. Each oven used for heat-treating magnesium shall be
permanently labeled USE NOT WITH WATER--MAGNESIUM HEATTREATING
OVEN---EXPLOSION HAZARD.
F. Supervision. All premises in which magnesium is machined, polished or
otherwise worked upon shall be under the care and supervision of one
or more persons, each holding a certificate of fitness as superintendent
or manager thereof. The number of persons required to hold such a
certificate shall be determined by the Fire Prevention Division and
stated on the required permit, but in no case shall there be required
more than three at any one time on the premises. [Amended
3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
§ 164-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-102
1:353
buildings complying with the above provisions for storage and workrooms,
housekeeping and protection.
§ 164-102 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-102
1:354
ARTICLE XV
Liquefied Petroleum Gases
§ 164-103. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all uses of liquefied petroleum
gas and the installation of all apparatus, piping and equipment pertinent to
systems for such uses.
§ 164-104. Filing of plans and reports.
§ 164-105. Installation and maintenance of equipment.
A. Plans.
(1) The plans for all new fixed LPG installations must be submitted to
the Fire Prevention Division for approval prior to installation. The
plan shall be a site plan showing locations of buildings and property
lines and all pertinent dimensions, including the proposed locations
of containers, vaporizers and equipment with the capacities and
descriptions thereof, submitted in duplicate. The acceptance of
plans for installation does not relieve the applicant from meeting
the requirements of any other law, rule, ordinance or regulation of
any other authority having jurisdiction. [Amended 3-14-2000 by
L.L. No. 4-2000; 1-11-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
(2) The installation of containers or tanks shall require the issuance of
a permit from the Department of Public Safety. [Amended
3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000; 1-11-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
(3) All underground LPG tanks and piping are to remain uncovered
until the installation is inspected and approved by a Fire Marshal.
(4) No LPG system which requires a permit to install shall be utilized
until an inspection of the same has been made by a Fire Marshal
and an appropriate certificate of compliance has been issued.
B. Temporary heat location reports. Every installation of LPG used for
temporary heat must be reported to the Fire Prevention Division at the
time of installation. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
A. All equipment shall be installed and maintained in conformity with the
rules and regulations of this chapter and the appropriate standards of
the NFPA. It shall be unlawful to install, service, handle or offer for sale,
in any form, liquefied petroleum gas and related equipment that does
not conform to these rules, regulations and standards.
B. No person, firm or corporation, except the owner or those authorized by
the owner to do so, shall sell, fill, refill, deliver or permit to be delivered
or used in any manner any LPG container for any gas or compound or
for any purpose whatsoever. Only containers designed for LPG may be
§ 164-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-105
1:355
§ 164-106. Portable cylinders.
filled with liquefied petroleum gas. Filling LPG containers with any
other gas or compound is prohibited.
C. Cylinders used for LPG shall be painted white, silver or other lightreflecting
color as approved by the Fire Prevention Division. It shall be
unlawful for any supplier to refill any container that has been painted
any other color. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
D. The gas supplier shall refuse to fill any container that does not fully
conform to all provisions of this chapter or one that has been involved in
a fire, burned or scorched.
E. The replacement of parts on containers, regulators or related
equipment shall be made by qualified personnel only.
F. The peening of weld leaks is prohibited.
G. Tanks, cylinders or other storage vessels which previously contained
gases other than liquefied petroleum gas, such as but not limited to
Freon, acetylene or hydrogen, shall not be revalved and used for
liquefied petroleum gases.
A. Portable vapor-withdrawal cylinders with water capacities greater than
2 1/2 pounds, which are or will be owned by the user or intended user,
are not to be filled or refilled unless the cylinder has been properly
tested or requalified in accordance with United States Department of
Transportation regulations and has attached thereto a warning label
approved by the Fire Prevention Division. A cylinder(s) shall not be
released to the owner or his representative by the seller or refiller until
it has been determined that the cylinder has not been filled beyond
acceptable limits (42% of its water-weight capacity), is free of leaks and
is safe for use or continued use.
B. Containers, except those used in liquid-withdrawal service up to and
including 40 pounds' propane capacity, shall be checked for leaks
immediately after filling. The test will be done by qualified personnel by
checking each connection with a soap-water solution or by total
submersion in a water-filled container. Should a leak exist, the
container shall be emptied immediately and marked with paint,
indelible ink or marker or other suitable means to positively identify a
container that leaks. A leaking container shall not be transported from
the filling site while it contains any product, either in liquefied or vapor
form.
C. All portable Department of Transportation and Interstate Commerce
Commission containers shall have the date of manufacture permanently
stamped on a permanently attached collar or on the cylinder if the
collar is not permanently attached and, in the case of containers more
than 12 years old, shall have the date of the most recent inspection,
month/year, marked on the collar or cylinder.
§ 164-105 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-106
1:356
§ 164-107. Permits required. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
D. Every person, firm or corporation offering the filling of LPG cylinders
for sale or resale shall have a certified scale on the premises to ensure
that each portable cylinder containing LPG has not been filled beyond
its safe capacity. Each such cylinder shall be weighed before delivery to
the purchaser to ensure that the cylinder is not filled beyond acceptable
limits.
E. Container storage restricted.
(1) No container of LPG, either in use or in storage, shall be permitted
inside or on the roof or balcony of any occupied building or in or on
any construction attached to an occupied building, except as
permitted in Subsections F and G below.
(2) Industrial lift trucks shall comply with the provisions of the
appropriate standards of the NFPA.
(3) The storage of containers must be outside the building, at least 25
feet from any building or structure. Storage is to be in either a
noncombustible top- and bottom-vented structure or surrounded by
a substantial metal fence enclosure. Such enclosure is to be
adequately secured against access by unauthorized persons.
F. Department of Transportation specification cylinders with a maximum
water capacity of 2 1/2 pounds, used with completely self-contained
hand torches and similar applications, may be stored or displayed in a
building frequented by the public, the quantity of which shall not
exceed 200 pounds aggregate.
G. The temporary or emergency use of LPG equipment in occupied or
unoccupied buildings shall be approved by the Fire Prevention Division
prior to use. Any tank used inside any building shall be equipped with
an excess-flow valve to shut off the flow of gas if a hose or other
connector is severed. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
A. Permits shall be required in locations where propane is installed,
stored, sold, stored for rental or resale and/or transferred from one
vessel to another. Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) permits shall be
acquired from the Fire Prevention Division.
B. Application for permits shall be made to the Fire Prevention Division on
forms provided and shall include the applicant's answers in full to
inquiries set forth on such forms. Applications for permits shall be
accompanied by such data as may be required by the Division and such
fees as may be required by the Town.
C. The Fire Prevention Division shall review all applications submitted and
determine compliance with applicable provisions of the Code. If an
§ 164-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-107
1:357
§ 164-108. Transportation.
§ 164-109. Certificate of fitness.
application for a permit is rejected by the Fire Prevention Division, the
applicant shall be advised of the reasons for such rejection.
D. A copy of permits shall be posted or otherwise readily accessible at
each place of operation or carried by the permit holder, as specified by
the Fire Prevention Division.
E. Permits shall be valid for a period of one year.
A. No person, firm or corporation whose motor vehicle, tank truck, tank
truck semitrailer or tank truck trailer, which is based within the Town of
Smithtown, shall use or cause to be used any motor vehicle, tank truck,
tank truck semitrailer or tank truck trailer for the transportation of
liquefied petroleum gas unless, after complying with these regulations,
a permit to operate any such vehicle has first been secured from the
Fire Prevention Division. No permit shall be required under this section
for any motor vehicle that is used for the transportation of LPG in
containers not larger than 10 gallons' water capacity each
(approximately 34 pounds' propane capacity) with an aggregate water
capacity of 25 gallons (approximately 87 pounds) or when used in
permanently installed containers on the vehicle as motor fuel.
[Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000; 9-24-2002 by L.L. No.
4-2002]
B. Permits shall be issued to a vehicle for the transportation of LPG only
after a full safety inspection of the vehicle by the Fire Prevention
Division and the Fire Marshal approves of the issuance of the permit.
[Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
C. Permits shall be valid for a period of one year. An approved marking
shall be displayed on the vehicle for which said permit is issued.
D. The transportation of liquefied petroleum gas cylinders, either empty or
full, is prohibited in the trunk of any passenger vehicle.
E. Cylinders larger than 10 gallons' water capacity or an aggregate
amount in excess of 25 gallons shall not be transported in cars, vans or
any type of enclosed vehicle or in the enclosed area of any vehicle.
A. Certificate of fitness required. Except as set forth in Subsection M
below, any person filling containers at locations where LPG is sold and/
or transferred from one vessel into another shall hold a valid certificate
of fitness issued by the Fire Prevention Division. Such certificate is
subject to revocation by the Fire Prevention Division at any time where
the certificate holder displays evidence of noncompliance with the
provisions of this chapter. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000;
9-24-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
§ 164-107 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-109
1:358
B. Application. All applications for a certificate of fitness shall be filed with
the Fire Prevention Division on forms provided by the Fire Prevention
Division and accompanied by the applicable fees. [Amended
3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
C. Proof of qualifications. Every person applying for a certificate of fitness
shall furnish satisfactory proof to the Fire Prevention Division that (s)he
is familiar with the materials, formulas, tools, techniques, standards,
laws, ordinances, recognized good practices, safety precautions and
manufacturers' recommendations pertaining to the particular system,
materials, devices or operations that (s)he will be involved with and for
which the certificate of fitness is issued. (S)he shall further prove that
(s)he is physically competent to perform any and all actions necessary
or incidental to the operation for which the certificate of fitness is
issued. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
D. Investigation and examination. The Fire Prevention Division shall
investigate every new applicant for a certificate of fitness. The
investigation shall include a written examination regarding the use,
makeup and handling of LPG, and such investigation shall also include a
practical test. When the Fire Prevention Division determines that the
applicant conforms to all requirements of this chapter, a certificate of
fitness shall be issued by the Fire Prevention Division. [Amended
3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
E. The certificate of fitness shall be given full force and effect for a period
of three years.
F. Refusal of certificate of fitness. When the Fire Prevention Division
determines that a candidate has failed to meet the requirements to
obtain a certificate of fitness, the Division shall refuse to issue any such
certificate. Any person may not apply again for the certificate of fitness
within a ten-day period following the refusal of issuance. [Amended
3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
G. Transferability. A certificate of fitness shall not be transferable.
H. Renewal of certificate of fitness. An application for the renewal of a
certificate of fitness shall be filed in the same manner as an application
for an original certificate. Each such application shall be accompanied
by applicable fees. The granting of a renewal of a certificate of fitness
shall be accomplished in the same manner as for an original
certification, except that any person continuously engaged in any
activity for which a certificate of fitness is required will not, upon
renewal, undergo the investigation as outlined in Subsection D above.
I. Certificate of fitness issued. A certificate of fitness will be required of
any person performing the following activities:
(1) Filling containers permanently located at consumer sites from a
cargo vehicle.
§ 164-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-109
1:359
§ 164-110. Reporting of incidents. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
Any incident involving LPG, including but not limited to leaks, fires,
explosions or any other accidental discharge into the atmosphere in excess
of 8.5 cubic feet (one pound of propane) must be reported to the
Department of Public Safety and the Department of Environment and
Waterways by the responsible party or his representative. The initial report
may be made by telephone and followed by a written report. Under no
circumstances shall a report be filed later than 24 hours after the incident,
nor shall such reporting in the event of an emergency delay the reporting or
(2) Selling LPG or transferring LPG from one vessel to another.
J. Change of address. Each person holding a certificate of fitness shall
notify the Fire Prevention Division, in writing, of any change in his
business, residential or other notification address within 10 days after
such change. Failure on the part of a person to give such notification
shall constitute grounds for revocation of said certificate of fitness.
[Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
K. Contents of certificate of fitness. A certificate of fitness issued by the
Fire Prevention Division shall be in the form of an identification card.
Said card shall contain the following information to be valid, and it will
be the responsibility of the certificate holder to report a card lost, stolen
or mutilated to receive a duplicate certification: [Amended 3-14-2000
by L.L. No. 4-2000]
(1) The purpose for which the certificate of fitness has been issued.
(2) The date of certificate of fitness issuance and the date of expiration.
(3) Other information as may be necessary to properly identify the
person to whom the certificate of fitness is issued.
(4) The signature of the person to whom the certificate of fitness is
issued.
(5) Printed thereon the following: THIS CERTIFICATE DOES NOT
EXCLUSIVELY RECOMMEND THE BEARER.
L. Requirement to display certificate of fitness. Any person to whom a
certificate of fitness has been issued in conformance with this chapter
shall, upon request, produce and show proper identification and the
certificate of fitness to anyone for whom he seeks to render services, to
any official of the Department of Public Safety or to any other law or
code enforcement official. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
M. A driver of a motor vehicle from which (or to which) liquefied petroleum
gas is sold, filled, transferred or delivered shall not be required to hold
a certificate of fitness as required under this chapter. [Added
9-24-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
§ 164-109 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-110
1:360
notification to the local Fire Department and/or other emergency response
forces.
§ 164-111. Storage, handling, installation, use and transfer.
The storage, handling, installation, use and transfer of LPG shall be in
accordance with the appropriate standards of the NFPA, except that more
restrictive requirements as specified in this Article shall take precedence
over any NFPA requirements.
A. No LPG tank vehicle shall be left unattended on any street, highway,
avenue or alley, provided that this shall not prevent the driver from a
necessary absence from the truck in connection with the delivery of his
load, except that during the actual discharge of the liquid, some
responsible person shall be present at the vehicle. Nothing in this
section shall prevent stops for meals, provided that the street where the
vehicle is temporarily stopped is well-lit and appropriate markers be
placed indicating the presence of such vehicle.
B. Tank vehicles as described above shall not be parked or garaged in any
buildings other than those specifically approved for such use by the Fire
Prevention Division.
C. Tank vehicles containing flammable liquids shall not be parked
outdoors at any one point for longer than one hour except, off the
street, and at least 25 feet from any building and/or public roadway.
§ 164-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-111
1:361

ARTICLE XVI
Nitrocellulose Motion-Picture Films
§ 164-112. Applicability.
This article shall apply to the motion-picture film stored in a building
commonly known as a "movie theater" and having a cellulose nitrate base.
The word "film," whenever used in this article, refers to such film. Cellulose
acetate film, bearing the manufacturers' warranty that it is a safety film or
"not dangerous" film, is exempt from these provisions.
§ 164-113. Permit required. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
No person shall store, keep or have on hand in any building more than
25 pounds (about 5,000 feet of one-and-three-eighths-inch film) of
nitrocellulose motion-picture film without a permit from the Fire Prevention
Division.
§ 164-114. Projection booths to conform.
All projection booths shall be constructed to comply with the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and applicable NFPA
standards.
§ 164-115. Smoking prohibited in storerooms.
Smoking or the carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or other form
of smoking material in any room where such film is stored or handled is
prohibited.
§ 164-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-115
1:363

ARTICLE XVII
Lumberyards and Woodworking Plants
§ 164-116. Storage permit required.
No person shall store in excess of 100,000 board feet of lumber without a
permit.
§ 164-117. Open yard storage.
§ 164-118. Operational fire hazards.
§ 164-119. Woodworking permits; conformance with other
standards.
A. Lumber shall be piled with due regard to the stability of the piles and in
no case higher than 20 feet.
B. Driveways between and around lumber piles shall be at least 15 feet
wide and maintained free of the accumulation of rubbish, equipment,
lumber or other articles or materials. Driveways shall be so spaced that
a maximum grid system unit of 50 feet by 150 feet is produced.
C. Permanent lumber storage, operating under a permit, shall be
surrounded with a suitable fence at least six feet high, unless storage is
within a building.
A. The burning of shavings, sawdust and other wood scraps may be
permitted only under boilers, in furnaces or in incinerators or refuse
burners safely constructed and located and only with the appropriate
permits and authorizations from the Town of Smithtown. Stacks shall be
provided with approved spark arresters having openings not greater
than 3/4 inch or other effective arrangement. At boiler or other points
where sawdust or shavings are used as fuel, a storage bin of
noncombustible construction with a raised sill shall be provided.
B. Smoking shall be prohibited except in specified safe locations in
buildings. Large "no smoking" signs shall be painted on exterior
building walls and on signs erected at driveway edges. "No smoking"
signs shall be posted throughout all buildings, except in specific
locations designated as safe for smoking purposes.
A. Sawmills, planing mills and all other woodworking plants shall require
a permit from the Department of Public Safety. [Amended 9-7-1993
by L.L. No. 5-1993]
B. All woodworking plants and lumberyards shall be constructed, operated
and maintained in accordance with the appropriate standards of the
NFPA.
§ 164-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-119
1:365

ARTICLE XVIII
Places of Public Assembly
§ 164-120. Permit required; exceptions.
No place of assembly shall be maintained, operated or used as such without
a permit, except that no permit shall be required for any place of public
assembly used solely as a place of religious worship.
§ 164-121. Plan of exitways. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
A plan showing the capacity and location of exitways and of aisles leading
thereto shall be filed with the Fire Prevention Division, and a copy shall be
kept on display in the premises.
§ 164-122. Maximum occupancy.
§ 164-123. Construction, maintenance and operation.
The construction, maintenance and operation of every place of assembly
shall be in accordance with the appropriate standards of the NFPA and the
Code of the Town of Smithtown.
A. The maximum allowable occupancy for every place of assembly or
portion thereof shall be determined by the Fire Marshal in accordance
to all applicable laws, rules and regulations.
B. Occupancy signs.
(1) Upon the completion of a life-safety inspection by a Fire Marshal
and the determination of the maximum allowable occupancy for all
applicable spaces, rooms, buildings or portions thereof, an
occupancy sign(s) will be issued by the Fire Prevention Division.
[Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
(2) The sign(s) issued by the Fire Prevention Division shall be so
located and posted at entrances to such applicable areas so as to be
conspicuously visible to any person entering such space, room,
building or portion thereof. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
(3) The sign(s) shall be illuminated at all such times when the building
or portion thereof is occupied, and shall be substantially secured to
a wall or partition.
C. The owner, operator, managing agent, manager or person in charge of
any place of assembly shall ensure that the maximum allowable
occupancy for any place of assembly or portion thereof is never
exceeded.
§ 164-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-124
1:367
§ 164-124. Fire-protection equipment.
All fire-detecting and -extinguishing equipment systems and smoke- and
fire-control doors, vents, devices and systems in every place of assembly
shall at all times be maintained in full and proper operating condition.
§ 164-125. Lighting systems.
All places of assembly when in use shall be so illuminated that every person
present may be plainly seen from any point in the place of assembly. When
required, artificial light shall be provided through electrical circuits and
shall be maintained in continuous operation.
§ 164-124 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-125
1:368
ARTICLE XIX
Welding and Cutting
§ 164-126. Scope.
Welding or cutting shall include gas, electric-arc or flammable-liquid
welding or cutting or any combination thereof.
§ 164-127. Permit required.
§ 164-128. Conformance with other standards.
All welding and cutting operations shall be conducted in accordance with
the appropriate standards of the NFPA.
A. A permit shall be required of each company, corporation, partnership,
venture or owner-operator performing welding or cutting operations.
This permit shall not be required for each welding or cutting job
location.
B. Application for a permit required by this article shall be made by the
company, corporation, partnership, venture or owner-operator
performing the welding or cutting operation or by its duly authorized
agent.
§ 164-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-128
1:369

ARTICLE XX
Electrical Systems
§ 164-129. Electric wire maintenance.
A. Any person maintaining electric wires for whatever purpose shall keep
such wiring so arranged, insulated and protected so as to conform to
the current edition of the National Fire Protection Association
Electrical Code and approved by the American Standards Association.
Any wiring designed to convey electricity found, by the authority
empowered to grant a permit or any authority empowered to enforce
any part of this article, to be in an unsafe condition or any wiring cut or
removed by the Fire Department in the discharge of its duties must be
repaired or replaced by the owner or lessee in accordance with said
codes and in a safe and proper manner. Whether such repair or
replacement is in conformity with such codes is a fact to be determined
by the Fire Prevention Division. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
B. Notwithstanding any provisions, conditions and directives contained in
the NFPA Electrical Code and/or the American Standards Association,
no aluminum wire shall be used for electrical installations of any kind in
any building or residence hereafter constructed in the Town. This
restriction shall include alterations to existing electrical service, except
that aluminum cable or copper cable may be used as a service entrance
cable on the line side of the building service panel.
§ 164-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-129
1:371

ARTICLE XXI
Fireworks
§ 164-130. Sale and discharge prohibition; exceptions; permit
required.
§ 164-131. Operations permit; conformance with standards.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
store, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or otherwise or use or
explode any fireworks, provided that the Fire Prevention Division may
grant permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by a
municipality, fair association, amusement park and other fraternal or
service organizations. Every such display shall be handled by a
competent operator approved by the Fire Prevention Division and shall
be so located, discharged or fired as, in the opinion of the Fire
Prevention Division, after proper inspection by a Fire Marshal, shall not
be hazardous to property nor endanger any person. [Amended
3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
B. Application for a permit shall be made, in writing, at least 30 days in
advance of the date of display. After such a privilege shall have been
granted, the possession and use of fireworks for such display shall be
lawful for the purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall be
transferable. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
C. No permit authorizing the display of fireworks shall be granted unless
the applicant thereto furnishes evidence of general liability insurance in
the limits of not less than $3,000,000 for bodily injury or death to
anyone and $1,000,000 for injury to or destruction of property.
D. No permit authorizing the display of fireworks shall be granted unless
the Town is named insured under the required policy of general liability
insurance, and such policy shall be noncancelable without 10 days'
prior written notice to the Town.
E. The display of fireworks shall be in accordance with the appropriate
current standards of the NFPA, as well as the specifications set forth in
the New York State Penal Law. If any conflict exists in the requirements,
the more restrictive requirement shall control. [Amended 3-14-2000
by L.L. No. 4-2000]
F. At all fireworks displays, a Fire Marshal shall be present before and
during the exploding of all pyrotechnics and/or devices. The local Fire
Department shall also be advised so that they may be on a standby
status at its headquarters or at the site of the display.
A. An operations permit shall be required for the manufacture, storage,
assembly and handling of any fireworks or pyrotechnic product.
B. The manufacture, assembly, storage and handling of fireworks or
pyrotechnic products shall be in accordance with the appropriate
§ 164-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-131
1:373
current standards of the NFPA. [Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
§ 164-131 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-131
1:374
ARTICLE XXII
Marinas and Boatyards44
§ 164-132. Conformance with other provisions.
Marinas and boatyards shall be constructed, maintained and operated in
accordance with the appropriate standards of the NFPA.
§ 164-133. Open fires.
No open fire or lighted charcoal grills shall be permitted on any dock or pier
or on board any boat or vessel or in close proximity thereto.
44.
§ 164-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-133
1:375

ARTICLE XXIII
Multiple-Unit Dwellings and Multiple-Residence Facilities
§ 164-134. Fire and smoke detectors.
Every multiple-unit dwelling and every multiple-residence facility shall be
equipped with a supervised circuited fire and smoke detection system.
Smoke detection sensors shall be located in or adjacent to all sleeping
quarters, and thermal detection units shall be located in all other areas,
including attics, basements, utility rooms and storage rooms. Each area
between fire walls shall be separately zoned. An enunciator panel and alarm
bells shall be located where specified by the Fire Marshal.
§ 164-135. Fire hydrants for new units.
During the course of construction of any multiple-unit dwelling or multipleresidence
facility, upon the installation of water mains on the construction
site, fire hydrants shall be immediately connected and maintained in an
operative condition. Access to all hydrants by fire suppression units shall be
provided.
§ 164-136. Permit required.
A permit for the operation of any multiple-residential facility, as defined
above, shall be required.
§ 164-137. Barbecues restricted.
The use of barbecues on balconies or patios of multiple-residence facilities
is prohibited. Open-flame barbecues may be accommodated on multiple
residence sites when used at grade level at least 15 feet from any building,
combustible material or motor vehicle.
A. No person shall own or operate any multiple-residence facility unless an
annual permit has been issued by the Fire Prevention Division. All new
and existing multiple-residence facilities must obtain a permit to
operate, and said permit shall be renewed annually. [Amended
3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
B. All multiple-residence facilities shall be in compliance with appropriate
portions of this chapter and appropriate standards of the NFPA in order
to receive a permit to operate.
§ 164-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-137
1:377

ARTICLE XXIV
Fire and Smoke Detection Systems
[Amended 9-7-1993 by L.L. No. 5-1993; 3-14-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
§ 164-138. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide regulations and standards
applicable to the installation of fire alarm systems that require Fire
Department response, so as to ensure competent standards of workmanship
and thereby lessen the possibility of false alarms resulting from
malfunctions of unrecognized installations.
§ 164-139. Owners responsibilities upon fire alarm activation.
It shall be unlawful for a fire alarm panel to be reset until the authorization
of the Fire Marshal, Fire Chief or designated fire officer has been obtained.
§ 164-140. Fire alarm malfunctions.
§ 164-141. Liability for installation and maintenance; permission
for automatic transmission systems.
A. In the event that a fire alarm activation is deemed by the Fire Marshal
to be the result of a fire alarm malfunction, the owner will be served
with a notice of violation and will be required to return said system to
full service. Repairs must be made by a fire alarm technician licensed
by the State of New York, and notification of the completion of such
repairs must be made to the Fire Prevention Division within 15 days of
the service of the notice of violation.
B. Only Fire Prevention Division or Fire Department officials may
authorize or order the disconnection or deactivation of any alarm
system, whether temporary or permanent. Such authorization will be
made by written notice to the owner of the premises for failure to meet
any requirements provided for in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for
any person to disconnect, deactivate, reconnect or reactivate an alarm
system unless such disconnection, deactivation, reconnection or
reactivation has been authorized by the Fire Marshal.
C. During any such time when a fire alarm is disconnected or is in any way
not fully operational, the owner of the premises or the owner's agent
shall, upon direction of the Chief Fire Marshal, post one or more
person(s) at the premises at all times, whose duty it shall be to inform
the Fire Department should a fire occur.
A. The Town of Smithtown assumes no responsibility for any device or
system installed, repaired, inspected, maintained or otherwise by any
persons licensed pursuant to this article. Notwithstanding the payment
of any fee and/or the issuance of any permit or license as herein
required, the Town of Smithtown shall be under no obligation
§ 164-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-141
1:379
§ 164-142. Inspection.
Every fire alarm system shall be thoroughly inspected not fewer than once
each six months. Inspection shall be only by a licensed fire alarm technician.
A report of such inspection shall be made on a form specified by the Fire
Prevention Division and shall be submitted to said Fire Prevention Division
within five days of the inspection.
§ 164-143. False alarms.
After a maximum of three false alarms in any one calendar year, for
whatsoever reason caused, the owner of an alarm device and/or system
shall be presumptively in violation of this article by causing or allowing false
alarms.
whatsoever concerning the adequacy, the operation or the maintenance
of the alarm device so installed, and the Town of Smithtown hereby
assumes no liability whatsoever for any failure of any such alarm device
or for any act of omission or commission as a result of any such alarm,
device or system.
B. Devices which automatically transmit fire alarm signals to a Fire
Department or the dispatching facilities for a Fire Department shall be
prohibited unless specific written permission is issued by the Fire
Commissioners of said Fire Department or by the dispatching facility.
This shall not apply to signals transmitted to commercial central alarm
systems.
C. Installation and maintenance. The owner shall be responsible for the
maintenance and service of any fire alarm device and related
equipment and shall be responsible for all malfunctions of the
equipment or system.
D. Taped message dialers. The use of taped message dialers to any Fire
Department, Police Department, dispatching facility for any Fire
Department or central station is hereby prohibited.
E. All fire alarm devices, systems and associated equipment shall be
installed, repaired, tested, inspected and maintained in accordance
with the appropriate standards of the NFPA.
§ 164-141 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-143
1:380
ARTICLE XXV
Automobile Undercoating
[Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
§ 164-144. Scope; general requirements.
A. Automobile undercoating spray operations, conducted in areas having
adequate natural or mechanical ventilation, may be exempt from the
provisions of Subsection B of this section, on approval of the Fire
Prevention Division, when using undercoating materials which are not
more hazardous than kerosene or undercoating materials using only
solvents having a flash point in excess of 100° F.
B. Undercoating spray operations not conforming to Subsection A of this
section shall be subject to all applicable provisions of Article XI.
§ 164-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-144
1:381

ARTICLE XXVI
Compressed Gases
[Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
§ 164-145. Scope.
This article shall apply to gases in a state exceeding 40 pounds per square
inch absolute at 70° F. or 104 pounds per square inch absolute at 130°
F., and including but not limited to bulk oxygen, hydrogen, flammable
anaesthetics and nonflammable medical gases.
§ 164-146. General requirements.
Compressed gases shall be stored, handled and used according to the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and/or the applicable
standards of the NFPA.
§ 164-147. Permit required.
A permit shall be obtained from the Fire Prevention Division for storage,
handling and use of compressed gases.
§ 164-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-147
1:383

ARTICLE XXVII
Mechanical Refrigeration
[Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
§ 164-148. Installation requirements.
All new mechanical refrigeration systems shall be installed and all existing
installations shall be maintained in a standard safe manner which will
minimize the life, health and fire hazards of the installation. Installation
shall be in accordance with nationally recognized good practice.
§ 164-149. Permit required.
No installation of a refrigeration unit or system containing in excess of 20
pounds of refrigerant, other than air or water, shall be made without a
permit obtained from the Fire Prevention Division.
§ 164-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-149
1:385

ARTICLE XXVIII
Stop-Work Orders
[Amended 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
§ 164-150. Cease-and-desist orders.
Whenever the Fire Prevention Division shall find in, upon, around or under
any building or upon any premises or other place within its jurisdiction
immediate life-safety hazards to the occupants of such building or premises,
an order of cease and desist shall be issued to the owner, owner-agent
or person in charge of said building or premises. Immediately upon the
issuance of a cease-and-desist order, the building, lot, structure or premises
shall be vacated and shall remain unoccupied until such time as all lifesafety
violations are corrected and an order of compliance is issued by the
Fire Prevention Division. Nothing in this section shall repair or remove any
violation which causes the issuance of the cease-and-desist order.
§ 164-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-150
1:387

ARTICLE XXIX
Permits
[Amended 3-26-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991; 4-23-1991 by L.L. No.
4-1991; 7-23-1991 by L.L. No. 8-1991; 9-7-1993 by L.L. No. 5-1993;
3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
§ 164-151. General provisions.
A. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall constitute permission, in
writing, to manufacture, maintain, store, handle, install, erect, use or
conduct the activity specified on the permit. Nothing herein shall
relieve any applicant or licensee from the responsibility of obtaining
any other license, permit, certification, permission or authorization
required of any other governmental authority or entity. Any permit
issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable or assignable.
Each permit shall be limited to the purpose and materials set forth on
the face thereof, and any change in use or occupancy of the premises
shall require a new permit. Every permit shall be null and void upon the
expiration date indicated thereon or upon the revocation or suspension
of said permit.
B. Before any permit may be issued, the Department of Public Safety and/
or the Fire Prevention Division shall inspect and approve the
receptacles, equipment, vehicles, buildings, materials, premises or
storage places to be used. In cases where the approval of any other
governmental agency is required, no permit shall be issued until
satisfactory evidence of such approval has been submitted by the
applicant.
C. All applications for a permit required by this chapter, other than an
application for a household or commercial burning permit, shall be
made to the Fire Prevention Division in such form and detail as the
Town of Smithtown may prescribe. Applications for permits shall be
accompanied by such plans required by the Fire Prevention Division. An
application for a household or commercial burning permit may be made
to the Chief of the Fire Department in whose district the burning is to
be conducted. A permit shall not be issued for a period longer than one
year from the date thereof, unless specifically stated by some other
section of this chapter.
D. Permits shall at all times be kept on the premises designated thereon
and shall at all times be subject to inspection by the Fire Prevention
Division and any employee or designated agent of the Town of
Smithtown, the Police Department and/or the Fire Department in whose
district said premises are located.
E. A copy of each permit, together with the application and plans on which
it is based, shall be available to the Chief of the Fire Department which
protects the area in which the premises are located.
§ 164-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-151
1:389
§ 164-152. Fees. [Amended 1-11-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005;
12-17-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
Fees shall be charged for each license, permit or certificate required under
this chapter.
F. The Director of the Department of Public Safety or Chief Fire Marshal
may revoke any permit or approval issued, and the Chief of the Fire
Department may revoke a household or commercial burning permit
issued by the Chief, if any violation of this chapter is found upon
inspection or in case there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on
which the permit or approval was based.
G. No building or structure, except one- and two-family dwellings, shall be
erected or altered until the plans therefor have been approved, in
writing, by the Fire Prevention Division. Such written approval shall not
be given where said construction or alteration would be in violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter.
A. The Town Board shall adopt and from time to time amend, by
resolution, a schedule of fees charged for fire prevention permits issued
under this chapter.
B. Fees adopted and/or amended by Town Board resolution shall remain in
effect until such time as they are amended by a subsequent Town Board
resolution.
C. Official copies of the current fire prevention permit fee schedule, along
with the Town Board resolution approving same, shall be maintained by
the Town Clerk, the Director of the Department of Public Safety and the
Chief Fire Marshal.
D. Effective date. This section shall become effective immediately upon
filing with the New York State Secretary of State.
§ 164-151 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-152
1:390
ARTICLE XXX
Wood- and Coal-Burning Stoves
[Added 3-26-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991; amended 3-14-2000 by L.L.
No. 4-2000]
§ 164-153. Permit required where structural integrity is not
affected.
A permit is required and may be obtained from the Fire Prevention Division
for the installation of any wood- or coal-burning stove not otherwise
affecting the structural integrity of any structure or altering the condition
of any structure.
§ 164-154. Permit required where structural integrity is affected.
A permit is required and may be obtained from the Building Department for
the installation of any wood- or coal-burning stove where the alteration of
any structure or the addition to any structure is required in order to install
such wood- or coal-burning stove.
§ 164-155. Construction to be free of hazards.
Wood- or coal-burning stoves shall be constructed or maintained in such a
manner so as not to create a hazardous condition.
§ 164-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-155
1:391

ARTICLE XXXI
Emergency Access Systems
[Added 3-14-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
§ 164-156. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide emergency access to certain areas
of buildings, fire suppression equipment, fire alarm equipment, building
systems and information specified by the Chief Fire Marshal for use by the
Fire Department at the time of an emergency or reported emergency.
§ 164-157. Survey of buildings and establishments.
The Chief Fire Marshal shall survey or cause to be surveyed each
establishment, except the interior of one- and two-family dwellings, and
shall specify what key lock box(es) and/or information storage cabinet(s)
shall be installed.
§ 164-158. Permit required.
A permit shall be obtained from the Fire Prevention Division of the
Department of Public Safety prior to the installation or alteration of any key
lock box, information storage cabinet or combination thereof. No equipment
installed shall be deemed acceptable or approved until an inspection of
the same has been conducted by the Fire Prevention Division and an
appropriate certificate of compliance has been issued.
§ 164-159. Installation and maintenance requirements.
§ 164-160. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to the following establishments:
A. Key lock boxes, information storage cabinets or combinations thereof
which have been installed in compliance with any permit or order, or
because of any local law, shall be maintained in operative condition at
all times. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the
effectiveness of any emergency access system so required, except that
this shall not prohibit the owner or occupant from temporarily reducing
the use of an emergency access system to make repairs or alterations.
The Fire Prevention Division shall be notified before alterations or
repairs are made.
B. All key lock boxes and information storage cabinets shall be equipped
with dual lock cylinders. In no case shall any person or entity, other
than the Smithtown Town Fire Marshal or a member of the Fire
Department protecting the subject premises, be issued, possess or use
any key intended to operate the Fire Department lock cylinder on any
key lock box or information storage cabinet or combination thereof.
A. One- or two-family dwellings.
§ 164-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-160
1:393
B. Shopping centers with less than four tenant spaces, unless serviced by
a common fire alarm system or fire sprinkler system or where one or
more of the occupants is a hazardous material permittee.
C. Freestanding Class C mercantile occupancies, unless the occupant is a
hazardous material permittee.
D. Other occupancies as may be determined by the Chief Fire Marshal of
the Town of Smithtown.
§ 164-160 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-160
1:394
ARTICLE XXXII
through ARTICLE XXXIX (Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-160
1:395

ARTICLE XL
Penalties; Miscellaneous Provisions
[Amended 3-26-1991 by L.L. No. 2-1991; 3-14-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
§ 164-161. Disclaimer of warranty or guaranty.
Nothing in this chapter shall amount to a guaranty or warranty that any
particular type of construction or method of construction will be free from
defects or will perform in a particular manner. Neither the issuance of any
permit, certificate, license or approval under this chapter nor the inspection
and approval of any work under this chapter shall constitute any guaranty
or warranty whatsoever of the safety, durability or fitness for a particular
purpose of any material, labor or construction whatsoever in kind or nature.
§ 164-162. Presumption of liability.
The occupant and the owner of any premises or building upon or in which
any violation of this chapter is found, the owner of any object or material
placed or remaining anywhere in violation of this chapter or the owner
of any structure illegally made or erected shall be deemed, prima facie,
responsible and liable for the violation so evidenced and subject to the
penalty and or sanction provided herein.
§ 164-163. Conflict with other provisions.
If any provision of this chapter shall be in actual conflict with any other law,
then the more restrictive law shall govern.
§ 164-164. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
A. A person who violates any of the provisions of or who fails to comply
with any condition imposed by this chapter shall have committed a
violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,500 or imprisonment for
not more than 60 days, or both, for a conviction of the first offense and
punishable by a fine of $5,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or both, for conviction of a second or subsequent offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. The Town Attorney is authorized and directed to institute any and all
actions and proceedings necessary to enforce this chapter. The Town
Attorney is also authorized to seek damages and any civil penalties in
any civil action, and such penalties shall be in addition to and not in lieu
of any criminal prosecution and penalty.
(1) In the event of any actual or pending violation of this chapter, the
Town Attorney may, in addition to other remedies, institute any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct or
abate such violation.
§ 164-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-164
1:397
(2) In addition to other remedies provided by law, any appropriate
action or proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise, may
be instituted or taken to prevent the unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to
prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such
premises.
(3) In addition to any fine or penalty imposed, the defendant shall pay
all costs and expenses incurred by the Town in determining such
violation.
§ 164-164 SMITHTOWN CODE § 164-164
1:398
Chapter 168
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental and coastal quality
review — See Ch. 151.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 153.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 170.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 248.
Zoning — See Ch. 322.
§ 164-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-164
1:399

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization and Purpose
§ 168-1. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown finds that the potential and/
or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the Town of Smithtown and that such damages may include:
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 168-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 168-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
F. (Reserved)
G. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
§ 168-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-3
1:401
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 168-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 168-3
1:402
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 168-4. Terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION — The portion of the SFHA landward
of a V Zone or landward of an open coast without mapped V Zones, in which
the principal sources of flooding are astronomical tides, storm surges,
seiches, or tsunamis, not riverine sources. Areas of moderate wave action
may be subject to wave effects, velocity flows, erosion, scour, or
combinations of these forces and are treated as V Zones. The area of
moderate wave action is an area within a Zone AE that is bounded by a line
labeled "Limit of Moderate Wave Action."
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30,
A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base
floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain." For purposes of this chapter,
the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with
the phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high-velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on a FIRM as Zone
§ 168-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-4
1:403
V1-V30, VE, VO or V. The coastal high hazard area shall also include areas
on a FIRM within a Zone AE that are bounded by a line labeled "Limit of
Moderate Wave Action."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18
inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the
lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above
the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be
properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic forces which
would be experienced during periods of flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a
building in Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to have the top
of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zone V1-V30, VE, or V, or
area of moderate wave action, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structure member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level
by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to
the flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of
the base flood. In the case of Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X,
or D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zone V1-V30, VE, or V,
"elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition
of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls that meet the federal standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates
a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood
Insurance Study.
FLOOD EVALUATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of
flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as
Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
§ 168-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 168-4
1:404
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD OR FLOODING —
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities.
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales, or
service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
A.
"Flood or flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of land along
the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion
or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm,
or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in flooding as defined in Subsection A(1) above.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
§ 168-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-4
1:405
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the Town to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the Building
Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or an employee of an engineering
department.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other
than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD OR ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — Has
the same meaning as "base flood."
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous mound
or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves during major coastal storms. The
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 168-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 168-4
1:406
inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a
distinct change from a relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value of
the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or by other agencies as
provided in § 168-15 of this chapter.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or
mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided
that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition placement, or other improvement is within 180 days after the date
of issuance. The "actual start of construction" means the first placement
of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home)
on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings
or construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation (such as clearing, excavation, grading, or filling), or the
installation of streets or walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation
of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 168-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-4
1:407
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 168-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 168-4
1:408
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 168-5. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Smithtown, Suffolk County.
§ 168-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 168-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 168-8. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Town of Smithtown,
Community Number 360810, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers 36103C0341H,
36103C0342H, 36103C0343H, 36103C0344H, 36103C0361H,
36103C0363H, 36103C0364H, 36103C0367H, 36103C0368H,
36103C0369H, 36103C0636H, 36103C0645H, 36103C0652H,
36103C0655H, 36103C0656H, 36103C0660H, 36103C0665H,
36103C0680H, whose effective date is September 25, 2009, and
any subsequent revisions to these map panels that do not affect
areas under our community's jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Suffolk County, New York, All Jurisdictions" dated September 25,
2009.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the
Planning Department located in the Town Hall Annex Building 2,
Redwood Lane, Smithtown, New York 11787.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 168-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-9
1:409
§ 168-9. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of
Smithtown from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent
or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under Article VI will
be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 168-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town
of Smithtown, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 168-9 SMITHTOWN CODE § 168-10
1:410
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 168-11. Designation of local administrator.
The Director of Planning is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain
development permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 168-12. Floodplain development permit.
§ 168-13. Application for permit.
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate.
Additional information may be required on the permit application form.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and insuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 168-6, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale and showing: the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee of $2 per square foot of gross floor
area to be constructed or improved on the premises. In addition, the
applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the Town of Smithtown
for any additional costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of
this project. The local administrator may require a deposit of no more
than $500 to cover these additional costs.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the bottom of
the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and
columns) of any new or substantially improved structure to be located
in Zone V1-V30 or VE, or Zone V if base flood elevation data are
available. Upon completion of the lowest floor, the permittee shall
§ 168-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-13
1:411
submit to the local administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a
licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
C. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility flood-proofing will meet the criteria in § 168-23C, Utilities.
E. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 168-26, Nonresidential structures (except coastal highhazard
areas).
F. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 168-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
G. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
H. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
I. In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation are
available, or in an area of moderate wave action, designs and
specifications, certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect,
for any breakaway walls in a proposed structure with design strengths
in excess of 20 pounds per square foot.
J. In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation are
available, or in an area of moderate wave action, for all new and
substantial improvements to structures, floodplain development permit
applications shall be accompanied by design plans and specifications,
§ 168-13 SMITHTOWN CODE § 168-13
1:412
§ 168-14. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
§ 168-15. Use of other flood data.
prepared in sufficient detail to enable independent review of the
foundation support and connection components. Said plans and
specifications shall be developed or reviewed by a licensed professional
engineer or architect, and shall be accompanied by a statement,
bearing the signature of the architect or engineer, certifying that the
design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice and with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 168-13, Application for permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of Article V, Construction Standards, and, in
particular, § 168-22B, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
Article V, Construction Standards, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
A. When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation data
§ 168-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-15
1:413
§ 168-16. Alteration of watercourses.
The local administrator shall:
§ 168-17. Construction stage.
(these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor identified
a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source, including data developed pursuant to
§ 168-13G, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial
improvements or other proposed development meet the requirements
of this chapter.
B. When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other authoritative
source, such as historical data, to establish flood elevations within the
areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes of this chapter.
A. Notify to adjacent communities and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submittal of evidence of such
notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
B. Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance within
the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the floodcarrying
capacity is not diminished.
A. In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or completion of
floodproofing of a new or substantially improved structure, the local
administrator shall obtain from the permit holder a certification of the
as-built elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in
relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or under
the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional
engineer and certified by same. For manufactured homes, the permit
holder shall submit the certificate of elevation upon placement of the
structure on the site. A certificate of elevation must also be submitted
for a recreational vehicle if it remains on a site for 180 consecutive days
or longer (unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use).
B. In Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation data
are available or in an area of moderate wave action, upon placement of
the lowest floor of a new or substantially improved structure, the permit
holder shall submit to the local administrator a certificate of elevation,
in relation to mean sea level, of the bottom of the lowest structural
member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns). The
certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same.
For manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate
§ 168-15 SMITHTOWN CODE § 168-17
1:414
§ 168-18. Inspections.
The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or architect shall
make periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of
construction in order to monitor compliance with permit conditions and
enable said inspector to certify, if requested, that the development is in
compliance with the requirements of the floodplain development permit
and/or any variance provisions.
§ 168-19. Stop-work orders.
§ 168-20. Certificate of compliance.
of elevation upon placement of the structure on the site. An elevation
certificate must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it
remains on a site 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is fully
licensed and ready for highway use).
C. Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of the
certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local administrator
shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected shall be cause to
issue a stop-work order for the project unless immediately corrected.
A. The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stop-work
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject the
violator to the penalties described in § 168-9 of this chapter.
B. The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stop-work
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant with the
provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the development
permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject the violator to the
penalties described in § 168-9 of this chapter.
A. In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 168-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit the
use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly
altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating that the
building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
B. A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local administrator
upon satisfactory completion of all development in areas of special flood
hazard.
C. Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 168-18, Inspections, and/or any certified
elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring requirements or
encroachment analyses which may have been required as a condition of
the approved permit.
§ 168-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-21
1:415
§ 168-21. Information to be retained.
The local administrator shall retain and make available for inspection copies
of the following:
A. Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
B. Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures, required
pursuant to § 168-17A and B, and whether or not the structures contain
a basement;
C. Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 168-17A, and whether
or not the structures contain a basement;
D. Variances issued pursuant to Article VI, Variance Procedures; and
E. Notices required under § 168-16, Alteration of watercourses.
§ 168-21 SMITHTOWN CODE § 168-21
1:416
ARTICLE V
Construction Standards
§ 168-22. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 168-6.
A. Coastal high hazard areas. The following requirements apply within
Zones V1-V30, VE and V or in an area of moderate wave action:
(1) All new construction, including manufactured homes and
recreational vehicles on site 180 days or longer and not fully
licensed for highway use, shall be located landward of the reach of
high tide.
(2) The use of fill for structural support of buildings, manufactured
homes or recreational vehicles on site 180 days or longer is
prohibited.
(3) Man-made alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential
flood damage is prohibited.
B. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
C. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Town of Smithtown agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
§ 168-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-22
1:417
§ 168-23. Standards for all structures.
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and
reimburses the Town of Smithtown for all fees and other costs
in relation to the application. The applicant must also provide
all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Town of
Smithtown for all costs related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 168-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Town of Smithtown agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and
the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the Town of Smithtown for all fees
and other costs in relation to the application. The applicant
must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the Town of Smithtown for all costs related to the
final map revisions.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation data
are available, new and substantially improved structures shall have
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and which are subject to flooding, designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
§ 168-22 SMITHTOWN CODE § 168-23
1:418
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria: (i) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding; and (ii) the bottom of all such openings
no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all sides are
considered basements and are not permitted.
(4) Within Zones V1-V30 and VE, and also within Zone V if base flood
elevation are available, or in an area of moderate wave action, new
construction and substantial improvements shall have the space
below the lowest floor either free from obstruction or constructed
with nonsupporting breakaway walls, open wood latticework or
insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water loads
without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation
system. The enclosed space below the lowest floor shall be used
only for parking vehicles, building access or storage. Use of this
space for human habitation is expressly prohibited. The
construction of stairs, stairwells and elevator shafts is subject to
the design requirements for breakaway walls.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at least two feet above the base flood
elevation or be designed to prevent water from entering and
accumulating within the components during a flood and to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring
and outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated
to or above the base flood elevation unless they conform to the
appropriate provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of
New York State or the Residential Code of New York State for
location of such items in wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and
§ 168-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-23
1:419
§ 168-24. Elevation of residential structures (except coastal high
hazard areas).
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved residential
structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the
requirements in § 168-22B, Subdivision proposals, and § 168-22C,
Encroachments, and § 168-23, Standards for all structures.
§ 168-25. Residential structures (coastal high hazard areas).
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 168-22A, Coastal
high hazard areas, and § 168-22B, Subdivision proposals, and § 168-23,
Standards for all structures, apply to new and substantially improved
residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard shown as Zone
V1-V30, VE or V or in an area of moderate wave action, on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 168-6.
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
B. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
C. Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 168-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Elevation. New construction and substantial improvements shall be
elevated on pilings, columns or shear walls such that the bottom of the
lowest horizontal structural member supporting the lowest elevated
floor (excluding columns, piles, diagonal bracing attached to the piles
or columns, grade beams, pile caps and other members designed to
either withstand storm action or break away without imparting
damaging loads to the structure) is elevated to or above two feet above
base flood elevation so as not to impede the flow of water.
§ 168-23 SMITHTOWN CODE § 168-25
1:420
B. Determination of loading forces. Structural design shall consider the
effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously during the base
flood on all building components.
(1) The structural design shall be adequate to resist water forces that
would occur during the base flood. Horizontal water loads
considered shall include inertial and drag forces of waves, current
drag forces, and impact forces from waterborne storm debris.
Dynamic uplift loads shall also be considered if bulkheads, walls, or
other natural or man-made flow obstructions could cause wave
runup beyond the elevation of the base flood.
(2) Buildings shall be designed and constructed to resist the forces due
to wind pressure. Wind forces on the superstructure include
windward and leeward forces on vertical walls, uplift on the roof,
internal forces when openings allow wind to enter the house, and
upward force on the underside of the house when it is exposed. In
the design, the wind should be assumed to blow potentially from
any lateral direction relative to the house.
(3) Wind loading values used shall be those required by the building
code.
C. Foundation standards.
(1) The pilings or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water pressures acting
simultaneously on all building components. Foundations must be
designed to transfer safely to the underlying soil all loads due to
wind, water, dead load, live load and other loads (including uplift
due to wind and water).
(2) Spread footings and fill material shall not be used for structural
support of a new building or substantial improvement of an existing
structure.
D. Pile foundation design.
(1) The design ratio of pile spacing to pile diameter shall not be less
than 8:1 for individual piles (this shall not apply to pile clusters
located below the design grade). The maximum center-to-center
spacing of wood piles shall not be more than 12 feet on center
under load-bearing sills, beams, or girders.
(2) Pilings shall have adequate soil penetration (bearing capacity) to
resist the combined wave and wind loads (lateral and uplift)
associated with the base flood acting simultaneously with typical
structure (live and dead) loads, and shall include consideration of
decreased resistance capacity caused by erosion of soil strata
surrounding the piles. The minimum penetration for foundation
piles is to an elevation of five feet below mean sea level (msl) datum
§ 168-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-25
1:421
if the BFE is +10 msl or less, or to be at least 10 feet below msl if
the BFE is greater than +10 msl.
(3) Pile foundation analysis shall also include consideration of piles in
column action from the bottom of the structure to the stable soil
elevation of the site. Pilings may be horizontally or diagonally
braced to withstand wind and water forces.
(4) The minimum acceptable sizes for timber piles are a tip diameter of
eight inches for round timber piles and eight inches by eight inches
for square timber piles. All wood piles must be treated in
accordance with requirements of EPEE-C3 to minimize decay and
damage from fungus.
(5) Reinforced concrete piles shall be cast of concrete having a twentyeight-
day ultimate compressive strength of not less than 5,000
pounds per square inch, and shall be reinforced with a minimum of
four longitudinal steel bars having a combined area of not less than
1% nor more than 4% of the gross concrete area. Reinforcing for
precast piles shall have a concrete cover of not less than 1 1/4
inches for No. 5 bars and smaller and not less than 1 1/2 inches for
No. 6 through No. 11 bars. Reinforcement for piles cast in the field
shall have a concrete cover of not less than two inches.
(6) Piles shall be driven by means of a pile driver or drop hammer,
jetted, or augered into place.
(7) Additional support for piles in the form of bracing may include
lateral or diagonal bracing between piles.
(8) When necessary, piles shall be braced at the ground line in both
directions by a wood timber grade beam or a reinforced concrete
grade beam. These at-grade supports should be securely attached
to the piles to provide support even if scoured from beneath.
(9) Diagonal bracing between piles, consisting of two-inch by eightinch
(minimum) members bolted to the piles, shall be limited in
location to below the lowest supporting structural member and
above the stable soil elevation, and aligned in the vertical plane
along pile rows perpendicular to the shoreline. Galvanized steel
rods (minimum diameter 1/2 inch) or cable-type bracing is
permitted in any plane.
(10) Knee braces, which stiffen both the upper portion of a pile and the
beam-to-pile connection, may be used along pile rows
perpendicular and parallel to the shoreline. Knee braces shall be
two-by-eight lumber bolted to the sides of the pile/beam, or four-byfour
or larger braces framed into the pile/beam. Bolting shall
consist of two five-eighths-inch galvanized steel bolts (each end) for
two-by-eight members, or one five-eighths-inch lag bolt (each end)
for square members. Knee braces shall not extend more than three
feet below the elevation of the base flood.
§ 168-25 SMITHTOWN CODE § 168-25
1:422
E. Column foundation design.
(1) Masonry piers or poured-in-place concrete piers shall be internally
reinforced to resist vertical and lateral loads, and be connected
with a movement-resisting connection to a pile cap or pile shaft.
F. Connectors and fasteners.
(1) Galvanized metal connectors, wood connectors, or bolts of size and
number adequate for the calculated loads must be used to connect
adjoining components of a structure. Toe nailing as a principal
method of connection is not permitted. All metal connectors and
fasteners used in exposed locations shall be steel, hot-dipped
galvanized after fabrication. Connectors in protected interior
locations shall be fabricated from galvanized sheet.
G. Beam-to-pile connections.
(1) The primary floor beams or girders shall span the supports in the
direction parallel to the flow of potential floodwater and wave
action and shall be fastened to the columns or pilings by bolting,
with or without cover plates. Concrete members shall be connected
by reinforcement, if cast in place, or (of precast) shall be securely
connected by bolting and welding. If sills, beams, or girders are
attached to wood piling at a notch, a minimum of two five-eighthsinch
galvanized steel bolts or two hot-dipped galvanized straps 3/
16 inch by four inches by 18 inches each bolted with two one-halfinch
lag bolts per beam member shall be used. Notching of pile tops
shall be the minimum sufficient to provide ledge support for beam
members without unduly weakening pile connections. Piling shall
not be notched so that the cross-section is reduced below 50%.
H. Floor and deck connections.
(1) Wood two-by four-inch (minimum) connectors or metal joist
anchors shall be used to tie floor joists to floor beams/girders.
These should be installed on alternate floor joists, at a minimum.
Cross-bridging of all floor joists shall be provided. Such crossbridging
may be one-by three-inch members, placed eight feet oncenter
maximum, or solid bridging of same depth as joist at same
spacing.
(2) Plywood should be used for subflooring and attic flooring to provide
good torsional resistance in the horizontal plane of the structure.
The plywood should not be less than 3/4 inch total thickness, and
should be exterior grade and fastened to beams or joists with 8d
annular or spiral thread galvanized nails. Such fastening shall be
supplemented by the application of waterproof industrial adhesive
applied to all bearing surfaces.
I. Exterior wall connections.
§ 168-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-25
1:423
(1) All bottom plates shall have any required breaks under a wall stud
or an anchor bolt. Approved anchors will be used to secure rafters
or joists and top and bottom plates to studs in exterior and bearing
walls to form a continuous tie. Continuous 15/32-inch or thicker
plywood sheathing, overlapping the top wall plate and continuing
down to the sill, beam, or girder, may be used to provide the
continuous tie. If the sheets of plywood are not vertically
continuous, then two-by-four nailer blocking shall be provided at all
horizontal joints. In lieu of the plywood, galvanized steel rods of
one-half-inch diameter or galvanized steel straps not less than one
inch wide by 1/16 inch thick may be used to connect from the top
wall plate to the sill, beam, or girder. Washers with a minimum
diameter of three inches shall be used at each end of the one-halfinch
round rods. These anchors shall be installed no more than two
feet from each corner rod, no more than four feet on center.
J. Ceiling joist/rafter connections.
(1) All ceiling joists or rafters shall be installed in such a manner that
the joists provide a continuous tie across the rafters. Ceiling joists
and rafters shall be securely fastened at their intersections. A
metal or wood connector shall be used at alternate ceiling joist/
rafter connections to the wall top plate.
(2) Gable roofs shall be additionally stabilized by installing two-by-four
blocking on two-foot centers between the rafters at each gable end.
Blocking shall be installed a minimum of eight feet toward the
house interior from each gable end.
K. Projecting members.
(1) All cantilevers and other projecting members must be adequately
supported and braced to withstand wind and water uplift forces.
Roof eave overhangs shall be limited to a maximum of two feet and
joist overhangs to a maximum of one foot. Larger overhangs and
porches will be permitted if designed or reviewed and certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect.
L. Roof sheathing.
(1) Plywood, or other wood material, when used as roof sheathing,
shall not be less than 15/32 inch in thickness, and shall be of
exterior sheathing grade or equivalent. All attaching devices for
sheathing and roof coverings shall be galvanized or be of other
suitable corrosion-resistant material.
(2) All corners, gable ends, and roof overhangs exceeding six inches
shall be reinforced by the application of waterproof industrial
adhesive applied to all bearing surfaces of any plywood sheet used
in the sheathing of such corner, gable end, or roof overhang.
§ 168-25 SMITHTOWN CODE § 168-25
1:424
§ 168-26. Nonresidential structures (except coastal high hazard
areas).
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in § 168-22B,
Subdivision proposals, and § 168-22C, Encroachments, and § 168-23,
Standards for all structures.
(3) In addition, roofs should be sloped as steeply as practicable to
reduce uplift pressures, and special care should be used in
securing ridges, hips, valleys, eaves, vents, chimneys, and other
points of discontinuity in the roofing surface.
M. Protection of openings.
(1) All exterior glass panels, windows, and doors shall be designed,
detailed, and constructed to withstand loads due to the design wind
speed of 75 miles per hour. Connections for these elements must be
designed to transfer safely the design loads to the supporting
structure. Panel widths of multiple-panel sliding glass doors shall
not exceed three feet.
N. Breakaway wall design standards.
(1) The breakaway wall shall have a design-safe loading resistance of
not less than 10 and not more than 20 pounds per square foot, with
the criterion that the safety of the overall structure at the point of
wall failure be confirmed using established procedures. Grade
beams shall be installed in both directions for all piles considered
to carry the breakaway wall load. Knee braces are required for
front row piles that support breakaway walls.
(2) Use of breakaway wall strengths in excess of 20 pounds per square
foot shall not be permitted unless a registered professional
engineer or architect has developed or reviewed the structural
design and specifications for the building foundation and
breakaway wall components, and certifies that the breakaway walls
will fail under water loads less than those that would occur during
the base flood; and the elevated portion of the building and
supporting foundation system will not be subject to collapse,
displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind
and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components
(structural and nonstructural). Water loading values used shall be
those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values shall be
those required by the building code.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
§ 168-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-26
1:425
§ 168-27. Nonresidential structures (coastal high hazard areas).
In Zones V1-V30, VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevations are available,
or in an area of moderate wave action, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall have the bottom of lowest member of the
lowest floor elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
Floodproofing of structures is not an allowable alternative to elevating the
lowest floor to two feet above the base flood elevation in Zones V1-V30, VE
and V.
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood elevation with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components
located below the base flood elevation must be capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 168-23C.
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
§ 168-26A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
§ 168-26 SMITHTOWN CODE § 168-28
1:426
§ 168-28. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 168-22, General
standards, and § 168-23, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated,
in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
A. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE, AH,
V1-V30, V, and VE shall either: (1) be on site fewer than 180 consecutive
days, (2) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (3) meet the
requirements for manufactured homes in § 168-28B, C, and D. A
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE, AH, V1-V30, V, and VE shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor is elevated to or above two feet
above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and
lateral movement. Elevation on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks is
prohibited.
C. Within Zone A or V, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated
such that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that
are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Elevation on piers consisting of
dry stacked blocks is prohibited.
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 168-6 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified). Elevation on piers consisting of dry stacked blocks
is prohibited.
§ 168-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-28
1:427

ARTICLE VI
Variance Procedures
§ 168-29. Appeals Board; considerations; records.
A. The Board of Zoning Appeals as established by the Town of Smithtown
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals, shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
§ 168-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-29
1:429
§ 168-30. Conditions for variances.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 168-29D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood elevation, providing items (1) through
(12), inclusive, in § 168-29D have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure; and
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E, and F of this section are met;
and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
§ 168-29 SMITHTOWN CODE § 168-30
1:430
§ 168-31. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon its filing in the Office of the
Secretary of State of the State of New York.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
G. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice
over the signature of a community official that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
lowest floor elevation.
§ 168-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-31
1:431
Chapter 170
FRESHWATER WETLANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dredging — See Ch. 138.
Environmental and coastal quality
review — See Ch. 151.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 248.
Waterways — See Ch. 318.
§ 168-31 SMITHTOWN CODE § 168-31
1:432
ARTICLE I
Local Regulatory Authority
[Adopted 8-27-1976 as L.L. No. 3-1976]
§ 170-1. Local authority.
Pursuant to § 24-0501 of the New York State Freshwater Wetlands Act
(Article 24 of the New York Environmental Conservation Law), the Town
of Smithtown shall fully undertake and exercise its regulatory authority
with regard to activities subject to regulation under the Act in freshwater
wetlands, as shown on the Freshwater Wetlands Map, as such may from
time to time be amended, and filed by the Department of Environmental
Conservation pursuant to the Act, and in all areas adjacent to any such
freshwater wetland up to one hundred (100) feet from the boundary of such
wetland. Such regulatory authority shall be undertaken and exercised in
accordance with all of the procedures, concepts and definitions set forth in
Article 24 of the New York Environmental Conservation Law and Title 23 of
Article 71 of such law relating to the enforcement of Article 24, as such law
may from time to time be amended, together with any exceptions, additions
and modifications hereto made in accordance with § 24-501, Subdivision 3,
of the New York State Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 170-2. When effective.
This Article, adopted on the date set forth above, shall take effect upon
the filing with the Clerk of the Town of Smithtown of the final Freshwater
Wetlands Map by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation pursuant to § 24-0301 of the Freshwater Wetlands Act
applicable to any or all lands within the Town of Smithtown.
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-2
1:433

ARTICLE II
Wetlands Regulation
[Adopted 9-7-1976 as L.L. No. 4-1976]
§ 170-3. Short title.
This Article shall be known as the "Freshwater Wetlands Protection Law of
the Town of Smithtown."
§ 170-4. Declaration of policy.
It is declared to be the public policy of the Town of Smithtown to preserve,
protect and conserve freshwater wetlands and the benefits derived
therefrom, to prevent the despoliation and destruction of freshwater
wetlands and to regulate the development of such wetlands in order to
secure the natural benefits of freshwater wetlands, consistent with the
general welfare and beneficial economic, social and agricultural
development of the town. It is further declared to be the policy of the Town
of Smithtown to exercise its authority pursuant to Article 24 of the State
Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 170-5. Statement of findings.
A. The freshwater wetlands located in the Town of Smithtown are
invaluable resources for flood protection, wildlife habitat, open space
and water resources.
B. Considerable acreage of freshwater wetlands in the town has been lost,
despoiled or impaired by unregulated draining, dredging, filling,
excavating, building, pollution or other acts inconsistent with the
natural uses of such areas. Other freshwater wetlands are in jeopardy
of being lost, despoiled or impaired by such unregulated acts.
C. Recurrent flooding aggravated or caused by the loss of freshwater
wetlands has serious effects upon natural ecosystems.
D. Freshwater wetland conservation is a matter of concern.
E. Any loss of freshwater wetlands deprives the people of the Town of
Smithtown of some or all of the many and multiple benefits to be
derived from wetlands, for example:
(1) Flood and storm control by the hydrologic absorption and storage
capacity of freshwater wetlands.
(2) Wildlife habitat by providing breeding, nesting and feeding
grounds and cover for many forms of wildlife, wildfowl and
shorebirds, including migratory wildfowl and rare species.
(3) Protection of subsurface water resources and provision for
valuable watersheds and recharging groundwater supplies.
§ 170-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-5
1:435
§ 170-6. Definitions.
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the
meanings given herein:
ADJACENT AREA — Any land in the Town of Smithtown immediately
adjacent to a freshwater wetland, lying within one hundred (100) feet,
as determined by the local government, measured horizontally, of the
boundary of a freshwater wetland.
AGENCY — The Town of Smithtown Conservation Board.[Amended
2-21-1984 by L.L. No. 4-1984]
APPLICANT — Any person who files an application for any permit issued by
the Agency pursuant to this Article, and includes the agent of the owner or
a contract vendee.
BOARD — The Freshwater Wetlands Appeals Board established by Article
24 of the State Environmental Conservation Law.
BOUNDARIES OF A FRESHWATER WETLAND — The outer limit of the
vegetation specified in Subsections A and B of the definition of "freshwater
wetlands" and of the waters specified in Subsection C of such definition.
FRESHWATER WETLANDS — Lands and waters lying within the boundaries
of the Town of Smithtown, as shown on a Freshwater Wetlands Map, which
contain any or all of the following:
(4) Recreation by providing areas for hunting, fishing, boating, hiking,
bird-watching, photography, camping and other uses.
(5) Pollution treatment by serving as biological and chemical oxidation
basins.
(6) Erosion control by serving as sedimentation areas and filtering
basins, absorbing silt and organic matter and protecting channels
and harbors.
(7) Education and scientific research by providing readily accessible
outdoor biophysical laboratories, living classrooms and training
and education resources.
(8) Open space and aesthetic appreciation.
(9) Sources of nutrients in freshwater food cycles and nursery grounds
and sanctuaries for freshwater fish.
F. The regulation of freshwater wetlands, in accordance with the
agricultural exemption established in § 170-7 hereof, is consistent with
the legitimate interests of farmers and other landowners to graze and
water livestock, make reasonable use of water resources, harvest
natural products of the wetlands, selectively cut timber and otherwise
engage in the use of land for agricultural production.
§ 170-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 170-6
1:436
Lands and submerged lands commonly called marshes, swamps,
slough, bogs and flats supporting aquatic or semiaquatic vegetation of
the following vegetative types:
Wetland trees, which depend upon seasonal or permanent flooding
or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give them a competitive
advantage over other trees, including, among others, red maple
(Acer rubrum), willows (Salix species), black spruce (Picea
mariana), swamp white oak (Quercus bicolor), red ash (Fraxinus
pennsylvanica), American elm (Ulmus americana) and larch (Larix
laricina).
(1)
Wetlands shrubs, which depend upon seasonal or permanent
flooding or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give them a competitive
advantage over other shrubs, including, among others, alder (Alnus
species), buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis), bog rosemary
(Andromeda glaucophylla) and leatherleaf (Chamaedaphne
calyculata).
(2)
Emergent vegetation, including, among others, cattails (Typha
species), pickerelweed (Pontederia cordata), bulrushes (Scirpus
species), arrow arum (Peltandra virginica), arrowheads (Sagittaria
species), reed (Phragmites communis), wild rice (Zizania aquatica),
bur reeds (Sparganium species), purple loosestrife (Lythrum
salicaria), swamp loosestrife (Decodon verticillatus) and water
plantain (Alisma plantago-aquatica).
(3)
Rooted, floating-leaved vegetation, including, among others, water
lily (Nymphaea odorata), water shield (Brasenia schreberi) and
spatterdock (Nuphar species).
(4)
Free-floating vegetation, including, among others, duckweed
(Lemna species), big duckweed (Spirodela polyrhiza) and
watermeal (Wolffia species).
(5)
Wet meadow vegetation, which depends upon seasonal or
permanent flooding or sufficiently waterlogged soils to give them a
competitive advantage over other open land vegetation, including,
among others, sedges (Carex species), rushes (Juncus species),
cattails (Typha species), rice cut-grass (Leersia oryzoides), reed
canary grass (Phalaris arundinaceae), swamp loosestrife (Decodon
verticillatus) and spike rush (Eleocharis species).
(6)
Bog mat vegetation, including, among others, sphagnum mosses
(Sphagnum species), bog rosemary (Andromeda glaucophylla),
leatherleaf (Chamaedaphne calyculata), pitcher plant (Sarracenia
purpurea) and cranberries (Vaccinium macrocarpon and Vaccinium
oxycoccos).
(7)
Submergent vegetation, including, among others, pondweeds
(Potamogeton species), naiads (Naias species), bladderworts
(Utricularia species), wild celery (Vallisneria americana), coontails
(8)
A.
§ 170-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-6
1:437
FRESHWATER WETLANDS MAP — A map on which are indicated the
boundaries of any freshwater wetland and which has been filed with the
Clerk of the Town of Smithtown by the State Department of Environmental
Conservation pursuant to § 24-0301 of the State Environmental
Conservation Law.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT — A city, county, town or village.
PARTY IN INTEREST — The applicant, the Agency, the State Department of
Environmental Conservation, each local government in which the regulated
activity or any part thereof is located and any person who appears and
wishes to be a party in interest at the public hearing held pursuant to
§ 170-9 of this Article.
PERSON — Any corporation, firm, partnership, association, trust, estate,
one (1) or more individuals and any unit of government or agency or
subdivision thereof.
POLLUTION — The presence in the environment of human-induced
conditions or contaminants in quantities or having characteristics which are
or may be injurious to humans, plants, animals or property.
PROJECT — Any action which may result in direct or indirect physical
impact on a freshwater wetland, including but not limited to any regulated
activity.
REGULATED ACTIVITY — Any form of draining, dredging, excavation,
removal of soil, mud, sand, shells, gravel or other aggregate from any
freshwater wetland, either directly or indirectly; any form of dumping,
filling or depositing of any soil, stones, sand, gravel, mud, rubbish or fill
of any kind, either directly or indirectly; erecting any structures or roads;
the driving of pilings or placing of any other obstructions, whether or not
changing the ebb and flow of the water; any form of pollution, including but
not limited to installing a septic tank, running a sewer outfall or discharging
(Ceratophyllum demersum), water milfoils (Myriophyllum species),
muskgrass (Chara species), stonewort (Nitella species),
waterweeds (Elodea species) and water smartweeds (Polygonum
amphibium).
Lands and submerged lands containing remnants of any vegetation that
is not aquatic or semiaquatic that has died because of wet conditions
over a sufficiently long period, provided that such wet conditions do not
exceed a maximum seasonal water depth of six (6) feet and provided,
further, that such conditions can be expected to persist indefinitely,
barring human intervention.
B.
Lands and waters enclosed by aquatic or semiaquatic vegetation as
set forth herein in Subsection A and dead vegetation as set forth
in Subsection B, the regulation of which is necessary to protect and
preserve the aquatic and semiaquatic vegetation.
C.
The waters overlying the areas as set forth in Subsections A and B and
the lands underlying the areas set forth in Subsection C.
D.
§ 170-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § 170-6
1:438
sewage treatment effluent or other liquid wastes directly into or so as to
drain into a freshwater wetland; that portion of any subdivision of land that
involves any land in any freshwater wetland or adjacent area; and any other
activity which substantially impairs any of the several functions served by
freshwater wetlands or the benefits derived therefrom which are set forth
in § 170-5 of this Article.
SELECTIVE CUTTING — The annual or periodic removal of trees,
individually or in small groups, in order to realize the yield and establish
a new crop and to improve the forest, which does not involve the total
elimination of one (1) or more particular species of trees.
STATE — The State of New York.
STATE AGENCY — Any state department, bureau, commission, board or
other agency, public authority or public benefit corporation.
SUBDIVISION OF LAND — Any division of land into two (2) or more lots,
parcels or sites, whether adjoining or not, for the purpose of sale, lease,
license or any form of separate ownership or occupancy, including any
grading, road construction, installation of utilities or other improvements
of utilities or other improvements or any other land use and development
preparatory or incidental to any such division, by any person or by any other
person controlled by, under common control with or controlling such person
or by any group of persons acting in concert as part of a common scheme
or plan. "Subdivision of land" shall include any map, plat or other plan of
division of land, whether or not previously filed. "Subdivision of land" shall
not include the lease of land for hunting and fishing and other open-space
recreation uses and shall not include the division of land by a bona fide gift,
devise or inheritance.
TOWN — The Town of Smithtown.
§ 170-7. Permit required; exceptions.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, no person shall
conduct a regulated activity on any freshwater wetland or adjacent area
unless such person has first obtained a permit pursuant to this Article.
B. No permit under this Article shall be required for:
(1) The deposition or removal of the natural products of freshwater
wetlands and adjacent areas by recreational or commercial fishing,
shellfishing, aquiculture, hunting or trapping, where otherwise
legally permitted and regulated.
(2) The activities of farmers and other landowners in grazing and
watering livestock, making reasonable use of water resources,
harvesting natural products of wetlands or adjacent areas,
selective cutting of timber, draining land or wetlands for growing
agriculture products and otherwise engaging in the use of wetlands
or other land for growing agricultural products, except that
structures not required for the enhancement or maintenance of the
§ 170-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-7
1:439
§ 170-8. Application procedure.
agricultural productivity of the land and any filling activities shall
not be excluded hereunder. Each farmer or other landowner who
intends to conduct an otherwise regulated activity shall notify the
Agency, in writing, prior to conducting the activity, of his or her
intention to engage in such activity, stating the approximate
acreage of the freshwater wetland or adjacent area affected, the
location thereof, the methods to be employed and the uses to be
made of such land. A soil and water conservation plan prepared
by a soil and water conservation district and filed with the Agency
shall be deemed sufficient notification for the purpose of this
subsection.
(3) Public health activities, orders and regulations of the State
Department of Health, County Department of Health, City
Department of Health or other, as applicable, undertaken in
compliance with § 24-0701, Subdivision 5, of the State
Environmental Conservation Law.
(4) Activities subject to the review jurisdiction of the State Public
Service Commission or the New York State Board on Electric
Generation Siting and the Environment under Article VII or Article
VIII of the State Public Service Law, respectively. The standards
and restrictions of this Article will be applied by said bodies in
determining whether to issue a certificate of environmental
compatibility and public need under such Articles.
(5) Any actual and ongoing emergency activity which is immediately
necessary for the protection and preservation of life or property or
for the protection or preservation of natural resource values. Such
emergency activities include, for example, search and rescue
operations; preventive or remedial activities related to the largescale
contamination of streams or other bodies of water; floods,
hurricanes and other storms; and public health concerns. Within
five (5) days of the end of such an emergency involving the
undertaking of any activity which otherwise would be treated as a
regulated activity under this Article, the person chiefly responsible
for undertaking such emergency activity shall send a written
statement to the Agency setting forth the pertinent facts regarding
such emergency, including an explanation of the life, property or
resource value such activity was designated to protect or preserve.
(6) Any activity located in a freshwater wetland where such wetland is
located in more than one (1) town.
A. Any person proposing to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated
activity requiring a permit under this Article upon any freshwater
wetland or adjacent area shall file an application for a permit with the
Clerk of the Town of Smithtown. The Clerk shall immediately forward
such application to the Agency.
§ 170-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 170-8
1:440
B. An application for a permit shall be filed by the applicant on a form
prescribed by the Agency. Such application shall set forth the purpose,
character and extent of the proposed regulated activity. The application
shall include a detailed description of the regulated activity, a map
showing the area of the freshwater wetland or adjacent area directly
affected with the location of the proposed regulated activity thereon, a
deed or other legal description describing the subject property and
such additional information as the Agency deems sufficient to enable it
to make the findings and determinations required under this Article.
The application shall be accompanied by a list of the names of the
owners of record of lands adjacent to the freshwater wetland or
adjacent area upon which the project is to be undertaken and the
names of known claimants of water rights, of whom the applicant has
notice, which relate to any land within, or within one hundred (100) feet
of the boundary of, the property on which the proposed regulated
activity will be located. An application shall not be deemed to be
complete or received until the Agency determines that all such
information, including any additional information requested, has been
supplied in a complete and satisfactory form.
C. The Clerk of the Town of Smithtown shall cause a copy of such
completed application to be mailed to all local governments where the
proposed activity or any part thereof is located.
D. Notice of application.
(1) Within five (5) days of its receipt of a completed application for a
permit regarding any proposed regulated activity, the Agency shall
provide the applicant with a notice of application which the
applicant shall publish, at his or her own expense, at least once in
each of at least two (2) newspapers having a general circulation in
the Town of Smithtown. Said notice of application shall be in a form
prescribed by the Agency and shall:
(a) Specify that persons wishing to object to the application should
file a notice of objection by a specified date, together with a
statement of the precise grounds of objection to the
application, with the Agency.
(b) Specify that if no notices of objection are timely filed or if the
Agency determines that the proposed activity is of such a
minor nature as to not affect or endanger the balance of
systems within any freshwater wetland, then the Agency, in its
discretion, may determine that a hearing is not necessary and
dispense with the public hearing.
(c) Specify that the application, including all documents and maps
therewith, is available for public inspection at the office of the
Clerk of the Town of Smithtown.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Agency
may, in its discretion, dispense with the requirement for a notice of
§ 170-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-8
1:441
application and require a notice of hearing pursuant to Subsection
F of this section.
E. Hearing.
(1) No sooner than thirty (30) days and not later than sixty (60) days
after its receipt of a completed application for a permit regarding a
proposed regulated activity, and after the publication of a notice of
application pursuant to Subsection D of this section, the Agency
shall hold a public hearing on such application at a suitable location
in the Town of Smithtown, which hearing shall be held pursuant to
the provisions of § 170-9 of this Article.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection E(1) of this section,
where no notice of objection to the notice of application published
pursuant to Subsection D of this section shall have been filed within
the time specified by that notice or where the Agency determines
that the proposed activity is of such a minor nature as not to affect
or endanger the balance of systems within any freshwater wetland,
the Agency may, in its discretion, dispense with such hearing.
Where the Agency finds that a public hearing is not necessary, it
shall publish a decision, setting forth its reasons therefor, which
decision shall be a matter of public record and shall be mailed to
each local government where the proposed regulated activity or
any part thereof will be located. Public notice of such decision that
a public hearing is not necessary shall be provided in the same
manner as the notice of application set forth in Subsection D of this
section.
F. Notice of hearing.
(1) The Agency shall, within twenty-one (21) days of receipt of a
completed application, provide the applicant with a notice of
hearing which the applicant shall publish, at his or her own
expense, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for the
hearing, at least once in each of at least two (2) newspapers of
general circulation in the Town of Smithtown.
(2) At least fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for the hearing, the
Agency shall, by certified mail, provide a notice of hearing to each
local government within whose boundaries the proposed regulated
activity or any portion thereof will be located.
(3) At least fifteen (15) days prior to the date set for the hearing, the
Agency shall, by certified mail, provide notice of hearing to all
owners of record of land adjacent to the affected freshwater
wetland or adjacent area and to all known claimants of water
rights, of whom the applicant has notice, which relate to any land
within, or within one hundred (100) feet of the boundary of, the
property on which the proposed regulated activity will be located.
(4) The notice of hearing shall:
§ 170-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 170-8
1:442
§ 170-9. Public hearing on permit application.
(a) State the name of the applicant.
(b) Specify the location and outline the scope of the proposed
regulated activity.
(c) Specify the date, time and place of the public hearing on the
application.
(d) Specify that persons wishing to be parties in interest and
eligible to be heard at such public hearing, if any, should file
with the Agency a notice of appearance by a specified date,
together with a statement of the precise grounds of support of,
opposition to or interest in the application.
(e) Specify that any person who wishes to be a party in interest
without filling a notice of appearance may do so by appearing
at the public hearing and indicating his or her desire to be a
party in interest, if a public hearing is held.
(f) Specify that if no notices of appearance are timely filed by and
party in interest and if the applicant waives any public hearing,
then the public hearing may be canceled by the agency.
(g) Specify that the application, including all documents and maps
therewith, is available for public inspection at the office of the
Clerk of the Town of Smithtown.
G. The Agency shall make the application, including all documents and
maps associated with it, available for public inspection at the office of
the Clerk of the Town of Smithtown.
H. If no timely notice of appearance has been filed as provided in the
notice of hearing published pursuant to Subsection F of this section and
the applicant waives, in writing, any public hearing on his or her
application, the Agency may dispense with a public hearing and, in such
instance, shall provide public notice of the cancellation of the hearing.
I. For any notice canceling a hearing which has been scheduled, notice
shall be given on the same basis as the notice of public hearing
provided in Subsection F of this section.
J. The Agency may establish permit fees to assist in its implementation of
this Article.
A. Any public hearing held on a permit application received under this
Article shall be conducted by a hearing officer designated by the
Agency. The hearing officer shall have full authority to control the
conduct and procedure of the hearing and shall be responsible for
seeing that a complete record of the hearing is kept. The public hearing
shall be held within the Town of Smithtown.
§ 170-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-9
1:443
§ 170-10. Decision on permit application.
B. Parties in interest.
(1) Any person may appear as a party in interest, notwithstanding the
failure of such person to file a timely notice of appearance, by
appearing at the hearing and making known his or her desire to be
a party in interest. Persons who are not parties in interest may be
allowed to participate in the hearing where the hearing officer finds
that such participation would be in the public interest.
(2) All parties in interest shall be afforded an opportunity to present
oral and written arguments on issues of law and policy and an
opportunity to call witnesses in their behalf and to present oral and
written evidence on issues of fact. The hearing officer shall permit
the parties in interest to cross-examine witnesses but may limit
such cross-examination to avoid the introduction of irrelevant or
repetitious material in the record of the hearing.
A. Where a public hearing has been held regarding a permit application,
the Agency shall either issue the permit request, with or without
conditions, or deny the application. The decision by the Agency to issue
or deny a permit after a public hearing shall be based on the record of
the hearing and shall be made, in writing, within thirty (30) days of the
Agency's receipt of the hearing record.
B. Where no public hearing regarding a permit application has been held,
either because a hearing was determined not to be necessary pursuant
to § 170-8E(2) of this Article or because no notice of appearance was
filed with regard to the public hearing and a hearing was canceled
pursuant to § 170-8H of this Article, the Agency shall compile an official
file consisting of documents submitted by the applicant and any
additional documents relied on by the Agency with respect to the
application. The Agency may also take notice of general, technical or
scientific facts within the specialized knowledge of the Agency. Any
document made part of such official file shall be available for inspection
by the applicant and any interested member of the public. On the basis
of such file, the Agency shall either issue the permit requested, with or
without conditions, deny the application or order a public hearing to be
held pursuant to the provisions of this Article. The decision by the
Agency to issue or deny a permit or to order that a hearing be held shall
be based on the official file and shall be made, in writing, within thirty
(30) days of its completion of the official file and, in any event, within
sixty (60) days of its receipt of a completed application; provided,
however, that in the case where there have been no objections filed
regarding a proposed project, the issuance of a permit shall be deemed
to be a written decision by the Agency.
C. A copy of the decision of the Agency on each application for a permit
under this Article shall be mailed by the Agency as soon as practicable
following such decision to the applicant and to each local government
§ 170-9 SMITHTOWN CODE § 170-10
1:444
§ 170-11. Standards for issuance and denial of permits.
within whose boundaries the proposed regulated activity or any portion
thereof is located and, if a public hearing has been held regarding the
application, to each party in interest.
A. In granting, denying or conditioning any permit, the Agency shall
consider the effect of the proposed activity with reference to the public
health and welfare, fishing, flood, hurricane and storm dangers and the
protection or enhancement of the several functions of the freshwater
wetlands and the benefits derived therefrom which are set forth in
§ 170-5 of this Article.
B. Standards for issuance of permit.
(1) No permit shall be issued by the Agency pursuant to this Article
unless the Agency shall find that:
(a) The proposed regulated activity is consistent with the police of
this Article to preserve, protect and conserve freshwater
wetlands and the benefits derived therefrom and to prevent the
despoliation and destruction of freshwater wetlands in order to
secure the natural benefits of freshwater wetlands, consistent
with the general welfare and beneficial economic, social and
agricultural development of the town.
(b) The proposed regulated activity is consistent with the land use
regulations applicable in the Town of Smithtown pursuant to
§ 24-0903 of Article 24 of the State Environmental
Conservation Law.
(c) The proposed regulated activity is compatible with the public
health and welfare.
(d) The proposed regulated activity is reasonable and necessary.
(e) There is no reasonable alternative for the proposed regulated
activity on a site which is not a freshwater wetland or adjacent
area.
(2) The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that the
proposed regulated activity will be in accord with the standards set
forth in this subsection.
C. Duly filed written notice by the state, or any agency or subdivision
thereof, to the Agency that the state or any such agency or subdivision
is in process of acquiring the affected freshwater wetland on which a
proposed regulated activity would be located by negotiation or
condemnation shall be sufficient basis for the denial of a permit for such
regulated activity. Such notice may be provided at any time prior to the
Agency's decision to issue or deny a permit for the regulated activity.
§ 170-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-12
1:445
§ 170-12. Conditions of permit.
§ 170-13. Powers of Agency.
In order to carry out the purpose and provisions of this Article, the Agency
shall have the following powers:
§ 170-14. Other laws and regulations.
A. Any permit issued pursuant to this Article may be issued with
conditions. Such conditions may be attached as are necessary to assure
the preservation and protection of affected freshwater wetlands and to
assure compliance with the policy and provisions of this Article and the
provisions of the Agency's rules and regulations adopted pursuant to
this Article.
B. Every permit issued pursuant to this Article shall contain the following
conditions:
(1) The Agency shall have the right to inspect the project from time to
time.
(2) The permit shall expire on a date certain.
(3) The permit holder shall notify the Agency of the date on which
project construction is to begin, at least five (5) days in advance of
such date.
(4) The Agency's permit shall be prominently displayed at the project
site during the undertaking of the activities authorized by the
permit.
C. The Agency shall set forth, in writing, in the file it keeps regarding a
permit application, its findings and the reasons for all conditions
attached to any permit.
A. To appoint officers, agents and employees, prescribe their duties and
qualifications and fix their compensation.
B. To adopt, amend and repeal, after a public hearing (except in the case
of rules and regulations that relate to the organization or internal
management of the Agency), such rules and regulations, consistent
with this Article, as it deems necessary to administer this Article and to
do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out the purpose
and policies of this Article.
C. To contract for professional and technical assistance and advice.
D. To hold hearings and subpoena witnesses in the exercise of its powers,
functions and duties provided for by this Article.
A. To the greatest extent practicable, any public hearing held pursuant to
§ 170-9 of this Article shall be incorporated with any public hearing
§ 170-12 SMITHTOWN CODE § 170-14
1:446
§ 170-15. Bonding requirements.
§ 170-16. Suspension or revocation of permit.
§ 170-17. Penalties for offenses.
required by or pursuant to the New York State Town Law, Village
Law, General City Law, General Municipal Law or Environmental
Conservation Law relating to approvals or permits otherwise required
for the undertaking of regulated activities on the freshwater wetland or
adjacent area in question.
B. No permit granted pursuant to this Article shall remove any person's
obligation to comply in all respects with the applicable provisions of any
other federal, state or local law or regulation, including but not limited
to the acquisition of any other required permit or approval.
A. The Agency may require that, prior to the commencement of work
under any permit issued pursuant to this Article, the permittee shall
post a bond with the Agency, in an amount determined by the Agency,
conditioned upon the faithful compliance with the terms of such permit
and for the indemnification of the Town of Smithtown for restoration
costs resulting from failure to so comply. Such bond shall be issued by a
corporate surety authorized to do business in the state and shall be in
favor of the Town of Smithtown. It shall remain in effect until the
Agency certifies that the work has been completed in compliance with
the terms of the permit or the bond is released by the Agency or a
substitute bond is provided.
B. The Agency shall set forth, in writing, in the file it keeps regarding a
permit application, its findings and reasons for imposing a bond
pursuant to this section.
A. The Agency may suspend or revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
Article where it finds that the permittee has not complied with any or all
terms of such permit, has exceeded the authority granted in the permit
or has failed to undertake the project in the manner set forth in the
application.
B. The Agency shall set forth, in writing, in the file it keeps regarding a
permit application, its findings and reasons for revoking or suspending
a permit pursuant to this section.
A. Administrative sanctions. Any person who violates, disobeys or
disregards any provision of this Article, including any provision of any
permit issued pursuant to this Article or any rule or regulation adopted
by the Agency pursuant to this Article, shall be liable to the people of
the state for a civil penalty not to exceed three thousand dollars
($3,000.) for every such violation, to be assessed, after a hearing or
opportunity to be heard upon due notice and with the rights to
specification of the charges and representation by counsel at such
§ 170-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-17
1:447
§ 170-18. Enforcement.
§ 170-19. Review and appeal.
hearing, by the Agency. Such penalty may be recovered in an action
brought by the Attorney General at the request and in the name of the
Agency in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such civil penalty may
be released or compromised by the Agency before the matter has been
referred to the Attorney General, and such penalty may be released or
compromised and any action commenced to recover the same may be
settled and discontinued by the Attorney General with the consent of
the Agency. In addition, the Agency shall have the power, following a
hearing held in conformance with the procedures set forth in § 71-1709
of the State Environmental Conservation Law, to direct the violator to
cease his or her violation of this Article and to restore the affected
freshwater wetland to its condition prior to the violation, insofar as that
is possible within a reasonable time and under the supervision of the
Agency. Any such order of the Agency shall be enforceable in an action
brought by the Attorney General at the request and in the name of the
Agency in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any civil penalty or order
issued by the Agency pursuant to this subsection shall be reviewable in
a proceeding pursuant to Article 78 of the State Civil Practice Law and
Rules.
B. Criminal sanctions. Any person who violates an order, permit, rule or
regulation of the Agency regulating freshwater wetlands and adjacent
areas pursuant to this Article shall, in addition, for the first offense, be
guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.); for a
second and each subsequent offense, he or she shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.) or a term of
imprisonment of not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than six (6)
months, or both. Instead of these punishments, any offender may be
punishable by being ordered by the court to restore the affected
freshwater wetland to its condition prior to the offense, insofar as that
is possible. The court shall specify a reasonable time for the completion
of such restoration, which shall be effected under the supervision of the
Agency. Each offense shall be a separate and distinct offense and, in the
case of a continuing offense, each day's continuance thereof shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense.
A. The Attorney General, upon his or her own initiative or upon complaint
of the Agency, shall prosecute persons alleged to have violated any such
order of the Agency pursuant to this Article.
B. The Agency shall have the right to seek equitable relief to restrain any
violation or threatened violation of any provisions of this Article.
§ 170-17 SMITHTOWN CODE § 170-19
1:448
§ 170-20. When effective.
This Article shall take effect upon the filing with the Clerk of the Town of
Smithtown of the final Freshwater Wetlands Map of the State Department
of Environmental Conservation pursuant to § 24-0301 of the New York State
Environmental Conservation Law applicable to any or all lands within the
Town of Smithtown.
A. Any decision or order of the Agency, or any officer or employee thereof,
made pursuant to or within the scope of this Article may be reviewed at
the instance of any person affected thereby, including but not limited to
any owner of the affected wetland or adjacent area and any resident or
citizen of the Town of Smithtown, by the Board in accordance with Title
11 of Article 24 of the State Environmental Conservation Law, provided
that such review is commenced by the filing with the Board of a notice
of review within thirty (30) days after service of such order or notice of
such decision given, as the case may be.
B. Any party to any proceeding before the Agency may make an appeal to
the Board in accordance with Title 11 of Article 24 of the State
Environmental Conservation Law from any order or decision of the
Agency, or any officer or employee thereof, issued or made pursuant to
or within the scope of this Article, provided that such appeal is
commenced by the filing with the Board of a notice of appeal within
thirty (30) days after service of such order or after notice of such
decision given, as the case may be.
C. Any decision or order of the Agency, or any officer or employee thereof,
made pursuant to or within the scope of this Article may be reviewed at
the instance of any person, including but not limited to any owner of the
affected wetland or adjacent area and any resident or citizen of the
Town of Smithtown, in accordance with Article 78 of the State Civil
Practice Law and Rules, provided that such review is commenced
within thirty (30) days of the filing of such decision or order; and the
limitation upon the availability of such remedy as prescribed in § 7801
of the Civil Practice Law and Rules shall not be applicable to the
applications for review of determinations and orders made pursuant to
this Article.
D. The institution of a judicial proceeding to review a determination or
order of the Agency shall preclude the institution of proceeding before
the Board to review such a determination or order. The availability of
such review by the Board shall not affect the right of any person to seek
review of a determination of the Agency as provided in Article 78 of the
State Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 170-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-20
1:449
Chapter 173
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 105. Carnivals — See Ch. 119.
§ 173-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Smithtown Games of Chance
Licensing Law."
§ 173-2. Legislative authority.
This chapter is subject and subordinate to all the conditions and provisions
contained in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law and amendments
thereto and any and all rules and regulations and opinions adopted or to be
adopted by the New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
§ 173-3. Legislative intent.
The Town Board finds the raising of funds for the promotion of bona fide
charitable, educational, scientific, health, religious, patriotic and other
worthy causes, and where the beneficiaries are undetermined, to be in
the public interest and that the mandate of § 9 of Article 1 of the State
Constitution, as amended, should be carried out by rigid regulations to
prevent commercialized gambling, prevent participation by criminal and
other undesirable elements and prevent the diversion of funds from the
purposes herein authorized.
§ 173-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED GAMES OF CHANCE LESSOR — An authorized organization
which has been granted a lessor's license pursuant to the provisions of
Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law or pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — Includes any bona fide religious or
charitable organization or bona fide educational or service organization
or bona fide organization of veterans or volunteer firemen which, by its
charter, certificate of incorporation, constitution or Act of the Legislature,
shall have among its dominant purposes those as defined in this chapter
and provided that each such organization shall operate without profit to its
individual members and provided that each such organization has engaged
in serving one (1) or more of the lawful purposes as defined in this chapter
for a period of three (3) years immediately preceding the filing of an
§ 170-20 SMITHTOWN CODE § 173-4
1:450
application for a license under this chapter. No organization shall be
deemed an "authorized organization" which is or has been formed primarily
for the purpose of conducting games of chance and the distribution of
the proceeds thereof to itself or any other organization or which does not
devote at least seventy-five percent (75%) of its activities and funds to
other lawful purposes set forth in this chapter. No political party or club or
committee shall be deemed an "authorized organization."
AUTHORIZED SUPPLIER OF GAMES OF CHANCE EQUIPMENT — Any
person, firm, corporation, partnership or organization licensed by the New
York State Racing and Wagering Board to sell or lease games of chance
equipment or paraphernalia which meets the specifications and regulations
established by the New York State Racing and Wagering Board. Nothing
herein shall prevent an authorized organization from purchasing common
articles, such as cards and dice, from normal sources of supply of such
articles or from constructing equipment and paraphernalia for games of
chance for its own use. However, no such equipment or paraphernalia
constructed by an authorized organization shall be sold or leased to any
other authorized organization without written permission from the New
York State Racing and Wagering Board.
GAMES OF CHANCE — Includes specific games of chance in which prizes
are awarded on the basis of a designated winning number or numbers, color
or colors or symbol or symbols determined by chance, but not including
games commonly known as "bingo" or "lotto," which are controlled by
Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and Chapter 105 of the Code of
the Town of Smithtown, and also not including slot machines, bookmaking
and policy or number games, as defined in § 225.00 of the Penal Law. No
game of chance shall involve the wagering of money by one player against
another player.
LAWFUL PURPOSES — One (1) or more of the following causes, deeds or
activities:
Those which shall benefit needy or deserving persons, indefinite in
number, by enhancing their opportunity for religious or educational
advancement; by relieving them from disease, suffering or distress
or by contributing to their physical well-being; by assisting them in
establishing themselves in life as worthy and useful citizens; or by
increasing their comprehension of and devotion to the principles upon
which this nation was founded and enhancing their loyalty to their
governments.
A.
Those which shall initiate, perform or foster worthy public works or
shall enable or further the erection or maintenance of public structures.
B.
Those which shall otherwise lessen the burdens borne by government
or which are voluntarily undertaken by an authorized organization to
augment or supplement services which governments would normally
render to the people.
C.
§ 173-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-4
1:451
LICENSED PERIOD — A period of time not to exceed fourteen (14)
consecutive hours.
NET PROCEEDS —
ONE (1) OCCASION — The conducting of any type of game of chance during
any one (1) license period. No series of prizes on any one (1) occasion shall
aggregate more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.).
PRIZE — A sum of money or item of merchandise awarded by the authorized
organization to a participant in any one (1) operation or conducting of a
game of chance in which participants utilize currency for participation and
in which those who are not winners surrender their participating currency
at the conclusion of the single operation of such game of chance. No prize
for any one (1) participant in any one (1) operation or conducting of such
single game of chance shall exceed the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.).
If a prize is awarded based on odds, only that portion in excess of the
winning participant's bet shall be considered as a prize. For the purposes of
this chapter, the value of a prize which consists of merchandise shall be the
actual cost of the item of such merchandise.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown.
TOWN CLERK — The Town Clerk of the Town of Smithtown.
§ 173-5. Enforcement.
The Town Clerk is hereby delegated the authority granted to the Town
Board by the New York State Games of Chance Licensing Law, Article 9-A
of the General Municipal Law, in relation to the issuance, amendment and
cancellation of licenses, the conduct of investigations and hearings and the
collection and transmission of fees.
§ 173-6. Restrictions on conduct of games.
In relation to the gross receipts from one (1) or more occasions of
games of chance, the amount that shall remain after deducting the
reasonable sums necessarily and actually expended for supplies and
equipment, prizes, stated rental, if any, bookkeeping or accounting
services according to a schedule of compensation prescribed by the
New York State Racing and Wagering Board, janitorial services and
utility supplies, if any, license fees and the cost of bus transportation if
authorized by the division.
A.
In relation to the gross rent received by an organization licensed to
conduct such games for the use of its premises by another licensee,
the amount that shall remain after deducting the reasonable sums
necessarily and actually expended for janitorial services and utility
supplies directly attributable thereto, if any.
B.
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization, other than a
licensee under the provisions of this chapter, shall conduct such game
or shall lease or otherwise make available for conducting games of
§ 173-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 173-6
1:452
§ 173-7. Application for license.
chance a hall or other premises for any consideration whatsoever,
direct or indirect, except as provided in § 173-7 of this Games of Chance
Licensing Law.
B. No game of chance shall be held, operated or conducted on or within
any leased premises if the rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly
or partly, on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits
derived from the operation of such game.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of this
chapter shall purchase or receive any supplies or equipment
specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of games of
chance from other than an authorized supplier of games of chance
equipment licensed by the New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of chance and of any rental shall
be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
E. No series of prizes on any one (1) occasion of games of chance shall
aggregate more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.).
F. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of one hundred dollars ($100.) in
any operation or conducting of a single game of chance. No single
wager shall exceed ten dollars ($10.).
G. No person, except a bona fide member of any such organization, or its
auxiliary or affiliated organization, shall participate in the management
or operation of such game as set forth in § 173-12 of this chapter.
H. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any such game.
I. The conduct of games of chance on Sundays is only permitted when it is
specifically provided for in the license issued. No games, however, shall
be conducted on Easter Sunday, Christmas Day or New Year's Eve.
J. No hall or other premises may be used for the conduct of games of
chance unless said hall or other premises, where applicable, complies
with the provisions of Title 12 NYCRR, Subpart 36, relative to places of
public assembly.
A. License to conduct games of chance.
(1) Each applicant for a license to conduct games of chance shall, after
obtaining an identification number from the New York State Racing
and Wagering Board, file with the Town Clerk a written application
therefor, in a form to be prescribed by the New York State Racing
and Wagering Board and/or the Town Clerk, duly executed and
verified, in which shall be stated:
§ 173-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-7
1:453
(a) The name and address of the applicant, together with sufficient
facts relating to its incorporation and organization to enable
the Town Clerk to determine whether or not it is a bona fide
authorized organization.
(b) The names and home addresses of its officers and the place or
places where and the date or dates and the time or times when
the applicant intends to conduct games under the license
applied for.
(c) The amount of rent to be paid or other consideration to be
given directly or indirectly for such occasion for use of the
premises of another authorized organization licensed under
this chapter to conduct such games or for the use of the
premises of an authorized games of chance lessor.
(d) All other items of expense intended to be incurred or paid in
connection with the holding, operating and conducting of such
games of chance, and the names and addresses of the persons
to whom, and the purposes for which, they are to be paid.
(e) The purposes to which the entire net proceeds of such games
are to be devoted and in what manner; that no commission,
salary, compensation, reward or recompense will be paid to
any person for conducting such game or games or for assisting
therein, except as in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law
otherwise provided; and such other information as shall be
prescribed by such rules and regulations of the New York State
Racing and Wagering Board.
(2) In each application there shall be designated not fewer than four
(4) active members of the applicant organization under whom the
game or games of chance will be conducted, and to the application
shall be appended a statement executed by the members so
designated that they will be responsible for the conduct of such
games in accordance with the terms of the license and the rules
and regulations of the New York State Racing and Wagering Board,
Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law and the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Licensing of authorized games of chance lessor. Each applicant for a
license to lease premises to a licensed organization for the purpose of
conducting games of chance therein shall file with the Town Clerk a
written application therefor, in a form to be prescribed by the New York
State Racing and Wagering Board and/or the Town Clerk, duly executed
and verified, which shall set forth the name and address of the
applicant, the designation and address of the premises intended to be
covered by the license sought, a statement that the applicant in all
respects conforms to the specifications contained in the definition of
"authorized organization" set forth in § 173-4 of this chapter and such
§ 173-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 173-7
1:454
§ 173-8. Conditions of licensing; fees.
other information as shall be prescribed by the New York State Racing
and Wagering Board and the provisions of this chapter.
A. The Town Clerk shall make an investigation of the qualifications of each
applicant and the merits of each application with due expedition after
the filing of the application.
(1) Issuance of licenses to conduct games of chance. If the Town Clerk
shall determine that the applicant is duly qualified to be licensed to
conduct games of chance under this chapter and the member or
members of the applicant designated in the application to conduct
games of chance are bona fide active members of the applicant and
are persons of good moral character and have never been
convicted of a crime, or, if convicted, have received a pardon or a
certificate of good conduct; that such games are to be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the New York State Racing and
Wagering Board; and that the proceeds thereof are to be disposed
of as provided by this chapter, and if the Town Clerk is satisfied that
no commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense
whatsoever will be paid or given to any person holding, operating
or conducting or assisting in the holding, operation and conduct of
any such games except as in this chapter otherwise provided and
that no prize will be given in excess of the sum or value of one
hundred dollars ($100.) in any single game and that the aggregate
of all prizes given on one (1) occasion under said license shall not
exceed the sum or value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.), said
Town Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant for the conduct of
games of chance upon the payment of a license fee of twenty-five
dollars ($25.) for each license period.
(2) Issuance of licenses to authorized games of chance lessors. If the
Town Clerk shall determine that the applicant seeking to lease a
hall or premises for the conduct of games of chance to an
authorized organization is duly qualified to be licensed under this
chapter; that the applicant satisfies the requirements for an
authorized games of chance lessor as defined in § 173-4 of this
chapter; that there is a public need and that public advantage will
be served by the issuance of such license; that the applicant has
filed its proposed rent for each game of chance occasion; that there
is no diversion of the funds of the proposed lessee from the lawful
purposes as defined in this chapter; and that such leasing of a hall
or premises for the conduct of such games is to be in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the New York State Racing and
Wagering Board, said Town Clerk shall issue a license permitting
the applicant to lease said premises for the conduct of such games
to the authorized organization or organizations specified in the
application during the period therein specified or such shorter
§ 173-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-8
1:455
period as the Town Clerk shall determine, but not to exceed one (1)
year, upon the payment of a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.).
(3) Fingerprinting. [Added 7-10-1979]
(a) The applicant shall furnish the Town Clerk with a full set of the
applicant's fingerprints.
(b) The Town Clerk shall be authorized to forward the applicant's
fingerprints to the Division of Criminal Justice Services for a
criminal background investigation.
(c) The applicant shall be charged a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.) for
a full search and return from the Division of Criminal Justice
Services, said fee to be made payable to the Town Clerk of the
Town of Smithtown.
B. On or before the 30th day of each month, the Comptroller of the Town of
Smithtown, on behalf of the Town Clerk, shall transmit to the State
Comptroller a sum equal to fifty percent (50%) of all authorized games
of chance lessor license fees and the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.) per
license period for the conduct of games of chance collected by such
Town Clerk pursuant to this section during the preceding calendar
month.
C. No license shall be issued under this chapter which shall be effective for
a period of more than one (1) year.
D. No game of chance shall be conducted with any equipment except such
as shall be owned or leased by the authorized organization so licensed
or used without payment of any compensation therefor by the licensee.
E. At least two (2) officers, directors, trustees or clergy of the authorized
organization shall, upon request, certify under oath that the persons
assisting in holding, operating or conducting any game of chance are
bona fide members of such authorized organization or auxiliary or
affiliated organization. Upon request by the chief law enforcement
officer of Suffolk County, any such person involved in such games of
chance shall certify that he or she has no criminal record.
F. No items of expense shall be incurred or paid in connection with the
conducting of any game of chance pursuant to any license issued under
this chapter except those that are reasonable and are necessarily
expended for games of chance supplies and equipment, prizes, stated
rental, if any, bookkeeping or accounting services according to a
schedule of compensation prescribed by the New York State Racing and
Wagering Board, janitorial services and utility supplies, if any, license
fees and the cost of bus transportation if authorized by said Board.
G. Charge for admission and participation; amount of prizes; award of
prizes. Not more than two dollars ($2.) shall be charged by any licensee
for admission to any room or place in which any game or games of
§ 173-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 173-8
1:456
chance are to be conducted under any license issued under this chapter.
Every winner shall be determined and every prize shall be awarded and
delivered within the same calendar day as that upon which the game
was played. No alcoholic beverage shall be offered or given as a prize
in any game of chance.
H. Advertising games. No game of chance conducted or to be conducted in
the Town of Smithtown shall be advertised as to its location, the time
when it is to be or has been played, the prizes awarded or to be
awarded or transportation facilities to be provided to such game by
means of newspapers, radio, television or sound trucks or by means of
billboards, posters or handbills or any other means addressed to the
general public, except that one (1) sign not exceeding twenty-four (24)
square feet in area may be displayed on or adjacent to the premises
owned or occupied by a licensed authorized organization; and when an
organization is licensed to conduct games of chance on the premises of
an authorized games of chance lessor, one (1) additional such sign may
be displayed on or adjacent to the premises in which the games are to
be conducted. Additional signs may be displayed upon any fire-fighting
equipment belonging to any licensee which is a volunteer fire company
or upon any first aid or first aid and rescue squad in and throughout the
communities served by such volunteer fire company or such first aid or
first aid and rescue squad, as the case may be.
I. Statement of receipts and expenses; additional license fees. Within
seven (7) days after the conclusion of any license period, the authorized
organization which conducted the same and its members who were in
charge thereof and, when applicable, the authorized organization which
rented its premises therefor shall each furnish to the Town Clerk a
statement subscribed by the member in charge and affirmed by him as
true, under the penalties of perjury, showing the amount of the gross
receipts derived therefrom and each item of expense incurred or paid
and each item of expenditure made or to be made, other than prizes;
the name and address of each person to whom each such item of
expense has been paid or is to be paid, with a detailed description of the
merchandise purchased or the services rendered therefor; the net
proceeds derived from the conduct of games of chance during such
license period and the use to which such proceeds have been or are to
be applied; and a list of prizes offered and given with the respective
values thereof, and it shall be the duty of each licensee to maintain and
keep such books and records as may be necessary to substantiate the
particulars of each such statement.
J. Examination of books and records; examination of officers and
employees; disclosure of information.
(1) The Town Clerk, the chief law enforcement officer of Suffolk County
and the New York State Racing and Wagering Board shall have
power to examine or cause to be examined the books and records
of:
§ 173-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-8
1:457
§ 173-9. Amendment of license.
(a) Any authorized organization which is or has been licensed to
conduct games of chance, so far as they may relate to games of
chance, including the maintenance, control and disposition of
net proceeds derived from games of chance or from the use of
its premises for games of chance, and to examine any manager,
officer, director, agent, member or employee thereof, under
oath, in relation to the conduct of any such game under any
such license, the use of its premises for games of chance or the
disposition of net proceeds derived from games of chance, as
the case may be.
(b) Any authorized games of chance lessor, so far as it may relate
to leasing premises for games of chance, and to examine said
lessor or any manager, officer, director, agent or employee
thereof, under oath, in relation to such leasing.
(2) Any information so received shall not be disclosed except so far as
may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of
this chapter.
K. Appeals from the decision of the Town Clerk to the New York State
Racing and Wagering Board. Any applicant for or holder of any license
issued or to be issued under this chapter aggrieved by any action of the
Town Clerk to whom such application has been made or by whom such
license has been issued may appeal to the New York State Racing and
Wagering Board from the determination of said Town Clerk by filing
with such Town Clerk written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days
after the determination or action appealed from, and upon the hearing
of such appeal, the evidence, if any, taken before such Town Clerk and
any additional evidence may be produced and shall be considered in
arriving at a determination of the matters in issue, and the action of the
New York State Racing and Wagering Board upon said appeal shall be
binding upon the Town Clerk and all parties to said appeal.
L. Exemption from prosecution. No person, association, corporation or
organization lawfully conducting or participating in the conduct of
games of chance or permitting the conduct upon any premises owned
or leased by him or it under any license lawfully issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be liable to prosecution or conviction for violation of any
provision of Article 225 of the Penal Law or any other law or ordinance,
to the extent that such conduct is specifically authorized by this
chapter, but this immunity shall not extend to any person or corporation
knowingly conducting or participating in the conduct of games of
chance under any license obtained by any false pretense or by any false
statement made in any application for license or otherwise or
permitting the conduct upon any premises owned or leased by him or it
of any game of chance conducted under any license known to him or it
to have been obtained by any such false pretense or statement.
§ 173-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 173-9
1:458
§ 173-10. Form, content and display of license.
§ 173-11. Control and supervision of games.
A. No application for the issuance of a license to an authorized
organization shall be denied by the Town Clerk until after a hearing
held by the Town Clerk on due notice to the applicant, at which the
applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the qualifications of the
applicant and the merits of the application.
B. Any license issued under this chapter may be amended upon
application made to such Town Clerk, if the subject matter of the
proposed amendment could lawfully and properly have been included in
the original license, and upon payment of such additional license fee, if
any, as would have been payable if it had been so included.
A. Each license to conduct games of chance shall be in such form as shall
be prescribed in the rules and regulations of the New York State Racing
and Wagering Board and shall contain a statement of the name and
address of the licensee, the names and addresses of the member or
members of the licensee under whom the games will be conducted, the
place or places where and the date or dates and time or times when
such games are to be conducted and the purposes to which the entire
net proceeds of such games are to be devoted and, if any prize or prizes
are to be given in cash, a statement of the amounts of the prizes
authorized so to be given and any other information which may be
required by said rules and regulations to be contained therein. Each
license issued for the conduct of any games shall be conspicuously
displayed at the place where the same is to be conducted, at all times
during the conduct thereof.
B. Each license to lease premises for conducting games of chance will be
in such form as shall be prescribed in the rules and regulations of the
New York State Racing and Wagering Board and shall contain a
statement of the name and address of the licensee and the address of
the leased premises, the amount of permissible rent and any
information which may be required by said rules and regulations to be
contained therein. Each such license shall be conspicuously displayed
upon such premises at all times during the conduct of games of chance.
A. The chief law enforcement officer of the County of Suffolk shall have
and exercise rigid control and close supervision over all games of
chance conducted under such license to the end that the same are fairly
conducted in accordance with the provisions of such license, the
provisions of the rules and regulations promulgated by the New York
State Racing and Wagering Board and the provisions of this chapter,
and such chief law enforcement officer and the New York State Racing
and Wagering Board shall have the power and the authority to
temporarily suspend any license issued by the Town Clerk, pending a
hearing held by the Town Clerk, and after notice and hearing, the New
§ 173-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-11
1:459
§ 173-12. Operation and conduct of games.
§ 173-13. Violations in license applications or conduct of games;
penalties for offenses.
Any person, association, corporation or organization who or which shall:
York State Racing and Wagering Board may suspend or revoke the
same and shall have the right of entry by their respective officers and
agents at all times into any premises where any game of chance is
being conducted or where it is intended that any such game shall be
conducted or where any equipment being used or intended to be used
in the conduct thereof is found, for the purpose of inspecting the same.
An agent of the appropriate chief law enforcement officer shall make an
on-site inspection during the conduct of all games of chance licensed
pursuant to this chapter.
B. The service of alcoholic beverages is subject to the applicable
provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law; beer may be offered
for sale during the conduct of games of chance, but the offering of all
other alcoholic beverages is prohibited.
A. Participation by persons under eighteen (18). No person under the age
of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted to play any game or games of
chance conducted pursuant to any license issued under this chapter. No
person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted to
conduct or assist in the conduct of any game of chance conducted
pursuant to any license issued under this chapter.
B. Frequency of games. No game or games of chance shall be conducted
under any license issued under this chapter more often than twelve (12)
times in any calendar year. Games shall be conducted only between the
hours of 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday and Thursday and only between the hours of 12:00 noon on
Friday and 2:00 a.m. Saturday, and only between the hours of 12:00
noon on Saturday and 2:00 a.m. Sunday. The 2:00 a.m. closing period
shall also apply to a legal holiday.
C. Persons operating and conducting games; equipment; expenses;
compensation. No person shall hold, operate or conduct any game of
chance under any license issued under this chapter except an active
member of the authorized organization to which the license is issued,
and no person shall assist in the holding, operating or conducting of any
game of chance under such license except such an active member or a
member of an organization or association which is an auxiliary to the
licensee or a member of an organization or association of which such
licensee is an auxiliary or a member of an organization or association
which is affiliated with the licensee by being, with it, auxiliary to
another organization or association.
§ 173-11 SMITHTOWN CODE § 173-13
1:460
§ 173-14. When effective.
The provisions of this chapter shall remain inoperative in the Town of
Smithtown unless and until a proposition therefor submitted at a general
election in the Town of Smithtown shall be approved by a vote of the
majority of the qualified electors in such municipality voting thereon. Upon
approval by said electors, this chapter shall be effective on the first day of
January next succeeding said election.45
A. Make any material false statement in any application for any license
authorized to be issued under this chapter;
B. Pay or receive for the use of any premises for conducting games of
chance a rental in excess of the amount specified as the permissible
rent in the license provided in § 173-7 of this chapter;
C. Fail to keep such books and records as shall fully and truly record all
transactions connected with the conducting of games of chance or the
leasing of premises to be used for the conduct of games of chance;
D. Falsify or make any false entry in any books or records so far as they
relate in any manner to the conduct of games of chance, to the
disposition of the proceeds thereof and to the application of the rents
received by any authorized organization;
E. Divert or pay any portion of the net proceeds of any game of chance to
any person, association or corporation, except in furtherance of one (1)
or more of the lawful purposes defined in this chapter; or
F. Operate or conduct a game or games of chance unless in accordance
with a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter or unless on behalf
of a bona fide organization of persons sixty (60) years of age or over,
commonly referred to as "senior citizens," solely for the purpose of
amusement and recreation of its members, where the organization has
applied for and received an identification number from the New York
State Racing and Wagering Board, no player or person furnishes
anything of value for the opportunity to participate, the prizes awarded
or to be awarded are nominal, no person other than a bona fide active
member of the organization participates in the conduct of the games
and no person is paid for conducting or assisting in the conduct of the
game or games, shall forfeit any license heretofore issued under this
chapter, where applicable, and shall be ineligible to apply for a license
under this chapter for at least one (1) year thereafter and, in addition,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to one
thousand dollars ($1,000.) or imprisonment for up to six (6) months, or
both.
45.Editor's Note: This chapter was approved by a majority vote of the qualified electors of the
Town of Smithtown at the general election held November 2, 1976.
§ 173-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-15
1:461
§ 173-15. Amendment of provisions.
This chapter may be amended from time to time or repealed by the Town
Board of the Town of Smithtown by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of such Town
Board, and such amendment or repeal, as the case may be, may be made
effective and operative not earlier than thirty (30) days following the date
of enactment of the ordinance affecting such amendment or repeal, as the
case may be, and the approval of a majority of the electors of the Town of
Smithtown shall not be a condition prerequisite to the taking effect of such
chapter.
Chapter 177
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recycling Committee — See Ch. 61.
Cleanup of handbills — See Ch. 181.
Junkyard and junk dealers — See Ch. 194.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 221.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 245.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 293.
Abandoned vessels — See Ch. 303.
Water pollution — See Ch. 315.
§ 173-15 SMITHTOWN CODE § 173-15
1:462
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 177-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as "Solid Waste
Management Law of the Town of Smithtown."
§ 177-2. Intent and purpose.
It is hereby found that in the exercise of sound management and the
supervision and control over the storage, collection, transportation,
processing and disposal of solid wastes, the Town of Smithtown is
exercising a central and proper governmental function in accordance with
the express policy of the State of New York and that the powers and duties
enumerated herein constitute proper Town purposes to benefit the health,
safety and general welfare of the Town of Smithtown and its residents.
Therefore, pursuant to the Town Law, General Municipal Law and the
Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New York for the purpose of
providing on a townwide basis for the management, supervision and control
of the collection, transportation, processing and disposal of all solid waste
generated or existing within the Town of Smithtown, including without
limitation the power to require the segregation of wastes and to require the
delivery of solid waste to such solid waste management facility as may be
designated by the Town Board from time to time, the Town Board of the
Town of Smithtown does hereby adopt this chapter to promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the Town of Smithtown.
§ 177-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to residential and commercial
solid waste and the collection thereof. In the event that any conflict between
the provisions of this chapter and a contract by and between a carter and
the Town of Smithtown exists, the conflicting provision of the contract shall
prevail.
§ 177-4. Definitions. [Amended 12-9-1991 by L.L. No. 12-1991;
12-21-1993 by L.L.No. 11-1993; 1-10-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE WASTE — Only solid waste acceptable at specific Towndesignated
facilities, including but not limited to garbage, trash, rubbish,
refuse, construction and demolition materials and yard waste that are
normally disposed of by and collected from residential, commercial,
industrial, governmental or community facilities or institutional
establishments, except that acceptable wastes shall not include
unacceptable waste and recyclables.
§ 177-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-4
1:463
ASHES — The combustion residue from the burning of combustible
substances, such as wood, coal, ash and papers, as well as refuse from fires
to structures and glass, crockery, sweepings, dust, brick, metal and other
inorganic material.
BULK ITEMS — Nonputrescible items and materials, which include large
items of building rubble and tree stumps not exceeding 40 pounds in
weight, but not including household bulk items.
CLEAN FILL — Material consisting of concrete, steel, wood, sand, dirt,
soil, glass, construction and demolition debris and other recognizable inert
material.
COLLECT — To pick up, collect, remove, load or otherwise perform the
collection of solid waste, acceptable wastes, unacceptable wastes or
hazardous waste. The picking up, collection, removal, loading or
transporting upon or across roads within the Town of Smithtown of solid
wastes, acceptable wastes, unacceptable wastes or hazardous wastes shall
constitute prima facie evidence of operating, engaging in, conducting or
causing the operation of or engaging in the business of or a business
engaged in the collection or disposal of solid waste.
COMMUNITY FACILITY — Includes but is not limited to airports, heliports,
bus passenger shelters, cemeteries, churches or similar places of worship,
parish houses or convents, day camps, day-care centers, golf courses,
country clubs, hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes or rest homes,
horsemanship schools, stables for the boarding, sale and/or training of
horses, membership clubs, nursery schools, parks, playgrounds or
recreational areas or facilities operated by a municipality, public libraries,
museums, public passenger transportation stations or terminals, public
utility facilities, schools of whatever kind or nature which are accredited by
the New York State Education Department and swimming or boating clubs.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION (C & D) DEBRIS — Uncontaminated
solid waste resulting from the construction, remodeling, repair and
demolition of utilities, structures and roads and uncontaminated solid waste
resulting from land clearing. Such waste includes but is not limited to
bricks, concrete and other masonry materials, soil, rock, wood (including
painted, treated and coated wood and wood products), land clearing debris,
wall coverings, plaster, drywall, plumbing fixtures, nonasbestos insulation,
roofing shingles and other roof coverings, asphaltic pavement, glass,
plastics that are not sealed in a manner that conceals other wastes, empty
buckets 10 gallons or less in size and having no more than one inch
of residue remaining on the bottom, electrical wiring and components
containing no hazardous liquids and pipe and metals that are incidental to
any of the above. Solid waste that is not C & D debris (even if resulting from
the construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of utilities, structures
and roads and land clearing) includes but is not limited to asbestos waste,
garbage, corrugated container board, electrical fixtures containing
hazardous liquids such as fluorescent light ballasts or transformers,
fluorescent lights, carpeting, furniture, appliances, tires, drums, containers
greater than 10 gallons in size, any containers having more than one inch
§ 177-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-4
1:464
of residue remaining on the bottom and fuel tanks. Specifically excluded
from the definition of "construction and demolition debris" is solid waste
(including what otherwise would be "construction and demolition debris")
resulting from any processing technique, other than that employed at a New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) approved
C & D debris processing facility, that renders individual waste components
unrecognizable, such as pulverizing or shredding. Also, waste contained in
an illegal disposal site may be considered C & D debris if the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation determines that such waste is
similar in nature and content to C & D debris.
COMPACTION FACTOR — An empirical multiplier applied to those accounts
serviced by mechanical compactor-type containers. The purpose of this
factor is to equate the yards of compacted material to yards of
noncompacted material. The compaction factor for loose and noncompacted
material shall be as determined by the Town of Smithtown Solid Waste
Coordinator.[Added 6-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997]
CONTAINER — Any receptacle from which or in which solid waste is
collected by commercial waste collectors. Such containers shall include
but not be limited to front, side and rear load dumpsters, roll-off boxes,
transfer trailers, compactors, refuse cubicles, garbage cans, barrels and
trash bags.[Added 6-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997]
CONTAINER YARD — One cubic yard of solid waste container
capacity.[Added 6-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997]
DISPOSAL SERVICE UNIT (DSU) — A unit equal to one container
yard.[Added 6-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997]
DSU RATE (DSUR) — That rate, per disposal service unit, utilized in
calculating nonresidential disposal fees.[Added 6-10-1997 by L.L. No.
3-1997]
DUMPSTER — A solid waste storage or collection container which is
designed to be emptied by tipping or lifting into a garbage truck or
container by use of mechanical arms or pulleys on the truck or container.
EXPLOSIVES — A chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and
which contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in
such proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction,
by concussion, by percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound or
mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the
resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on
contiguous objects or of destroying life, limb or property.
GARBAGE — Putrescible solid waste which includes offal, filth, dead
animals, refuse, animal or vegetable matter, wastepapers, household refuse
or other waste incident to and resulting from the use, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food.
GRASS — Green lawn clippings.
§ 177-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-4
1:465
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Pathological, biological, septic, cesspool or other
human wastes, human and animal remains, radioactive and toxic waste and
other wastes which, according to any applicable law from time to time
in effect, are defined or classified as hazardous or as requiring special
handling in their collection, storage, treatment or disposal, including those
described in 40 CFR 261.3 promulgated by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant to the Resource Conservation Recovery Act of
1976, 90 Stat. 2806, 42 U.S.C. § 6901, such as, without limitation, cleaning
fluids, crankcase oils, cutting oils, paints, acids, caustic poisons, drugs and
refuse of similar nature.
HIGH MANAGERIAL AGENT — An individual or member of an
unincorporated association or partnership or an officer of a corporation or
any other agent, servant, employee, spouse, child or in-law in a position
of comparable authority with respect to the formulation of a policy of the
unincorporated association partnership or corporation or the supervisor in
the managerial capacity of subordinate employees.
HOUSEHOLD BULK ITEMS — Nonputrescible items and materials which
include household appliances, which are commonly found within the
confines of a residential home, which include such items as but not limited
to refrigerators, dishwashers, washing machines, dryers, compactors and
hot-water heaters; furniture, such as but not limited to couches, chairs, love
seats, tables, bookshelves; and rugs and carpeting. "Household bulk items"
shall not be deemed to include material or debris generated as a result of
household renovation or alteration projects, as well as radiators, windows,
construction lumber or material.
LIQUID WASTE — The liquid and waste solids contained in subsurface
sewerage disposal systems and appurtenances, waste, sludge generated at
sewerage treatment plants, wastewater from laundry operations, industrial
wastewater and material which requires a State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (SPDES) permit.
LITTER — All solid waste which is deposited in any location other than a
container or device used for the collection or storage of solid waste.
LOW-DENSITY WASTE GENERATOR — All commercial, industrial,
institutional and multifamily operations or establishments which generate
low-density solid waste as determined by the Solid Waste Coordinator of the
Town of Smithtown.[Added 5-12-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
MEDICAL WASTE — Includes but is not limited to the following:
hypodermic needles, intravenous tubing with or without the needles
attached, syringes, test tubes, blood samples, pipettes, lances, scalpels,
smears, blood gauze wraps, pathological waste, human blood, cultures,
human body parts or tissues and/or any material defined as medical waste in
the Federal Medical Waste Tracking Act of 1988 (42 U.S.C. § 6992 et seq.).
MINIMAL WASTE GENERATOR — All commercial, industrial, institutional
and multifamily operations or establishments that generate minimal
amounts of solid waste as determined by the Solid Waste Coordinator of
the Town of Smithtown, which waste is commonly disposed of utilizing
§ 177-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-4
1:466
containers such as plastic bags, bundles, boxes, paper bags, garbage pails
or other means, excluding dumpsters or rolloff containers.[Added
5-12-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
NEWSPAPER — A publication made of newsprint but shall not be construed
to mean magazines, periodicals or other paper products of any nature
whatsoever.
NONRESIDENTIAL — All commercial, industrial, institutional and
multifamily operations or establishments, whether totally or partially
occupied, or any other use which results in the generation of solid waste or
wherein commercial solid waste is being or is capable of being generated.
This term shall exclude all dwellings as served by the Town of Smithtown's
Residential Collection Districts.[Added 6-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997]
ON-DEMAND SERVICE WASTE GENERATOR — Irregular and infrequent
collection service of commercial, industrial, institutional and multifamily
operations or establishments as determined by the Town of Smithtown Solid
Waste Coordinator.[Added 5-12-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
OPERATOR — Any individual, corporation, department, bureau or other
entity duly authorized by the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown to
manage, operate or run a designated solid waste management facility and
who or which has the authority and knowledge to make and implement
decisions regarding operating conditions at the facility.
PERMANENT DUMPSTER OR ROLL-OFF — Any dumpster or roll-off
located pursuant to an approved site plan.
PERSON — Includes any person or corporation, including the officers,
directors, stockholders and trustees thereof, copartnership, unincorporated
associations or owner or owners, mortgagee or vendee in possession,
assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or agent directly or
indirectly in control of a building within the confines of the Town, as defined
herein.
RECYCLABLES — Solid waste that exhibits the potential to be used
repeatedly in place of a virgin material, and shall include the following:
A. All glass containers.
B. All metal cans and containers.
C. Newspaper.
D. Corrugated cardboard.
E. Office paper.
F. Magazines.
G. Plastics, No. 1 and No. 2 types.
H. All scrap metals.
§ 177-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-4
1:467
RESOURCE RECOVERY PLANT — The mass burn solid waste disposal
resource recovery and energy-generating facility in the Town of Huntington
which is jointly used by the Town of Smithtown pursuant to a municipal
cooperation agreement dated December 19, 1989, by and between the
towns as amended from time to time.
ROLL-OFF — Any garbage collection vehicle or device in which the
container portion is not covered by a permanently affixed nonopening cover
and in which the container portion can be removed from the chassis to
facilitate either dumping or loading.
ROLL-OFF CONTAINER SERVICE — Service of providing solid waste
containers for the collection of solid waste.
SERVICED CONTAINER YARDS (SCY) — The actual monthly container
yards serviced by a licensed commercial hauler. Serviced container yards
shall be computed by using the following formula:
N x Y x CF x WCF x 4.33 = Serviced Container Yards (SCY) per month
Where:
N = Number of containers.
Y = Container size in cubic yards [Fractional yards shall be
rounded to the nearest 0.25 (25/100) yard.]
CF = Compaction factor.
WCF = Weekly collection frequency.
4.33 = Monthly conversion factor.
SCY = Serviced container yards.
SOLID WASTE — All putrescible and nonputrescible materials or
substances discarded or rejected as having served their original intended
use or as being spent, useless, worthless or in excess to the owner at the
time of such discard or rejection, including but without limitation garbage,
refuse, litter, rubbish, industrial waste, commercial waste, sludge, ashes,
contained gaseous material, incinerator residue, construction and
demolition debris, landscaping debris, grass, leaves, brush, discarded
automobiles and offal, but not including solid or dissolved material and
domestic sewerage or substances and materials in noncontainerized
gaseous form. Recyclables or recycling material are also "solid waste"
within the meaning of this chapter.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — A solid waste storage and collection
container of two cubic yards or greater in capacity which is designed to be
emptied by a forklift or a forklift truck or any other device which can move,
lift or transport such container.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY — The Municipal Services Facility
on Old Northport Road in the Town of Smithtown, the mass burn solid
waste disposal resource recovery and energy-generating facility in the Town
of Huntington which is to be jointly used by the Town of Smithtown and
the Town of Huntington, together known as the "towns," pursuant to a
§ 177-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-4
1:468
municipal cooperation agreement dated December 19, 1989, by and
between the towns and any other similar facility, plant, work system,
building, structure, improvement, machinery, equipment, fixture or other
real or personal property which is to be used, occupied or employed for
the receiving, transporting, storage, processing or disposal of solid waste or
the recovery by any means of any material or energy product or resource
therefrom, including but not limited to recycling centers, transfer stations,
baling facilities, rail hall or maritime facilities, processing systems, sanitary
landfills, resource recovery facilities, steam- and electric-generating and
transmission facilities, including auxiliary facilities to supplement or
temporarily replace such facilities, and facilities for compacting,
composting or pyrolyzation of solid wastes, incinerators and other solid
waste disposal reduction or conversion facilities and resource recovery
equipment and disposal equipment, as defined in Subdivisions 4 and 5 of
§ 51-0903 of the Environmental Conservation Law of the State of New York,
as the same may be amended from time to time.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The segregation or separation of recyclables from
the solid waste stream for separate collection, sale or other disposition at
the point of origin.
STORAGE — The containment of any solid waste such that it does not
constitute disposal of that waste.
TEMPORARY DUMPSTER OR ROLL-OFF — Any dumpster or roll off, other
than a permanent dumpster or roll off.
TOWN — All areas within the jurisdictional and corporate boundaries of the
Town of Smithtown, inclusive of any incorporated village.
TOWN CLERK — The Town Clerk of the Town of Smithtown.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE — Material which is likely to cause damage to
or adversely effect the operation of any facility designated by the Town
pursuant to this chapter or which may constitute a threat to health or
safety or which the acceptance of may cause a violation of law or permit
condition applicable to any Town-designated facility. Such unacceptable
waste includes but is not limited to explosives (dynamite, hand grenades,
blasting caps, ordnance, fireworks, etc.), liquid wastes (gasoline, kerosene,
turpentine, ether, naphtha, acetate, propane, butane, paints, alcohol, acids,
caustics, sewage or process wastewaters, leachate, cesspool wastes and
all inflammable or volatile liquids), offal, tar-sealed drums, pressurized
containers, propane tanks, tires, hazardous waste (as defined under federal,
state and/or local laws and regulations), pathological waste, infectious
waste, radioactive waste, human remains, animal remains and toxic waste.
WHITE GOODS — All major household kitchen appliances, to include
washing machines, dryers, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, dishwashers and
home garbage compactors.
YARD WASTE — Includes leaves, brush and grass, and can be generalized
into the following major components: grass, organic yard/garden cleanup
material, leaves, brush, branches, thatch, tangled brush piles, vines, plant
§ 177-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-4
1:469
trimmings, dead trees and logs, trees with limbs and tops intact, stumps and
root debris.
§ 177-5. License required. [Amended 12-19-1991 by L.L. No.
12-1991; 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993]
§ 177-6. License requirements; appeals. [Amended 9-7-1993 by L.L.
No. 7-1993; 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993; 4-5-1994 by L.L. No.
4-1994; 7-22-2003; 10-6-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in the Town of Smithtown to engage
in the business of storing, collecting, carting or transporting,
segregating or sorting solid waste or recyclables of any kind or nature
from or on the premises of any person or providing roll-off, dumpster,
shopbox, compactor or open container service within the Town of
Smithtown without first having secured a license from the Town Clerk.
B. In the event that any dumpster, roll-off, shopbox or compactor is located
within the borders of the Town of Smithtown, said dumpster, roll-off,
shopbox or compactor shall be required to be permitted pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, and said dumpster, roll-off, shopbox or
compactor shall have affixed to it the carter's name, phone number and
license number properly affixed thereto.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit an unlicensed
dumpster, roll-off or compactor on their premises, and allowing such
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
A. In order to obtain a license to collect, store, cart, transport, segregate
or sort or provide roll-off or open container service for solid waste in the
Town of Smithtown, a verified application shall be made to the
Department of Public Safety setting forth the following information:
(1) The name and residence address of the applicant. If the applicant is
a corporation, partnership or other business entity, the applicant
shall also provide the name and address thereof and the names and
residence addresses for all principals, officers, directors, partners
and members.
(2) The residence and business addresses of the applicant during the
past five years. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or
other business entity, the applicant shall also provide the business
and residence addresses for all principals, officers, directors,
partners and members.
(3) The applicant's business(es) for the past five years. If the applicant
is a corporation, partnership or other business entity, the applicant
shall also provide the business(es) for all principals, officers,
directors, partners and members for the past five years.
§ 177-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-6
1:470
(4) If employed by the owner of a licensed vehicle, the name and
address of such employer, together with credentials establishing
the exact relationship.
(5) If for a vehicle license, a description of the vehicle, together with
the license number or other means of identification, including a
copy of vehicle registration and insurance card.
(6) The applicant shall provide a New York State sales tax number.
(7) Individual photographs (three of each principal, each two inches by
two inches).
(8) The applicant shall furnish the Department of Public Safety with a
full set of the applicant's fingerprints.
(a) The applicant shall be charged a fee of $140, which fee shall
include the cost for a full search and retain from the Division of
Criminal Justice Service. Said fee shall be collected by the
Town of Smithtown. [Amended 12-17-2009 by L.L. No.
6-2009]
(b) The Department of Public Safety shall take the applicant's
fingerprints and forward said prints to the Division of Criminal
Justice Service for a complete criminal background and
investigation upon receipt of the appropriate fee.
(c) The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall review all
information provided by the Division of Criminal Justice
Service in connection with the applicant's criminal background
and investigation.
(9) If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other business
entity, the applicant shall furnish the name, address, and date of
birth of each and every principal, officer, director, partner, and
member, as well as the percent of ownership interest of each such
person, and an affidavit from each such person describing his or
her duties and responsibilities.
(10) The applicant shall provide a record of a prior conviction or
convictions of any crime for which the applicant plead or was found
guilty. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other
business entity, it shall also provide a record of a prior conviction or
convictions of any crime for which it plead or was found guilty.
(11) The applicant shall provide a list of any and all pending lawsuits to
which it is a party and an explanation of each pending lawsuit,
including any civil, criminal or administrative proceeding.
(12) The applicant shall provide any other information or
documentation required by the Town Clerk and/or Department of
Public Safety for the purpose of implementing the intent of this
chapter.
§ 177-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-6
1:471
§ 177-7. Commercial good faith deposit.
B. All applications and documentation shall be submitted to the
Department of Public Safety by December 31 of each year preceding
the year for which the applicant seeks a license and/or permit. Upon
receipt of any such application and documentation, the Department of
Public Safety shall review same and shall verify the truth and accuracy
of said application and documentation. The Department of Public
Safety, in order to establish the truth or accuracy of the information
contained in the application, may request any information pertinent to
the processing of said application and may, as necessary, request any
additional information during the application process and for the entire
term of said permit. If the Department of Public Safety cannot confirm
the truth or accuracy of said material contained in the application; or if
it determines that a material misrepresentation is contained therein; or
if the applicant shall have been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony
which is determined to render the applicant unfit to carry on the
aforesaid operation; provided, however, that proper consideration is
given to New York State Correction Law §§ 701 through 703-b and
§§ 751 through 753 in making any such determination; or if it
determines the applicant to be unfit or incapable of properly conducting
the aforesaid operation, it shall issue a report to the Town Clerk, who
shall deny said application. The Town Clerk shall notify the applicant
within 30 days after receipt of a completed application as to whether
the application shall be approved or denied. If the application is denied
and the applicant has been operating with in the Town prior to the
denial, then the applicant shall discontinue all operations within the
Town of Smithtown within 15 days of such notification. An applicant
who is denied a permit hereunder may request a review by the Town
Board, which shall, upon such request, review the basis for such denial
and shall determine whether such denial shall be affirmed or reversed.
C. The Town Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued.
A. As a condition to receiving a license pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, each carter or applicant shall provide and maintain at all times
with the Town of Smithtown a cash deposit or bond in the amount of:
[Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993]
(1) Twenty-five thousand dollars if the carter or applicant has not been
previously licensed to cart in the Town of Smithtown; or
(2) The greater amount of $25,000 or $75 multiplied by the highest
monthly tonnage disposed of in the Town of Smithtown for the
previous 12 months if the carter or applicant has experience or a
track record legally doing solid waste business in the Town of
Smithtown for the 12 months immediately preceding the date of
application.
B. The Town shall evaluate the amount of solid waste disposed of by each
carter or licensee every three months and recalculate the bond or cash
§ 177-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-7
1:472
§ 177-8. Insurance.
Prior to a license being issued by the Town Clerk, each applicant shall file
with the Town Clerk proof of the following insurance coverage:
deposit to reflect an amount equal to the greater of $25,000 or 75
times the highest monthly tonnage disposed of during the 12 months
immediately preceding the date of recalculation.
C. The licensee shall be required to maintained at all times the cash
deposit or bond reflecting the correct amount as calculated by the
Town. If the cash deposit or bond is an amount different than the
recalculated amount or less than the required amount for whichever
reason, then the licensee shall appropriately adjust the bond or cash
deposit to reflect the recalculated or correct amount within seven days
after being so notified by the Town Comptroller.
D. Said good faith bond or cash deposit shall be returned to the licensee
within 30 days after the Town Board has received knowledge of the
termination of the licensee or revocation of the license, less any moneys
due pursuant to the terms of this chapter. If said license is revoked
pursuant to the revocation provisions provided herein, said good faith
deposit shall be forfeited to the Town of Smithtown.
E. If the nature of the commercial carter's business is limited to the
handling of only recyclables and no use of the Town-designated disposal
facility is required under this chapter, then said commercial good faith
bond or deposit shall not be required; and further [Added 12-21-1993
by L.L. No. 11-1993]
(1) The commercial carter will be required to submit a sworn
statement to the Town indicating that the nature of the commercial
carter's business is limited to the handling of only recyclables and
that no use of the Town-designated disposal facility is necessary;
and
(2) The commercial carter will be required to comply with all other
applicable provisions of this chapter.
A. Certificate of insurance.
B. Workmen's compensation insurance.
C. Disability benefits insurance.
D. Public liability and property damage insurance. For public liability, the
minimum limits shall be $1,000,000 for any one accident subject to a
limit of $500,000 for any one person; and for damage to property of
others, the limits of coverage shall be $500,000 for all accidents,
subject to a limit of $250,000 for any one accident. The insurance policy
shall name the Town of Smithtown as additional insured. Said policies
of insurance as referenced in this section shall remain in full force and
§ 177-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-8
1:473
§ 177-9. License and permit fees. [Amended 12-19-1991 by L.L. No.
12-1991]
The license required to engage in the business of storing, collecting,
carting, transporting, segregating or sorting or providing roll-off service or
open container service for solid waste of any kind from the premises of any
person in the Town of Smithtown shall be issued by the Town Clerk upon
the payment of a fee of $750 for the first vehicle applied for by any licensee
and $350 for each additional vehicle applied for by any licensee with a tare
weight in excess of 6,000 pounds for each calendar year or fraction thereof.
Every vehicle shall require a license.
§ 177-10. License, permit and route not transferable.
effect for the duration of the license. In the event that said license fails
to renew any of said policies of insurance, it shall form the basis for
a revocation and/or denial of said license. [Amended 12-21-1993 by
L.L. No. 11-1993]
A. Any license or permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall not be transferred or assigned to any person or used by any person
other than the licensee or permittee to whom it was issued.
B. Any transfer of routes or customers or servicing of the same by the
licensee or any exchanging of routes or customers with another
licensee or other entity or unlicensed entity working under the name of
or with the licensee within the Town of Smithtown shall be a violation of
this chapter unless a written notice is mailed to the customers and the
Town of Smithtown within 10 days of the transfer or exchange.
C. Any subcontracting out, transfer or assignment of routes and/or stops
shall not be permitted unless the Town Clerk or the Town Clerk's
designee is notified, in writing, by certified mail, at least 10 days prior
to said subcontracting, transfer or assignment. Any transfer,
assignment or subcontract must be to a carter duly licensed in the Town
of Smithtown and is subject to approval by the Town Clerk, which shall
not be unreasonably withheld. Any subcontracting of any routes or
stops must be to a completely independent and unaffiliated corporation
or legal entity. [Added 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993]
(1) Failure to notify the Town of any transfer, assignment or
subcontract will be a violation of this chapter.
(2) Any transfer, assignment or subcontract must be for a period of at
least 30 days. In the event of an emergency or if a carter is unable
to tend to its stops, a route may be temporarily transferred. In the
event that a carter is claiming an emergency transfer, the carter is
obligated to notify the Town Clerk within eight hours of the
emergency situation. Said notice shall be in writing, sent to the
Town Clerk by certified mail or facsimile transmission. Said
§ 177-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-10
1:474
§ 177-11. Posting of licenses and permits. [Amended 12-21-1993 by
L.L. No. 11-1993]
§ 177-12. Vehicle requirements.
emergency shall not exceed two days unless approval is obtained
from the Town Clerk's office.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of storing,
collecting, carting, transporting, segregating or sorting or providing
roll-off or open container service for solid waste of any kind in the Town
of Smithtown unless the permit number issued by the Town of
Smithtown and attesting to the issuance of the required license or
permit is displayed in a conspicuous place upon the container used for
such purpose.
B. Unless otherwise regulated by contract with the Town, license and/or
permit numbers shall be conspicuously and permanently displayed
upon all open roll-off containers in letters or numbers not less than
three inches in height and of a contrasting color to the roll-off or open
container.
C. Only permit numbers issued and affixed by the Town of Smithtown shall
be valid.
A. Each applicant shall produce each vehicle for which a license is
required for an inspection at a time and place to be named by the
Department of Public Safety. No application will be processed by the
Town Clerk for the issuance of a license until the vehicle or vehicles
have been produced for the above purposes at the time and place fixed
by the Department of Public Safety. [Amended 9-7-1993 by L.L. No.
7-1993; 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993]
B. No license shall be issued for the use of any vehicle for the collection of
solid waste unless it is a packer-type closed body roll-off or equal or a
compartmentalized or sorter vehicle or equivalent for recyclables. The
name of the owner and permit holder of each vehicle shall be
permanently inscribed (no magnetic shields, emblems or similar
devices shall be used) on the driver's door or for roll-off containers on
the first panel at 1/2 container height in legible lettering of not less than
three inches in height and of contrasting color to the body or roll-off.
C. Certified copies of title, registration and/or lease agreements shall be
presented to any enforcement employee, director, attorney or their duly
designated deputies and assistants of the Town of Smithtown upon
request.
D. All vehicles shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be subject to
inspection by such persons as the Department of Public Safety may
designate. It shall be unlawful to store or garage any vehicle containing
solid waste of any kind. [Amended 9-7-1993 by L.L. No. 7-1993]
§ 177-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-12
1:475
§ 177-13. Term of license or permit.
§ 177-14. Surrender of license or permit.
If a licensed or permitted vehicle is sold or transferred, the license or permit
for said vehicle is void at the moment of sale or transfer, and the licensee or
permittee must surrender the license or permit held for it to the Town Clerk
within 10 days.
§ 177-15. Routes.
The Town Board shall have the right to route any and all vehicles to and
from such solid waste management facility as may be designated for the
disposal of solid waste and/or acceptable waste, and it shall be unlawful for
any vehicle to use any route not authorized by the Town Board.
E. Every collection vehicle shall be maintained, operated and used at all
times only in full compliance with all applicable provisions of federal,
state and local law and this Code and all other applicable rules and
regulations adopted thereunder. Every collection vehicle shall be
loaded at all times in such a manner and by such methods as to prevent
the release or discharge of dust and to prevent the spilling of solid or
liquid waste upon the sidewalks or streets, and every operator of a
vehicle shall remove immediately from the sidewalks or streets all solid
waste spilled, littered or thrown thereon in loading operations or in the
handling and return of receptacles or while traveling. Failure to comply
with the provisions of this section shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
F. An identification card issued by the Department of Public Safety of the
Town of Smithtown or employees of a designated solid waste
management facility shall be given to each vehicle and shall be kept
with said vehicle at all times. Upon request of any Town employee or
employee of a designated solid waste management facility, said
identification card shall be presented to the employee. [Amended
9-7-1993 by L.L. No. 7-1993]
A. A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for the calendar year
or fraction thereof for which it was issued, unless revoked or
surrendered earlier. There shall be no apportionment or pro-rata cost of
any fee in any calendar year.
B. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for the calendar year
from January 1 through December 31 or fraction thereof for which it
was issued, unless revoked or surrendered earlier.
C. All applications for a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
applied for on or before November 30 of the year preceding the year
which for a license is sought. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
11-1993]
§ 177-12 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-16
1:476
§ 177-16. Failure to collect solid waste.
It shall be the duty of each licensee to effect the collection of solid waste on
the routes and days set forth on the license application. In the event of the
failure of the licensee to effect said collections within 24 hours after the due
date of said collections or failure to collect solid waste within a time period
otherwise set forth in this chapter, the Town reserves the right to perform
said collections on behalf of the licensee and to deduct the cost of the same
from the deposit made by the licensee with the Town of Smithtown. The
Town of Smithtown shall have the further right to revoke any license for the
failure of the licensee to meet this duty and requirement. In the event that
the Town Board shall be required to perform said collections and to deduct
the cost of the same from the deposit made by the licensee, the licensee
shall be required to make an additional deposit with the Town Comptroller
in an amount equal to that so deducted within 14 days of receipt of written
demand from the Town Comptroller. In the event that the Town Comptroller
notifies the Town Board that the licensee has failed to make the additional
deposit with the Town Comptroller within the required 14 days, the Town
Board may suspend the licensee license until such time as the licensee shall
make the required additional deposit with the Town Comptroller.
§ 177-17. Origin and destination of solid waste.
A. All acceptable waste generated within the Town of Smithtown shall be
collected, transported and delivered to such solid waste management
facility or facilities within or outside the Town as the Town Board may
designate by resolution at least 10 days prior to the effective date
thereof.
B. No person authorized to collect or transport acceptable waste within
the Town of Smithtown shall dispose of acceptable waste generated
within the Town of Smithtown except at a solid waste management
facility designated by the Town Board pursuant to this section.
C. No person shall dispose of any acceptable waste except in a designated
manner pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and at a solid waste
management facility designated by the Town Board for the disposal of
the material sought to be disposed.
D. The Town Board shall provide notice of any such designation or charge
of designation at least 10 days prior to the effective date thereof.
E. All vehicles or containers containing acceptable waste and Town-owned
solid waste originating or generated within the Town of Smithtown shall
proceed directly to a solid waste management facility designated by the
Town Board. No salvaging, mixing, sorting, removal or disposal of the
waste other than prescribed herein shall be permitted. No acceptable
waste or Town-owned solid waste shall be removed from any vehicle
unless at a solid waste management facility designated by the Town
Board.
§ 177-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-18
1:477
§ 177-18. Ownership of materials; unauthorized pickups.
§ 177-19. Underground receptacles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain underground receptacles for
the deposit or storage of solid waste.
§ 177-20. Notice required for carter changes.
Each carter shall give the Town of Smithtown and the operator of the facility
three weeks' written notification of any changes in such carter's operation
which would have a material effect on delivery schedules or weight records
and shall include the effective date or dates of such changes. These include
but are not limited to the following:
A. Ownership of all solid waste shall vest irrevocably upon the Town of
Smithtown or duly authorized agent the moment the solid waste or
recyclables are placed or located at the curb, street line or immediately
adjacent to the roadway or within any easement owned by the Town of
Smithtown which parallels any street, road or highway.
B. All acceptable waste placed in dumpsters or roll-offs shall be disposed
of according to the provisions of this chapter and at a solid waste
management facility designated by the Town Board.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person without authority of the Town to
collect, pick up, remove or cause to be removed or in any manner
interfere with or disturb any solid waste or portions thereof from any
premises.
D. The Town Board shall provide notice of any such designation or change
of designation at least 10 days prior to the effective date thereof.
E. All vehicles or containers containing acceptable waste and Town-owned
solid waste originating or generated within the Town of Smithtown shall
proceed directly to a solid waste management facility designated by the
Town Board. No salvaging, mixing, sorting, removal or disposal of the
waste other than prescribed herein shall be permitted. No acceptable
waste or Town-owned solid waste shall be removed from any vehicle
unless at a solid waste management facility designated by the Town
Board.
F. All receptacles may be put out for pickup no more than 12 hours prior
to pickup and must be removed no later than 12 hours after pickup. The
receptacles must be stored away from public view so as not to cause
unsightliness and public blight. All receptacles for pickup shall be
placed at house street address frontage. [Added 12-21-1993 by L.L.
No. 11-1993]
A. A change in name and/or mailing address.
B. A change in telephone number.
§ 177-18 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-20
1:478
§ 177-21. Failure to pay bill; license suspension.
A licensee or carter's license and dumping privileges at any designated solid
waste management facility shall be suspended if any bill or debt due and
owing the Town or any of its agents is not paid on or before its scheduled
due date. Suspension shall commence the moment notification is sent by
the Town to said carter or licensee. The Town shall accord the licensee a
license revocation hearing on said matter as soon as practically and feasibly
possible.
§ 177-22. Other grounds for license suspension.
A licensee or carter license and dumping privileges at any designated solid
waste management facility shall be suspended the moment notification is
sent by the Town regarding any violation of this chapter to said carter or
licensee that a license revocation hearing has been scheduled and shall
remain suspended until a determination has been rendered by the Town
Board.
§ 177-23. through § 177-25. (Reserved)
C. A change in the trucks and containers brought into the facility.
D. A change in the number of deliveries or clients.
E. Any change, deletion or addition of officers, directors, principals or
shareholders of a corporation or partners of a partnership.
§ 177-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-23
1:479

ARTICLE II
Residential Solid Waste
§ 177-26. Effective date; article superseded. [Amended 1-10-1995
by L.L. No. 1-1995]
This article was superseded by the residential carting contracts, effective
January 1, 1992.
§ 177-27. through § 177-34. (Reserved)46
46.Editor's Note: Former §§ 177-27 through 177-29, Collection schedule; rates; permitted
quantities; rate changes, Advanced billing, and Limitation of contracts, were repealed
1-10-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995.
§ 177-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-27
1:481

ARTICLE III
Dumpster Regulations
§ 177-35. Dumpsters and roll-offs.
A. No permanent dumpster, compactor, shopbox or roll-off or their
equivalents shall be placed, located or maintained on any property
within the Town of Smithtown unless a permit number has been first
obtained for said dumpster, compactor, shopbox or roll-off from the
Department of Public Safety. [Amended 9-7-1993 by L.L. No.
7-1993; 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993]
B. All dumpsters, compactors, shopboxes and roll-offs shall be located in
such a manner that they do not obstruct or interfere with the passage of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
C. All dumpsters and compactors must be equipped with workable lids and
component parts.
D. The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the dumpster,
compactor, shopbox or roll-off shall be conspicuously displayed thereon.
[Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993]
E. No solid waste or other discarded materials or waste, including but not
limited to solid and liquid waste, which because of its quantity,
concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may
cause or significantly contribute to an increase of serious irreversible or
incapacitating reversible illness or pose a substantial present or
potential hazard to human health or environment shall be placed in any
dumpster, compactor, shopbox or roll-off by any person. [Amended
12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993]
F. Every dumpster, compactor, shopbox or roll-off must be watertight, and
every dumpster, compactor, shopbox or roll-off area shall be kept clean
and utilized in a safe, clean and orderly manner and in such a manner
as to
G. All dumpsters, compactors, shopboxes and roll-offs shall be promptly
removed or emptied when they are full. [Amended 12-21-1993 by
L.L. No. 11-1993]
H. Any dumpster, compactor, shopbox or roll-off failing to comply with any
provision of this chapter shall be deemed a hazard and every dumpster,
compactor, shopbox or roll-off left at any location after the permit for it
shall have expired or any dumpster, compactor, shopbox or roll-off left
at any location which is not well maintained shall be deemed a hazard.
At such time as a dumpster, compactor, shopbox or roll-off is deemed a
hazard, the carter or owner of said dumpster, compactor, shopbox or
roll-off and the real property owner shall be notified to remove said
dumpster, compactor shopbox or roll-off within 24 hours. If after 24
hours said dumpster or roll-off still remains in its present location, the
Town of Smithtown shall deem the dumpster, compactor, shopbox or
§ 177-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-35
1:483
§ 177-36. Annual permit. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
11-1993]
There shall be an annual permit number for a compactor, shopbox,
dumpster or roll-off which shall be for the calendar year January 1 through
December 31 or fraction thereof.
§ 177-37. Identification numbers. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
11-1993]
Permit numbers shall be assigned by the Town to all compactors, shopboxes,
dumpsters and roll-offs permitted under this chapter. All permanent
compactors, shopboxes, dumpsters and roll-offs shall be assigned a permit
number. Failure to conspicuously display said number on the dumpster,
compactor, shopbox or roll-off shall be a violation of this chapter.
§ 177-38. through § 177-41. (Reserved)
roll-off to have been abandoned and cause said dumpster, compactor,
shopbox or roll-off to be removed at the carter's or owner's or real
property owner's own expense. Said carter or owner or real property
owner shall also be charged an impound fee of $250 for each dumpster,
compactor, shopbox or roll-off impounded in addition to $50 per day
or part thereof that said dumpster, compactor, shopbox or roll-off is in
the possession of the Town of Smithtown. If said dumpster, compactor,
shopbox or roll-off is in the possession of the Town of Smithtown for
more than 10 days, it shall cause a notice to be sent to the last
registered owner of the dumpster, compactor, shopbox or roll-off by
certified mail, return receipt requested, that if said dumpster,
compactor, shopbox or roll-off is not removed from the possession of the
Town of Smithtown and all costs incurred to date are paid in full within
48 hours, the title to the dumpster, compactor, shopbox or roll-off shall
vest in the Town of Smithtown. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
11-1993]
§ 177-35 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-38
1:484
ARTICLE IV
License Suspension or Revocation
§ 177-42. Notice and hearing.
§ 177-43. Record.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown in accordance
with the adjudicatory procedures set forth herein.
B. A licensee shall be given reasonable notice of such hearing, which
notice shall be mailed postage prepaid to the licensee's last known
address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such
notice shall include:
(1) A statement of the time, place and nature of the hearing.
(2) A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the
hearing is to be held.
(3) A reference to the particular sections of the statutes, ordinances or
rules or regulations involved wherever possible.
(4) A short and plain statement of matters asserted.
C. Upon application of the licensee a more definite and detailed statement
shall be furnished. Whenever the Town of Smithtown finds that the
statement is not sufficiently definite or not sufficiently detailed, the
findings of the Town of Smithtown as to the sufficiency or definiteness
or detail of the statement or its failure or refusal to furnish a more
definite or detailed statement shall not be subject to judicial review. Any
statement furnished shall be deemed in all respects to be part of the
notice of hearing.
D. All license revocation hearings shall be conducted in the manner
wherein the accused licensee is afforded full due process of law.
E. All parties shall be afforded an opportunity to present written argument
on issues of law and an opportunity to present evidence and such
argument of issues of fact; provided, however, that nothing contained
herein shall be construed to prohibit the Town of Smithtown from
allowing parties to present oral argument within a reasonable time. In
fixing the time and place for hearings and oral argument, due regard
shall be had for the convenience of the parties, convenience of the
witnesses and the public welfare sought to be protected.
F. Unless precluded by statute, disposition may be made of any
adjudicatory proceeding by stipulation, agreed settlement consent
order, default or other informal method. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown from
convening another license revocation hearing at any future time.
§ 177-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-43
1:485
§ 177-44. Presiding officers.
Except as otherwise provided by statute, the Town of Smithtown, one or
more members of the Town Board, the Town Board or one or more hearing
officers designated and empowered by the Town Board of the Town of
Smithtown to conduct hearings shall be presiding officers. Hearings shall
be conducted in an impartial manner. Upon the filing in good faith by a
party of a timely and sufficient affidavit of personal bias or disqualification
of a presiding officer, the Town Board shall determine the matter as part of
the record in the case, and its determination shall be a matter subject to
judicial review at the conclusion of the adjudicatory proceeding. Whenever
a presiding officer is disqualified or it becomes impractical for him or her to
continue the hearing, another presiding officer may be assigned to continue
with the case, unless it is shown that substantial prejudice to the party will
result therefrom.
A. The record in a license revocation proceeding shall include:
(1) All notices, pleadings, motions and intermediate rulings.
(2) Evidence presented.
(3) A statement of matters officially noticed, except matters so obvious
that a statement of them would serve no useful purpose.
(4) Questions and offers of proof, objections thereto and rules thereon.
(5) Proposed findings and exceptions, if any.
(6) Any decision, determination, opinion, order or report rendered.
B. The Town of Smithtown shall make a complete record of all
adjudicatory proceedings conducted before it. For this purpose, unless
otherwise required by statute, the Town of Smithtown may use
whatever means it deems appropriate, including but not limited to the
use of stenographic transcriptions or electronic recording devices.
Upon request made by any party upon the Town of Smithtown within a
reasonable time but prior to the time for commencement of judicial
review of its giving notice of its decision, determination, opinion or
order, the Town of Smithtown shall prepare the record together with
any transcript of proceedings within a reasonable time and shall furnish
a copy of the record and transcript of any part thereof to any party as
that party may request. Except when any statute provides otherwise,
the Town of Smithtown is authorized to charge not more than its cost
for the preparation and furnishing of such record or transcript or any
part thereof or the rates specified in the contract between the Town of
Smithtown and a contractor, if prepared by a private contractor.
C. Findings of fact shall be based exclusively on the evidence and on
matters officially noticed.
§ 177-43 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-45
1:486
§ 177-45. Powers of presiding officers.
Except as otherwise provided by statutes, presiding officers are authorized
to:
§ 177-46. Evidence.
A. Administer oaths and affirmations.
B. Sign and issue subpoenas in the name of the Town of Smithtown at the
request of any party requiring attendance and giving of testimony by
witness and the production of books, papers, documents and other
evidence, and said subpoenas shall be regulated by the Civil Practice
Law and Rules. Nothing herein contained shall effect the authority of an
attorney for a party to issue such subpoenas under the provisions of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
C. Provide for the taking of testimony by deposition.
D. Regulate the course of the hearing, set the time and place for continued
hearings and fix the time for filing of briefs and other documents.
E. Direct the parties to appear and confer to consider the simplification of
the issues by consent of the parties.
A. Irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence or cross-examination may be
excluded. Except as otherwise provided by statute, the burden of proof
shall be on the party who initiated the proceeding. No decision,
determination or other shall be made except upon consideration of the
record as a whole or such portion thereof as may be cited by any party
to the proceeding and as supported by and in accordance with
substantial evidence. Unless otherwise provided by statute, the Town of
Smithtown need not observe the rules of evidence observed by courts
but shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized by law.
Objections to evidentiary offers may be made and shall be noted in the
record. Subject to these requirements, the Town of Smithtown may, for
the purposes of expediting hearings and when the interest of parties
will not be substantially prejudiced thereby, adopt procedures for the
submission of all or part of the evidence in written form.
B. All evidence, including records and documents, in the possession of the
Town of Smithtown which it desires to avail itself shall be offered and
made a part of the record, and all such documentary evidence may be
received in the form of copies or excerpts or by incorporation by
reference. In case of incorporation by reference, the materials so
incorporated shall be available for examination by the parties before
being received in evidence.
C. All parties shall have the right of cross-examination.
D. Official notice may be taken of all facts of which judicial notice could be
taken and of other facts within the specialized knowledge of the Town of
§ 177-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-46
1:487
§ 177-47. Decisions, determinations and orders.
Smithtown. When official notice is taken of a material fact not
appearing in the evidence in the record and of which judicial notice
could not be taken, every party shall be given notice thereof and
shall, on timely request, be afforded an opportunity prior to decision to
dispute the fact or its materiality.
A. A final decision, determination or order adverse to a party in an
adjudicatory proceeding shall be in writing or stated in the record and
shall include findings of fact and conclusions of law or reasons for the
decision, determination or order. Findings of fact, if set forth in
statutory language, shall be accompanied by a concise and explicit
statement of the underlying facts supporting the findings. If in
accordance with the Town of Smithtown rules a party submitted
proposed findings of fact, the decision, determination or order shall
include a ruling upon each proposed finding. A copy of the decision,
determination or order shall be delivered or mailed forthwith to each
party and to his or her attorney of record.
B. Unless required for the disposition of ex parte matters authorized by
law, members or employees of the Town of Smithtown assigned to
render a decision or to make findings of fact or conclusions of law in an
adjudicatory proceeding shall not communicate directly or indirectly in
connection with any issue of fact with any person or party nor in
connection with any issue of law with any party or his or her
representation except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate. Any such Town of Smithtown member or employee may:
(1) Communicate with other members of the Town of Smithtown; and
(2) Have the aid and advice of Town of Smithtown staff other than staff
which have been assigned or are engaged in the investigative or
prosecuting functions in connection with the case under
consideration or a factually related case.
C. The Town Clerk shall maintain an index by name and subject of all
written final decisions, determinations and orders rendered by the
Town Board of the Town of Smithtown in adjudicatory proceedings.
Such index and the text of any such written final decision,
determination or order shall be available for public inspection and
copying. Each decision, determination and order shall be indexed
within 60 days after having been rendered.
D. The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown may delete from any such
index, decision, determination or order any information that if disclosed
would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy under the
provisions of Subdivision 2 of § 89 of the Public Officers Law and may
also delete at the request of any person all references to trade secrets
that if disclosed would cause substantial injury to the competitive
possession of such person. Information which would reveal confidential
§ 177-46 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-47
1:488
§ 177-48. Adjournments.
Adjournment of any hearing or proceeding conducted pursuant to this
chapter shall be granted only for good cause. Written request for
adjournment shall be submitted to the hearing officer in the hearing or
proceeding or to the Town Board, as the appropriate case may be, for which
the adjournment is sought. The request must be accompanied by an affidavit
which contains sufficient detail to allow the hearing officer or the Town
Board to rule on the request.
§ 177-49. Time limits.
Under this chapter, adjudicatory proceedings shall be conducted in an
expeditious manner with all due regard for the rights of the parties
concerned. Every effort should be made by the parties to effectuate a
speedy disposition of the case.
§ 177-50. Conduct of hearings.
The hearing officer exercising discretion may elect to conduct any hearing
or proceeding under these rules ex parte after a showing that the party
who is the subject of the hearing and its representative of record have
been notified by certified mail of the pending hearing or proceeding or
otherwise served with notice of the hearing. The party who is the subject of
the hearing shall at no time be deprived the opportunity to appear. However,
if a party has been served with two written notices of hearing and fails to
appear after each notice, the hearing officer on proof of service shall have
the authority to proceed with the scheduled hearing. Proof of service shall
consist of a signed certified mail receipt or affidavit.
§ 177-51. Duties of hearing officer.
or privileged material protected by federal, state or local statute,
ordinance, rule or regulation shall be deleted from any such index
decision, determination or order.
A. At the close of the hearing or proceeding the hearing officer shall make
findings of fact and a recommendation as to the appropriate penalty or
fine to be assessed or any other recommended action to be taken. The
proposed findings of fact and the recommendation shall be transmitted
to the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown for approval and
simultaneously mailed or delivered to the parties to the proceeding. The
parties shall have an opportunity to respond, in writing, in the form of a
brief to the findings of fact and the recommendation of the hearing
officer and such response shall be directed to the Town Board for its
consideration within 15 days after the submission of the hearing
officer's recommendation to the Town Board. In their briefs submitted
in response to the findings of fact and the recommendation of the
hearing officer, the parties may not submit or discuss evidence which is
not a part of the official record of the hearing or proceeding. The Board
§ 177-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-51
1:489
§ 177-52. Fines and penalties.
At the conclusion of said hearing and as a result of the evidence adduced
thereon and upon the recommendation of the hearing officer, the Town
Board may, in its discretion, revoke said license, suspend the subject license
for a specified period of time, censure the licensee and/or impose a fine not
to exceed $25,000 per violation. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit
the authority of the Town Board to refer such violation to an appropriate
prosecutor for criminal prosecution in addition to any civil penalty assessed
under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 177-53. through § 177-57. (Reserved)
shall act on the findings of fact and the recommendation as
expeditiously as possible. The Board may affirm or reverse the findings
of fact and the recommendation of the hearing officer in whole or in
part, or it may remand and/or dismiss the proceeding based upon the
record produced at the hearing. In the event that the Town Board of
the Town of Smithtown sitting en masse hears and presides over the
hearing, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply.
B. The assessment of civil penalties under applicable law procedures shall
not preclude the referral of an appropriate violation to a prosecutor for
prosecution of criminal charges.
C. If the alleged violation has been established and the Board determines
in light of all the circumstances that the violation is not serious enough
to warrant assessment of a civil penalty or if the imposition of civil
penalties is not otherwise authorized by law, the Board in its discretion
may take such other action as appropriate, including but not limited to
written admonition or recommendation that disciplinary action be
taken or referral to a prosecutor for prosecution of criminal charges.
§ 177-51 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-53
1:490
ARTICLE V
Recycling
§ 177-58. Applicability.
All residential structures, including single- and multiple-family dwellings,
apartment buildings and all condominiums with curbside collection and
all community facilities shall be required to make provisions for the
segregation of newspapers, corrugated cardboard, glass, metal and plastic
from other solid waste for separate collection by a Town licensed carter.
§ 177-59. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PAPER RECYCLABLES —
§ 177-60. Requirements.
Shall include the following:
Clean and unsoiled paper, including newsprint, newspapers,
newspaper advertisements, supplements, comics and enclosures.
(1)
(2) Computer paper, noncarbonized and untreated.
(3) Magazines.
Corrugated boxes, cardboard cartons, pasteboard and similar
corrugated and kraft paper materials.
(4)
(5) Wrapping paper of all kinds.
A.
"Paper recyclables" shall not include those paper products that contain
a high glossy finish and shall not include telephone books.
B.
A. Recyclables shall be separated from all other solid waste.
B. Paper recyclables shall be tied in bundles not to exceed 40 pounds prior
to collection. Newspaper shall be bundled separately from magazines
and cardboard.
C. Glass, plastic and metal recyclables shall be clean and all contents shall
be removed therefrom prior to the collection. All caps and labels shall
be removed from all recyclable material prior to collection.
D. All recyclables, except cardboard and brown paper bags, shall be
placed in a designated recycling container for collection. Recyclables,
with the exception of plastic recyclables, shall not be placed in plastic
bags for collection.
§ 177-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-60
1:491
E. Bulk metal may be brought to the recycling facility by the homeowner
or left out to be removed by the Highway Department on Towndesignated
pickup days.
F. Recyclables shall not be placed in the same garbage can or container or
otherwise mixed with other forms of solid waste for collection.
G. Ownership of all recyclables shall vest irrevocably upon the Town of
Smithtown the moment the recyclables are placed or located at the
curb or street line or within any easement owned by the Town of
Smithtown which parallels any street, road or highway. [Amended
12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993]
H. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect or remove or dispose of any
solid waste or recyclable material which is the property of the Town of
Smithtown without first having obtained a license pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter.
I. A person who collects or removes solid waste or recyclables which
belong to the Town of Smithtown shall deliver and dispose of the same
at such locations and in such manner as designated by the Town of
Smithtown for such purposes. Each and every collection or disposal in
violation of this section from one or more residents shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
J. It shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of solid
waste which consists of recyclables combined with other form of solid
waste.
K. Any resident may donate or sell recyclable material to any person
whether operating for profit or not-for-profit, provided that no person
may under any circumstances collect any solid waste or recyclable
material from the curbside or street line or within any easement held by
the Town of Smithtown parallel to any street, road or highway in the
Town of Smithtown.
L. The Town Board is empowered to designate a day of the week on which
recyclables shall be collected from a particular area. Recyclables shall
not be collected from an area on any day of the week other than that
designated by the Town Board. Residential solid waste which does not
contain recyclable material shall not be collected from residences or
disposed of at any Town facility on the day designated for collection and
disposal of recyclables.
M. No person having custody or control of any property or premises in the
Town of Smithtown shall permit or cause any solid waste, including
recyclables, within his or her control to become a hazard to potential
hazard to public travel, health or safety or to become a nuisance of any
sort.
§ 177-60 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-60
1:492
§ 177-61. Commercial and industrial recycling.
§ 177-62. Commercial and industrial establishments designated.
Commercial and industrial establishments subject to the requirements of
§ 177-61 shall include all facilities, buildings, structures and establishments
other than community facilities or residential structures.
§ 177-63. through § 177-67. (Reserved)
N. No person shall place or locate any garbage, receptacle or container on
any street, road or highway at any time, except as provided by the
provisions of this chapter.
O. The Town Board or the Sanitation Department of the Town of
Smithtown shall be authorized from time to time to promulgate such
other rules or regulations as may be deemed necessary.
A. All commercial and industrial facilities that generate corrugated
cardboard waste and or recyclables shall be required to source
separate any and all corrugated cardboard materials and/or recyclables
from other solid wastes for separate collection by Town-licensed carters
at a time and place mutually convenient to both the business and the
carter. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993]
B. All corrugated cardboard and/or recyclables delivered to the Smithtown
Recycling Facility located at the Municipal Services Facility shall be
delivered Monday through Friday, except holidays, during regular
hours of operation. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993]
C. Upon the arrival at the Municipal Services Facility, commercial
collection vehicles shall identify their load as containing corrugated
cardboard materials and/or recyclables at the scale house. The vehicles
will then be directed to proceed to a designated location and unload.
[Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993]
D. No contaminated corrugated cardboard material shall be brought in or
deposited at the Municipal Services Facility. If the corrugated
cardboard is contaminated as designated by the Town's recycling
contractor and/or Town Sanitation Department personnel, the carter
will be required to remove, at the carter's own cost and expense, the
contaminated material and be subject to the fines as set forth herein.
§ 177-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-63
1:493

ARTICLE VI
Facility Operation
§ 177-68. Designated routes and destination of carters.
All carters shall proceed to a designated solid waste management facility
along routes designated by the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown.
§ 177-69. Facility instructions and procedures. [Amended
12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993]
All carters and those entering the Municipal Services Facility shall abide by
any instructions or procedures given by the Superintendent of Sanitation.
The Superintendent of Sanitation shall be responsible for the complete
operation and usage of any Town solid waste facility and the operation and
usage of all vehicles entering, leaving and conducting any activity upon or
with respect to said facility. The Superintendent of Sanitation shall make
such rules and regulations as he or she shall see fit concerning the same.
In the event that any rules or regulations established by the operator of the
Town facility are subject to any agreements with any other municipality or
governing body, said rule or regulation shall not be promulgated without
prior Town Board approval.
§ 177-70. Vehicle safety practices.
A. All carters shall follow vehicle safety practices at all times and observe
the following regulations:
(1) The speed limit at the facility is 10 miles per hour, unless otherwise
indicated.
(2) All turns require the use of signals to warn other vehicles of the
turn.
(3) Drivers of a vehicle must hold a valid driver's license and are
subject to all traffic laws and ordinances.
(4) Trucks or trailers stopped on roadways must be properly protected
by red flags by day and warning lights or reflectors by night.
(5) Never pass another vehicle on or near the crest of a hill, at any
intersection or curb or where the roadway ahead is obstructed for
any reason.
(6) Beware of slow-moving vehicles.
(7) Do not follow another vehicle too closely or at a speed which would
prevent you from stopping safely in an emergency.
(8) Before backing a vehicle, the driver should determine that the
space into which he or she will back is clear.
§ 177-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-70
1:495
§ 177-71. Facility entrance questions.
Drivers entering a designated facility shall be prepared to answer the
following questions:
§ 177-72. Weight tickets.
§ 177-73. Tare weights.
(9) When parking on a grade the driver should set the brakes properly,
leave the vehicle in gear and, if necessary, scotch the wheels.
(10) Use extreme caution when driving into or out of the building or
areas where visibility is limited.
(11)Keep the vehicle in gear when moving down grade.
(12) Special care should be taken in approaching and crossing a road.
Signals and signal lights should be fully respected.
(13) The driver must be alert to equipment defects. If a defect causes
any unsafe condition or impairs the same operation of the
equipment, operation must be suspended until the defect has been
corrected.
(14) Trucks with mechanical problems must exit the facility or, if
disabled, request towing immediately so that inbound and
outbound roads will be clear to other traffic.
(15)No vehicle exceeding New York State weight, height or length
requirements shall be permitted unless the driver is in possession
of a valid New York State permit for the particular vehicle in
question.
B. Noncompliance with this chapter may result in the driver, and for
severe violations his or her company, being denied access to any
designated facility.
A. The Town the solid waste originated in and/or was collected in.
B. Whether the load is commercial or residential solid waste.
C. The route or district number.
A. All carters are responsible for ascertaining the accuracy of their tickets
before signing. After a ticket is signed it shall be presumed to be
accurate and no claim of discrepancy may be maintained against the
Town of Smithtown or the operators of the facility.
B. Any carter who fails to sign for or fails to receive a weight ticket shall be
billed at the maximum rate for such delivery as though a weight ticket
had been signed and received.
§ 177-70 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-73
1:496
§ 177-74. Tipping area procedures; unacceptable and hazardous
waste.
§ 177-75. Emergencies.
§ 177-76. Rejected loads; nonprocessable wastes and other
hazardous wastes.
A. Any vehicle entering a designated facility for the first time shall obtain a
tare weight for each truck or container disposing of acceptable waste at
the designated facility and shall be obtained according to the
procedures of the operator of the designated facility.
B. After the initial tare weight has been obtained, the operator of the
designated facility will require tare weights on a random basis to verify
weight records. All carters shall cooperate with the operator of the
designated facility and shall follow such weighing procedures as
directed. Any carter refusing to cooperate with the operator of a
designated facility shall be barred from such facility and shall be billed
for the maximum load that could be delivered.
A. For unacceptable waste which is not hazardous waste, the carter may
be required at the direction of the operator of the designated facility to
reload such materials for disposal at another location.
B. For hazardous waste as defined by federal, state and local laws and
regulations, carters shall remain at the facility until Town, public health
and law enforcement officials arrive.
A. Carters at a designated facility who discover a fire in their trucks (hot
loads) shall be diverted to a clearly marked area of the facility property.
The carter will be directed to discharge the load onto a designated area.
B. In the event of any incident which impairs the flow of traffic or the
ability to dispose of acceptable waste at the facility, carters shall follow
directions and procedures from employees of the facility.
A. All nonprocessable waste shall be rejected from the Resource Recovery
Plant and all nonprocessable wastes, except demolition debris and
white goods, shall be rejected from the Municipal Services Facility.
Carters who have received weight tickets for loads which contain any
unacceptable waste shall not receive a credit for such deliveries.
B. The operator of the facility reserves the right to reject total or partial
loads being delivered to the facility if special handling should be
required.
C. Carters will dispose of rejected loads as prescribed by the Town.
D. The operator of any designated facility shall immediately notify the
Department of Public Safety of any attempt to deliver unacceptable
§ 177-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-76
1:497
§ 177-77. Hazardous wastes.
§ 177-78. Driver regulations.
§ 177-79. Nonprocessable wastes.
waste. Violators of any applicable law shall be subject to prosecution.
[Amended 9-7-1993 by L.L. No. 7-1993]
A. All loads coming into any solid waste management facility will be
visually inspected for the purpose of documenting any violation of
hazardous waste management laws. The Town will be notified
immediately if any suspected hazardous waste is found in a truck
delivering waste to any facility.
B. Violators of any of the laws governing the disposal of hazardous waste
will be subject to prosecution. Fines of up to $25,000 per day can be
imposed against those who knowingly violate the laws and regulations
regarding hazardous waste management.
C. Regardless of other actions, any carter who knowingly brings
hazardous waste to any facility shall be permanently barred from all
facilities.
A. All containers shall be secured. No leakage or spillage is allowed.
B. All trucks must proceed with care and follow directions issued by
appropriate employees of a designated facility.
C. Manual unloading will only be permitted in designated areas.
D. Trucks are not to bump or roll into guardrails.
E. Drivers should ascertain correct placement of containers before
releasing loads.
F. Cigarettes, cigars or other sources of combustion are strictly prohibited
in or around the facility. No hauler will possess, consume or be under
the influence of any illegal or intoxicating substances while on any
facility premises.
G. Trucks must be cleaned of loose debris before exiting the disposal area.
Any liquid or debris spilled onto roadways will be cleaned up at the
carter's expense.
H. The truck owner will be responsible for the removal and repair of all
damages relating to a roll-off container in the owner's possession that
falls into a refuse pit or discharge area at any facility.
A. Nonprocessable waste includes materials which, if present in
concentrations or quantities that in the reasonable judgment of
employees of a designated facility:
§ 177-76 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-79
1:498
(1) Would pose a substantial threat to public health or safety;
(2) May cause applicable air quality or water effluent standards to be
violated by the normal operation of a designated facility; or
(3) Have a reasonable possibility of adversely affecting the operation
of a designated facility in any material respect.
B. Nonprocessable waste includes but shall not be limited to the following:
(1) Explosives: dynamite, hand grenades, blasting caps, shotgun
shells, fireworks or any other explosives.
(2) Liquid waste: gasoline, kerosene, turpentine, waste oil, ether,
alcohol, acids, hydraulic oil, petroleum, caustics, naphtha, acetate,
solvents, propane, paints, sewage or processed wastewaters,
leachates, cesspool and other human wastes or flammable or
volatile liquids.
(3) Demolition debris: Sheetrock, aggregate, brick, stone, cement,
gravel, sand, structural clay products, soil, asbestos, roofing
materials, plaster, plasterboard or other noncombustible
demolition debris.
(4) Miscellaneous materials: offal, tar, asphalt, sealed drums,
pressurized containers or tires.
(5) Hazardous waste as defined in the federal, state and local laws and
regulations.
(6) Pathological or infectious waste.
(7) Radioactive waste.
(8) White goods.
(9) Logs or tree stumps larger than four feet in length and six inches in
diameter.
(10) Dead animals.
(11) Human and animal remains.
(12) Batteries.
(13) Motor vehicles, major motor vehicle parts and other large
machinery.
(14) Baled materials.
C. If the operator of a designated facility discovers nonprocessable waste
in an incoming truck either at or before the truck reaches the unloading
or discarding area, unless such truck is specifically disposing of clean
fill at the Town of Smithtown Municipal Services Facility, the driver will
be directed to leave the facility. The attempt to deliver will be recorded.
§ 177-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-79
1:499
§ 177-80. Town facilities and use thereof.
Repeat attempts may lead to refusal of access to all Town facilities.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
D. All staff of any designated facility may routinely visually screen the solid
waste being unloaded into the facility looking for nonprocessable waste
and other prohibited material, including drums, containers which may
contain unused or waste chemicals, large numbers of filled sacks or
substantial quantities of soil or powdery debris. If suspected hazardous
waste is discovered, the appropriate steps will be applied.
E. If a facility operator observes nonprocessable waste being discharged
into the facility, that carter shall not be permitted to leave the facility.
The vehicle will be reloaded and the carter required to remove the
nonprocessable waste from the facility site at the carter's own expense.
If the waste is suspected to be hazardous and cannot be removed safely,
appropriate procedures shall be followed.
F. If the nonprocessable or suspected hazardous waste is observed in or
going into the refuse pit or discharge area but the delivery vehicle exits
the area before it can be stopped, the facility operator will make every
attempt to identify and stop the vehicle before it exits the facility. The
carter will then be required to reload the waste and remove it from the
facility at the carter's own expense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, partnership or
corporation to dispose of any solid waste of any kind or nature in the
Municipal Services Facility or such other waste management facility as
may be designated by the Town Board pursuant to this chapter which
originated or was collected outside the territorial limits of the Town of
Smithtown, except pursuant to Subsection L herein or a duly executed
intermunicipal cooperative agreement. [Amended 1-10-1995 by L.L.
No. 1-1995]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, partnership or
corporation to dispose of any solid waste of any kind or nature in the
Town of Smithtown if the same originated or was collected outside the
territorial limits of the Town of Smithtown, except pursuant to a duly
executed intermunicipal cooperation agreement.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in
any solid waste management facility as may be designated by the Town
Board pursuant to the provisions of this chapter any hazardous waste.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in
any solid waste management facility as may be designated by the Town
Board pursuant to the provisions of this chapter any hypodermic needle
or syringe, unless the same has been first destroyed by the detachment
of the needle from the syringe from any disposal hypodermic unit and
the hypodermic syringe has been crushed and broken and the needle
§ 177-79 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-80
1:500
bent and all of said parts deposited in the metal container so secured
as to prevent parts from falling out.
E. Except upon order by an authorized officer, employee or agent having
charge of a solid waste management facility as may be designated by
the Town Board pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, no person
shall remove any material or solid waste from any solid waste
management facility once the same has been deposited. [Amended
1-10-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in
any solid waste management facility any untreated cesspool contents.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
G. Any metal drums brought to the Municipal Services Facility with a
capacity of five gallons or greater must have both ends cut out.
[Amended 1-10-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
H. Old, used, worn, defective or discarded automobile tires, truck tires or
any other type of tires shall not be accepted for deposit in any solid
waste management facility. [Amended 1-10-1995 by L.L. No.
1-1995]
I. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, partnership or
corporation to dispose of any landscaping material in the Municipal
Service Facility. All landscaping material shall be disposed of at a duly
licensed facility. [Amended 1-10-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
J. Only Smithtown residents, parties to a specific agreement with the
Town of Smithtown or persons, firms, associations, partnerships or
corporations as provided in Subsection L herein are permitted to use
the Municipal Services Facility, and said Town residents will be charged
accordingly. There shall not be a charge for homeowners residing in the
Town of Smithtown for the use of the facility when disposing of yard
waste, unless said homeowner makes more than two deposits in a
single day. In the event that a homeowner uses the facility more than
two times in a day, said homeowner shall be charged $10 for each
additional visit, unless, for a good cause shown, the facility operator
determines that said additional fee is inappropriate; then, in the facility
operators judgment, the fee can be waived. [Added 12-21-1993 by
L.L. No. 11-1993; amended 1-10-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
K. In the event that the facility operator is able to accept Town resident
landscapers' yard waste material, they will be charged at a rate of $40
per ton to dump said waste. The facility operator reserves the right to
prohibit the dumping of landscapers' yard waste based upon the
availability of the space, weather conditions, frequency of visits and any
other reasons which are in the best interest of the proper operation of
the Municipal Services Facility. [Added 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
11-1993; amended 1-10-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
§ 177-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-80
1:501
§ 177-81. Entry into solid waste management facility; search and
seizure.
By a vehicle's entry into a solid waste management facility, the owner and
operator of that vehicle shall be deemed to consent to the searches and
seizures hereinafter provided.
§ 177-82. Disposal generally. [Amended 12-19-1991 by L.L. No.
12-1991]
L. Clean fill may be disposed of at the Town of Smithtown Municipal
Services Facility by any resident or nonresident person, firm,
association, partnership or corporation who will be charged at the rate
as established by the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown pursuant to
§ 177-83D(5) and D(6) herein. The Municipal Services Facility operator
reserves the right to prohibit the disposal of clean fill based upon
weather conditions or any other reasons which are in the best interest
of the proper operation of the Municipal Services Facility. [Added
1-10-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
M. The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown shall be authorized from
time to time to promulgate such other rules or regulations as may be
deemed necessary with regard to the disposal of clean fill at the Town of
Smithtown Municipal Services Facility. [Added 1-10-1995 by L.L. No.
1-1995]
A. Any vehicle which enters any solid waste management facility may be
searched and its contents examined by Town of Smithtown employees
or agents to determine compliance with the provisions and prohibitions
of the laws of the State of New York, County of Suffolk and Town of
Smithtown.
B. Any peace or police officer or any authorized employee or agent of the
Town of Smithtown shall have the power to seize without a warrant for
conservation, health, safety or evidentiary purposes any item the officer
or individual has cause to believe is a hazardous substance or
generated or collected outside the Town of Smithtown which has been
or is being processed or disposed of in violation of the provisions of this
chapter or any item which has been or is being processed or disposed of
in violation of any provision of applicable law.
A. All vehicles or containers subject to the fees set forth herein must have
a cubic yard capacity and tare weight of such vehicle or container
clearly displayed on the right side outside thereof. Failure to disclose
and display the cubic yard capacity and tare weight of a vehicle or
container shall be grounds for refusal to permit dumping at the site.
B. No vehicles, except for Town licensed carters, shall be permitted to
deliver solid waste to the Resource Recovery Plant.
§ 177-80 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-82
1:502
§ 177-83. Disposal site; fees. [Amended 12-19-1991 by L.L. No.
12-1991]
C. Dumping of any solid waste at any solid waste management facility
without the approval of the facility operator and the Town of Smithtown
shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall
exempt a resident from paying any fee which may otherwise be
applicable pursuant to this chapter.
A. Effective January 1, 1992, all commercial solid waste collected by a
carter shall be transported to and disposed of at a solid waste
management facility designated by the Town of Smithtown for the
material to be disposed.
B. The Town of Smithtown reserves the right to direct the carter to deliver
the waste to alternative disposal facilities within the boundaries of or
within a radius of five miles of the boundaries of the Town of
Smithtown.
C. All commercial solid waste collected shall be delivered directly to the
designated disposal facility. No salvaging, mixing, sorting, segregating,
removal or disposal shall be permitted at any other location.
D. All disposal fees associated with the disposal of commercial solid waste
at the designated facilities shall be borne by the licensee. The Town of
Smithtown shall invoice carters who have an account with the Town of
Smithtown on a monthly basis for the actual tonnage delivered to the
designated facility, except as provided in Subsection (7) herein.
Payment by the carter shall be made to the Town within 15 calendar
days of the date of invoice. In the event that the carter does not submit
payment for its disposal fees within 15 calendar days of the invoice, a
late payment charge of $25 will be added to the carter's next monthly
invoice. Furthermore, all delinquent unpaid balances will accrue
interest at the periodic rate of 18%, which amount will be reflected on
the carter's subsequent invoices until fully satisfied. [Amended
1-10-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
(1) Commercial acceptable wastes collected by the carter shall be
delivered to the Huntington Resource Recovery Facility for
disposal. The tipping fee at this facility shall be $65 per ton
commencing on January 1, 1992.
(2) Commercial recyclables, white goods or scrap metal collected by
the carter may be delivered to the Smithtown Municipal Services
Facility. Effective January 1, 1992, there shall be no tipping fee for
these materials delivered to the Municipal Services Facility.
(3) Commercial bulk items collected by a carter shall be delivered to
the Huntington Resource Recovery Facility. The tipping fee for
commercial bulk items shall be $65 per ton commencing on January
1, 1992.
§ 177-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-83
1:503
(4) Commercially collected leaves and brush collected by the carter
shall be delivered to the Municipal Services Facility where the
vehicles will be weighed then directed to a designated facility. The
tipping fee for these materials shall be $40 per ton commencing
January 1, 1992.
(5) Rubble or demolition and construction materials.
(a) The fee for the disposal of rubble or demolition and
construction materials at the Town of Smithtown Municipal
Services Facility shall be: [Amended 5-12-1998 by L.L. No.
4-1998; 12-19-2000; 7-22-2003; 6-20-2013]
[1] Six cents per pound for the disposal of materials weighing
up to 100 pounds.
[2] A minimum fee of $6 shall be charged for the disposal of
any materials weighing up to 100 pounds.
[3] Six cents per pound or $120 per ton for the disposal of
materials weighing more than 100 pounds.
(b) The Town of Smithtown Municipal Services Facility reserves
the right to weigh each vehicle as enumerated in
§ 177-83D(5)(a)[1], [2] and [3] that enters the facility if the
scale house operator or other designated individual believes
that such vehicle should be charged $120 per ton for the
disposal of rubble or demolition and construction materials.
[Amended 12-19-2000; 7-22-2003; 6-20-2013]
(c) The fee for the disposal of rubble or demolition and
construction materials in accordance with § 177-83D(5)(a)[1],
[2] and [3] and (b) may be amended by resolution, from time to
time, by the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown at the
recommendation of the Solid Waste Coordinator, without the
necessity of a formal public hearing. [Added 5-12-1998 by
L.L. No. 4-1998; amended 12-13-2005 by L.L. No. 6-2005]
(6) Clean fill collected by any person, firm, association, partnership or
corporation may be delivered and disposed of at the Town of
Smithtown Municipal Services Facility. The fee for disposal of clean
fill not specifically enumerated in § 177-83D(5)(a)[1], [2] and [3]
shall be $80 per ton. The fee as set forth in this subsection may be
amended by resolution, from time to time, by the Town Board of the
Town of Smithtown at the recommendation of the Solid Waste
Coordinator, without the necessity of a formal public hearing.
[Amended 1-24-1995; 4-17-1995; 5-9-1995; 5-16-1996;
7-1-1996; 7-16-1996; 5-12-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998;
5-12-1998; 12-19-2000; 7-22-2003; 9-9-2008; 8-17-2010]
§ 177-83 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-83
1:504
§ 177-84. Exemptions.
Exempt from the provisions of this chapter shall be any vehicle owned,
leased, rented, hired or utilized by the Town of Smithtown, its agencies,
departments or bureaus.
§ 177-85. through § 177-88. (Reserved)
(7) The disposal fee for the disposal of clean fill at the Town of
Smithtown Municipal Services Facility shall be paid pursuant to the
following procedures:
(a) The person, firm, association, partnership or corporation
seeking to dispose of clean fill at the Town of Smithtown
Municipal Services Facility shall first obtain a clean fill ticket at
the Municipal Services Facility.
(b) The person, firm, association, partnership or corporation shall
fill out an application requesting clean fill tickets at the
Municipal Services Facility and must submit a certified check
or money order payable to the Town of Smithtown general fund
or cash, only at the discretion of the Municipal Services Facility
operator, for the amount of clean fill tickets requested.
(c) The fee for disposal shall be calculated on a per yard basis
depending on the size of the container or roll-off the person,
firm, association, partnership or corporation is seeking to
dispose of.
(d) Upon the arrival at the Town of Smithtown Municipal Services
Facility, the person, firm, association, partnership or
corporation shall identify its load as clean fill and proceed to
the designated scale house. Then a clean fill ticket must be
presented to the Municipal Services Facility scale house
operator or other designated individual in advance of the
disposal of the clean fill.
§ 177-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-85
1:505

ARTICLE VII
Littering
§ 177-89. Throwing from vehicles.
No person while a driver or passenger in any vehicle shall throw, distribute
or deposit litter upon any street, sidewalk, vehicle, public place or upon any
private property within the Town of Smithtown.
§ 177-90. Vehicles causing litter.
§ 177-91. Public places.
No persons shall throw, deposit or distribute litter in or upon any street,
sidewalk, vehicle or other public place within the Town except in public
receptacles or in authorized private receptacles for collection.
§ 177-92. Placement in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.
§ 177-93. Sweeping into gutters.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Town any litter from any building or lot or from any public
or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall
keep the sidewalks adjacent to their premises free of litter.
§ 177-94. Duties of business merchants.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Town any litter
from any building or lot from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
Persons owning or occupying places of business within the Town shall keep
the sidewalks adjacent to their business premises free of litter.
A. No person shall drive, operate or move any vehicle within the Town
unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
material, contents, litter, sand or gravel from being blown or tossed or
deposited upon any street or public or private place.
B. No person shall drive, operate or move any vehicle within the Town if
the vehicle is discharging any load, material, contents, litter, sand or
gravel upon any street or public or private place.
§ 177-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-95
1:507
§ 177-95. Parks.
No person shall throw, distribute or deposit litter in any park within the
Town except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon
any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where
public receptacles are not provided, all litter shall be carried away from the
park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of
elsewhere as provided in this chapter.
§ 177-96. Watercourses.
No person shall throw or deposit litter into any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
river, bay or any other body of water, whether public or private, in any park
or elsewhere within the Town.
§ 177-97. Occupied private property.
No person shall throw, distribute or deposit litter on any occupied private
property within the Town, whether owned by such person or not, except that
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
§ 177-98. Premises to be maintained litter-free.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter. However, this section shall not prohibit
the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection.
§ 177-99. Vacant lots.
No person shall throw, distribute or deposit litter on any open or vacant
private property within the Town, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 177-100. Private dumps prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain on any property, whether
owned by such person or not, any dump, solid waste or abandoned vehicles
or parts thereof at any time. However, this section shall not be construed
to limit the rights of householders or others to place solid waste in properly
covered receptacles or containers in front of their property for authorized
collection or removal.
§ 177-95 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-100
1:508
ARTICLE VIII
Nonresidential Solid Waste Disposal Capacity Generation Fee
[Added 6-10-1997 by L.L. No. 3-199747]
§ 177-101. Scope and purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, welfare and safety
of the populace of the Town of Smithtown by establishing a system for
the collection of revenues necessary to meet existing municipal financial
obligations in connection with continuing to make available solid waste
disposal capacity meeting current technological, environmental and public
health protection standards. The making available of such solid waste
disposal capacity is intended to avoid the undue and unhealthful
accumulation of waste and to encourage disposal of solid waste in a manner
conducive to the maintenance of the public health, safety and welfare.
Therefore, pursuant to Town Law, General Municipal Law, Municipal Home
Rule Law and the laws of the State of New York, there is hereby established
a system for the charging of fees and collecting of funds for the generation
of nonresidential solid waste within the Town of Smithtown sufficient to
maintain and operate solid waste disposal capacity sufficient to
accommodate said nonresidential solid waste.
§ 177-102. System created.
A. There is hereby created and established a nonresidential solid waste
disposal capacity generation fee billing system. Charges billed through
this system shall be used to provide funds for the operation of a facility
used for or in connection with allowing for the disposal of solid waste
pursuant to a service agreement dated June 29, 1989, as amended, by
and between the Town of Smithtown, the Town of Huntington and the
facility operator, and for the acquisition, construction, equipping,
operation and maintenance of such other related solid waste disposal
sites or facilities and for other related services, the need for which the
Town of Smithtown shall determine from time to time.
B. This nonresidential solid waste disposal capacity generation fee billing
system and the disposal rates specified in this section shall become
effective no later than July 1, 1997, or the effective date of this article.
C. Exemption from fee system. [Added 5-12-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
(1) State and local municipal entities may be exempt from the Town of
Smithtown nonresidential solid waste disposal capacity generation
fee system upon application to the Town of Smithtown Solid Waste
Coordinator.
(2) The municipal entity may seek an exemption from the Town of
Smithtown nonresidential solid waste disposal capacity generation
47.Editor's Note: This local law also renumbered former Art. VIII, Penalties and
Miscellaneous, as Art. IX.
§ 177-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-102
1:509
§ 177-103. Rates.
§ 177-104. Billing.
fee system by filing a written request to the Town of Smithtown
Solid Waste Coordinator. This written request must clearly state:
(a) The name of the entity requesting the exemption.
(b) All properties owned and operated by this entity, which are
located within the confines of the Town of Smithtown
Nonresidential Solid Waste Disposal Capacity Generation Fee
System.
(c) The reasons why this entity should be exempt from the Town of
Smithtown Nonresidential Solid Waste Disposal Capacity
Generation Fee System.
(3) The municipal entity may seek a review of the Town of Smithtown
Solid Waste Coordinator's decision by filing a written request in
accordance with § 177-105B(2).
A. Serviced billing rates. Nonresidential solid waste generators, serviced
by licensed commercial waste collectors, shall be billed a monthly solid
waste disposal capacity fee calculated in accordance with the following
formula:
SCY = Serviced container yards.
DSUR = DSU (disposal service unit) rate.
SCY x DSUR = Disposal capacity billing charge.
B. DSU rate. The DSU rate shall be as established by the Town Board of
the Town of Smithtown. The DSU rate may be amended by resolution
from time to time by the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown without
the necessity of a formal public hearing.
A. The charges established herein for nonresidential solid waste disposal
capacity shall be billed monthly to the landowner of each parcel of
property.
B. The monthly nonresidential solid waste disposal capacity bill shall set
forth the following information:
(1) Name and billing address of the landowner, including the address
of that parcel of land for which this bill applies.
(2) The number and different sizes of the containers that are located
on such parcel of property and the individual breakdown for each
charge for each separate and distinct container and whether or not
any container is shared by any businesses.
§ 177-102 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-104
1:510
§ 177-105. Adjustments to charge; appeal proceedings. [Amended
5-12-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
(3) The service dates for which the bill applies, along with the
frequency of pickup at the location for each container and the
compaction factor utilized by the Town.
(4) Any on-demand or extra disposal service from the prior calendar
month, setting forth a detailed breakdown of what the disposal
charges were for that location.
(5) The date payment is due without interest and late charges.
C. Payment of the monthly disposal capacity bill by the landowner shall be
made to the Town of Smithtown general fund at the address as specified
on the bill, within 15 calendar days of the due date. In the event that the
disposal capacity fee bill is not paid within 15 calendar days of the due
date, a late payment charge of $25 will be added to the next monthly
disposal capacity bill. Furthermore, all delinquent unpaid balances will
accrue interest at the periodic rate of 18%, which amount will be
reflected on the landowner's subsequent disposal capacity fee bills until
such amount is fully satisfied.
D. In the event that such disposal capacity fee bill becomes over 75 days
delinquent, the Town of Smithtown may pursue any and all lawful and
appropriate collection remedies, including but not limited to:
(1) Civil action against the delinquent landowner seeking monetary
relief for the amounts owed for the disposal capacity service.
(2) A levy against the landowner's tax bill in accordance with General
Municipal Law § 120-cc, where the Town of Smithtown may impose
a tax levy in any year in which unpaid fees or charges, including
penalties for unpaid municipal solid waste disposal capacity
service.
E. The provisions for failing to make payment set forth herein shall be in
addition to any other rights and remedies which the Town of Smithtown
may have under the laws of the State of New York.
A. Any commercial, industrial, institutional and multifamily operation or
establishment may make an application to the Town of Smithtown Solid
Waste Coordinator to be classified as either a low-density waste
generator, a minimal waste generator and/or an on-demand service
waste generator. This written request must be made to the Town of
Smithtown Solid Waste Coordinator and include the following
information:
(1) The name of the entity requesting the classification.
(2) The type or types of classification being requested.
§ 177-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-105
1:511
(3) The addresses of all properties owned and operated by this entity
which are located within the confines of the Town of Smithtown
Nonresidential Solid Waste Disposal Capacity Generation Fee
System.
(4) The reason(s) why this entity' s properties should be classified as a
low-density waste generator, a minimal waste generator and/or an
on-demand service waste generator.
B. Appeal; review of decision.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation who is billed for charges outlined
in this article and who considers such charges to be inaccurate,
erroneous or inconsistent with the provisions of this article shall
have the right to appeal the disputed charges by making written
request to the Town of Smithtown Solid Waste Coordinator. A
review and investigation of the disputed charges will then be made
by the Town of Smithtown Solid Waste Coordinator who will
provide to the appellant a written decision on the appeal which
contains the reasons for the decision.
(2) The appellant may seek a review of the Town of Smithtown Solid
Waste Coordinator's decision, by filing a written request to the
Nonresidential Solid Waste Disposal Capacity Generation Fee
Review Board of the Town of Smithtown within 10 days of the date
of mailing of the Town of Smithtown Solid Waste Coordinator's
decision to the appellant. The Nonresidential Solid Waste Disposal
Capacity Generation Fee Review Board shall consist of the
Environmental Protection Director, Town Comptroller and Town
Attorney or their duly designated representatives. The appellant's
notice of appeal must clearly state the nature of the action or
reasons why the Town of Smithtown Solid Waste Coordinator's
action should be modified, reversed or remanded. A review by the
Board shall be conducted not less than 15 days and no more than
60 days from the date off the appellant's notice of appeal is filed,
unless the Review Board, in its sole discretion, finds that the review
should be delayed. [Amended 6-9-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
(3) Any charges found to be inaccurate, erroneous or inconsistent by
written decision after a review or an appeal made pursuant to this
section shall be corrected by means of a refund, credit or other
method approved of by the Town of Smithtown Solid Waste
Coordinator. Corrections for any inaccurate, erroneous or
inconsistent charges shall be retroactive only to the beginning of
the fiscal year in which such charges were appealed pursuant to
this section. [Added 5-30-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
C. A review and investigation of this request will be made by the Town of
Smithtown Solid Waste Coordinator, who will provide to the applicant a
written decision on the application, containing the reasons for the
decision.
§ 177-105 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-105
1:512
§ 177-106. Waste management restrictions.
D. The applicant may seek a review of the Town of Smithtown Solid Waste
Coordinator's decision by filing a written request in accordance with
§ 177-105B(2).
A. Container identification. All waste collectors must display on each
container a business name or trade name, which shall sufficiently
identify the licensee providing waste collection services to the
establishment using or owning the waste container. In addition, the
waste collector must display on every container a commercial solid
waste identification decal as supplied by the Town of Smithtown. This
decal must be applied in such a way so as to become permanent and
conspicuously visible to any Town of Smithtown employee and the
general public. It will be the solid waste collector's responsibility to
affix the decal supplied by the Town of Smithtown to its container.
B. Container capacity. The capacity of each container as agreed to by the
Town of Smithtown Solid Waste Coordinator must be conspicuously
displayed on the container so as to be readily accessible to any
employee of the Town of Smithtown . If there is any change in the
capacity of the container, the waste collector must notify the Town of
Smithtown Solid Waste Coordinator within 72 hours of such change.
C. Frequency of pickup. All waste collectors must conspicuously display on
all containers the frequency of collection of the waste in each container.
In the event such frequency of collection changes, the waste collector
must notify the Town of Smithtown Solid Waste Coordinator, in writing,
within 72 hours of such change.
D. Demand service. All waste collectors must conspicuously display on all
containers that are set up as demand service that such container is not
picked up on any specific frequency but is an on-demand container. The
waste collector must display in letters at least two inches tall, that such
container is "ON DEMAND." In the event that such container changes
from an on-demand service to a specific frequency collection, the waste
collector must notify the Town of Smithtown Solid Waste Coordinator, in
writing, within 72 hours of such change. All on-demand service for any
given month shall be billed based on the serviced container yards (SCY)
disposed of in that month and reflected on the landowner's subsequent
month's disposal fee bill. The Solid Waste Coordinator of the Town of
Smithtown shall determine whether the commercial, industrial,
institutional and multifamily operation or establishment is entitled to be
charged under this system as an on-demand service waste generator.
[Amended 5-12-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
E. Extra service. All waste collectors must notify the Town of Smithtown
Solid Waste Coordinator of any extra service provided to a location that
currently has a specific frequency of collection. Such notice must be
made to the Town of Smithtown Solid Waste Coordinator, in writing,
within 24 hours after such extra service is provided to any specific
§ 177-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-106
1:513
§ 177-107. Route manifest reporting requirements.
location, indicating the capacity size of the extra container service.
The landowner will be billed for the disposal capacity fee for the extra
service provided to the landowner, based on the serviced container
yards (SCY) disposed of in that month and reflected on the landowner's
subsequent month's disposal fee bill.
A. Every operator of a motor vehicle licensed to a waste collector shall
maintain a solid waste disposal route manifest, which shall be a
complete, accurate, current and legible record of each load of
nonresidential waste collected, removed, transported and/or disposed
of.
B. Solid waste disposal route manifests required by this section shall be
maintained on a form approved by the Town of Smithtown Solid Waste
Coordinator and shall contain the following:
(1) The date of the information reflected in the manifest; the business
name and license number of the waste collector for which the
vehicle is operated; the vehicle license number as required by the
Town of Smithtown; and the vehicle operator's full, true and correct
name.
(2) An itemized listing for each distinct point of waste collection of the
collection address, container sizes and the Town of Smithtown
decal number from which waste was collected and the account
name of the customer from whom waste was collected.
(3) For each listing of waste collection, the name and address of the
disposal, facility and the date of disposal.
C. Vehicle operators shall subscribe to the following statement on the
manifest: "I understand that falsification of a solid waste disposal route
manifest is a criminal offense. Understanding this, I hereby affirm that
all garbage collected by me is only commercial waste generated within
the confines of the Town of Smithtown and that the information
contained in the foregoing manifest is full, true and correct to the best
of my knowledge."
D. Every operator of a motor vehicle licensed to a waste collector shall
have an accurate and current solid waste disposal route manifest in his
immediate possession at all times and shall display such manifest on
demand of any employee of the Town of Smithtown. Failure to do so
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter subjecting a person
convicted under this section to the fines and penalties as set forth in
this chapter.
E. The solid waste disposal route manifest shall be submitted to the Town
of Smithtown Solid Waste Coordinator or his duly authorized
representative daily upon delivery of the load to any disposal facility.
§ 177-106 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-107
1:514
§ 177-108. Notice of changes.
§ 177-109. Administration fee.
F. The waste collector must set forth on its solid waste disposal route
manifest the route that each truck takes in collecting the waste by
delineating the stop numbers in numerical order on the solid waste
disposal route manifest.
A. Commercial waste collectors shall provide the Town of Smithtown Solid
Waste Coordinator with written notification within 72 hours of the
effective date of any changes in operation which affect the service to a
commercial customer. The notification shall include the effective date(s)
of such changes. Changes requiring written notification include but are
not limited to the following:
(1) Loss of customers.
(2) Sale, lease or transfer of any portion of a waste collector's solid
waste operation.
(3) Change of mailing address or phone number.
(4) Purchase, sale or lease of any vehicle or related solid waste
collection equipment, including loaned or borrowed vehicles or
equipment.
(5) Changes in number, sizes, types and collection frequency of
containers.
(6) Addition of customers.
(7) Any extra container services.
B. Any changes to a customer's service which will affect their disposal
charges shall be communicated in writing to the Town of Smithtown
Solid Waste Coordinator.
A. The Town of Smithtown shall charge each commercial property owner
an administrative fee to cover the cost of implementing, administrating
and enforcing this commercial waste disposal capacity generation fee
system. Each property owner shall be charged an administration fee to
be included in the disposal capacity generation fee bill. The
administration fee shall be as established by the Town Board of the
Town of Smithtown. The administration fee may be amended by the
Town Board of the Town of Smithtown without the necessity of a formal
public hearing.
B. All commercial properties that have an assessment code classification
as set forth below will be exempt from the administrative fee as set
forth by the Town of Smithtown:
§ 177-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-109
1:515
610 Education
611 Libraries
612 Schools
614 Special schools and institutions
615 Other education
620 Religious
632 Benevolent and moral associations
633 Homes for the aged
641 Hospitals
642 All other health facilities
650 Government
651 Highway garage
652 Office building government
653 Parking lots
662 Police and fire protection
681 Cultural facilities
690 Miscellaneous
692 Road, streets, highways and parkways
695 Cemeteries
§ 177-109 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-109
1:516
ARTICLE IX
Penalties and Miscellaneous
[Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 11-1993; 6-10-1997 by L.L. No.
3-1997]
§ 177-110. Penalties for false statements.
§ 177-111. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate or neglect or refuse to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter, except where otherwise indicated, shall be guilty
of an unclassified misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not more than
$5,000 or imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both. Each day shall
constitute a separate violation and subject any person who shall violate or
neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of the chapter to liability to
the same extent as the first-time violator.
§ 177-112. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or other part of
this chapter shall be judged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such judgment shall not affect,
impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter, and it shall be construed
to have been the legislative intent to enact this chapter without such
unconstitutional or invalid part therein.
A. Any applicant for a license, as hereinabove described, who knowingly
makes a false statement in such application shall be guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not more than
$5,000 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. In addition,
any license issued by the Town of Smithtown in reliance on any false
statement material to the application shall be immediately suspended
until such time as the applicant submits a new application, together
with supporting documentation and all appropriate fees. Upon approval
of the application, the Town Clerk shall remove the suspension from the
license, and the same shall continue to be in effect until the expiration
date stamped on the license.
B. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to knowingly prepare
or execute an inaccurate solid waste disposal route manifest or to
induce or coerce any other person to prepare or execute an inaccurate
solid waste disposal route manifest. Persons violating the provisions of
this section shall be guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be liable for a fine of not more than $5,000,
excluding costs, and/or by imprisonment for a period of not more than
30 days.
C. Violations of this section shall be deemed sufficient cause for the
cancellation, suspension or revocation of the waste collector's license
pursuant to the rules and regulations authorized by this chapter.
§ 177-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-113
1:517
§ 177-113. When effective. [Amended 10-6-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon filing with the
Secretary of State of the State of New York.
§ 177-114. Preemption.
The provisions of this chapter shall take precedence over and shall
supersede and preempt any inconsistent provision of any other local law or
ordinance heretofore enacted by the Town of Smithtown or by any village
within the Town of Smithtown.
§ 177-113 SMITHTOWN CODE § 177-114
1:518
Chapter 181
HANDBILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 177. Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 215.
§ 181-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as an "Ordinance Regulating the Distribution
of Handbills in the Town of Smithtown."
§ 181-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
HANDBILL — Printed or written matter, sample or device, dodger, circular,
leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed matter or literature
which is not delivered by United States mail:
PRIVATE PREMISES — All property, including but not limited to vacant land
or any land, building or other structure designed or used for residential,
commercial, business, industrial, institutional or religious purposes,
together with any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, fence, porch, steps,
vestibule, mailbox and other structure appurtenant thereto.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways, lakes, rivers, watercourses or fountains and any and all public
parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon land or water, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing;
A.
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales;
B.
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee
is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; or
C.
Which contains reading or pictorial matter other than advertising
matter, but is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is
distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private
benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
§ 177-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-3
1:519
§ 181-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health and well-being
by controlling the manner in which handbills are distributed in the Town.
§ 181-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall control the manner in which persons distribute handbills
within the Town.
§ 181-5. Manner of distribution in public places.
No person shall throw, scatter or cast any kind of handbill in or upon any
public place within the Town, and no person shall hand out or distribute
or sell any handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not
be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute handbills or any other
thing which is otherwise permitted and authorized by law in any public
place to any person willing to accept such handbill or other thing without
payment therefor.
§ 181-6. Manner of distribution on private premises.
No person shall place any handbill in or upon any private premises except
by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to any other person
then present in or upon the private premises or by placing the handbill on
a structure appurtenant to the private premises, excluding mailboxes when
prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations, so as to prevent it from
being carried by the elements about such premises or elsewhere.
§ 181-7. Distributor's telephone number and address to be
included; opportunity for cancellation.
Such material shall contain in each delivery a telephone number and
mailing address of the distributor, with notice that further distribution may
be canceled at any time during the year by calling and canceling by phone
or, in writing, by mailing such cancellation to the listed mailing address.
§ 181-8. Distribution prohibited after cancellation.
It shall be unlawful to tack or place any handbill on the private property
of anyone who has placed the distributor on notice, pursuant to § 181-7, of
cancellation of such distribution or delivery until further notice.
§ 181-9. Placement in or on vehicles.
No person shall deposit, fasten, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or
upon any vehicle located on public property. The provisions of this section
shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing of any handbill to the owner or
other occupant of any vehicle who is willing to accept it without payment
therefor or to apply to the issuance of any traffic ticket or other notice
permitted or required by law.
§ 181-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 181-10
1:520
§ 181-10. Required cleanup.
Any person distributing handbills shall maintain the area which he is
utilizing free of any litter caused by or related to said handbill distribution.
§ 181-11. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the
distribution of newspapers and political literature, except that newspapers
and political literature shall be placed in such a manner as to prevent their
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or private
premises.
§ 181-12. Liability.
It shall be a rebuttable presumption that the publisher, advertiser and/or
distributor shall be responsible for the means of distribution and not the
individual carrier.
§ 181-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both; however, for the
purpose of confirming jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers, such
violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and for such purposes only all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations.
In lieu of the foregoing, any person violating any provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a penalty in the sum of not more than $100 for the first
violation and in a sum of not more than $250 for subsequent violations,
which penalties may be recovered in a civil action in the name of the Town
of Smithtown.
§ 181-14. Enforcement. [Amended 9-7-1993; 5-8-2007]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Ordinance Inspectors and Building
Director or the Building Inspectors or the Public Safety Director of the Town
of Smithtown or by deputies whom said Building Director or Public Safety
Director shall designate for this purpose.
Chapter 185
HISTORIC DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historical Advisory Board — See Ch. 39.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 115.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 248.
Zoning — See Ch. 322.
§ 181-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-1
1:521
§ 185-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Historic Districts Law
of the Town of Smithtown."
§ 185-2. Purpose.
A. The Smithtown Town Board finds that the historic heritage of
Smithtown is among its most valued and most important educational,
cultural and economic assets. It is the intent of the Town Board to
promote the conservation, protection and preservation of historic sites
and structures within Smithtown for the education, welfare and
pleasure of the residents of Smithtown.
B. The Town Board of Smithtown therefore finds that:
(1) There exist in sections of the Town of Smithtown pieces of property,
archaeological sites, landmarks and buildings of:
(a) Special historic interest, by reason of association with historic
or famous events or by reason of antiquity or by reason of
association with historic or famed personages or by reason of
being illustrative of events or periods in the history and growth
of the Town of Smithtown.
(b) Unusual aesthetic interest or value, by reason of being
representative of a style or period of architecture or by reason
of extraordinary architectural merit or by reason of association
with other buildings, landmarks, pieces of property or
archaeological sites that are historically and/or architecturally
valuable.
(2) In some sections of Smithtown, these archaeological sites, pieces of
property, buildings and landmarks actually form a distinct area or
district of two or more archaeological sites, pieces of property,
buildings and landmarks that may or may not be contiguous. These
districts also deserve special consideration and delineation as
districts because of the reasons listed herein.
(3) The conservation, protection, rehabilitation and perpetuation of
such archaeological sites, parcels of property, buildings, landmarks
and districts is a public necessity for the good of the community
and will promote the education, civic pride, economic well-being
and general welfare of the residents of Smithtown.
C. Now, therefore, the Town Board declares that the purpose of this
chapter is to encourage and to accomplish the conservation, protection,
rehabilitation and perpetuation of such archaeological sites, pieces of
property, buildings, landmarks and districts in the Town of Smithtown.
§ 185-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § 185-3
1:522
§ 185-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERATION — Any material change in the exterior architectural features
of any structure less than the demolition or removal of the structure.
"Exterior architectural features" specifically means the architectural style,
general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or
other structure subject to the provisions of the Historic Districts Law. The
term includes the color, the kind and texture of building material and the
type and style of the doors, light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant
fixtures. In the case of outdoor advertising signs, "exterior architectural
features" means the style, material, size and location of all signs. Any
renovation of the interior of a structure in an historic district which has
no appreciable effect upon the exterior architectural features of such a
structure shall not be deemed an "alteration."
ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE — Construction, reconstruction, moving,
alteration or demolition, in whole or in part, which will affect the exterior
design or appearance of any structure, building or appurtenant open spaces
within or adjacent to the historic district.
HISTORIC LAND USE DISTRICT — A designation which:
HISTORIC PERFORMANCE STANDARD DISTRICT — A designation which:
STRUCTURE — Any building or fixture, including but not limited to the
following: houses, stores, warehouses, churches, schools, barns and other
like buildings; fences, outhouses, pumps, gravestones, light fixtures and
other like fixtures; markers, display boards, display panels, outdoor signs
and other like outdoor advertising fixtures.
Specifically identifies archaeological sites, pieces of property, buildings
or landmarks of special historical, cultural or architectural interest,
which together form a distinct geographical area within the Township
of Smithtown.
A.
Specifies the purpose for creating such an area and the restrictive
land uses within the area and identifies the historical period, cultural
features or archaeological heritage sought to be restored or preserved
within the district.
B.
Specifically identifies individual archaeological sites, pieces of property,
buildings or landmarks of special historical, cultural or architectural
interest to the Town of Smithtown as outlined in § 185-2 of this chapter.
A.
Designates the archaeological site, piece of property, building or
landmark as belonging to a district and thereby extends the provisions
of this chapter to the designated structure and appurtenant open
spaces and to adjacent structures which materially affect the
architectural or aesthetic features of any structure designated as part
of the district.
B.
§ 185-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-4
1:523
§ 185-4. Historical Advisory Board.
A. Membership. The Historical Advisory Board of the Town of Smithtown
shall consist of six members, who shall be appointed by the Town Board
for terms not exceeding two years, and the Town Historian, who shall
serve as an ex officio member. The Chairman of the Board shall be
designated by the Town Board from among the members so appointed
to the Board. The members appointed shall be eligible for
reappointment, shall be qualified by reason of special interest,
knowledge or training in such fields as history, architecture or other
like fields of special knowledge or interest and shall be residents of the
Town of Smithtown.
B. Powers and duties.
(1) The Historical Advisory Board shall be charged with the following
responsibilities and duties:
(a) To serve as an advisory board to the Town of Smithtown Town
Board and to meet upon the request of the Town Board, Town
Historian and/or the Chairman of the Historical Advisory Board
to discuss any matter of importance relating to the
preservation of the historical, architectural and cultural
heritage.
(b) To discuss, find and advise the Town Board of Smithtown on a
course of action regarding these matters.
(c) To present written recommendations for the Town Board
members to consider when making a final determination
involving these matters.
(d) To serve as the guardians of any historical items that have been
or will be donated to the Town of Smithtown by its citizenry.
(e) To safeguard these items in the public interest by depositing
them in a Town building designated by the Town Board as an
historical depository.
(2) The responsibilities of the Historical Advisory Board shall be as
follows in establishing historic districts:
(a) The Board, as a designated agent of the Town Board, in
conjunction with the Director of Town Planning, shall review
the historic structures report that was compiled by the
Smithtown Planning Department and determine the propriety
and desirability of bringing certain of these structures under
the provisions of an Historic Districts Law. In this review of
historic structures within the Town, the Advisory Board shall
consider other sites or structures it finds to be of special
historical, cultural or architectural interest which may not be
§ 185-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 185-4
1:524
included in the historic structures report. Upon completing its
review, the Advisory Board shall do as follows:
[1] It shall draw up a list of archaeological sites, parcels of
property, buildings and landmarks which are deserving of
preservation under the regulations of an Historic Districts
Law.
[2] It shall approach the owner or owners of these properties
and recommend to them that they consider having their
properties designated by the Town Board as "historic" and
thereby protected by the covenants of an Historic Districts
Law.
[3] Upon approval, in writing, by the owner or majority of
owners of these properties that it is their desire to have
their properties declared "historic," the Advisory Board
shall recommend the owner's properties to the Town
Planning Director for consideration as historic sites to be
protected as part of an historic standard performance
district or as part of an historic land use district.
[4] The Smithtown Historical Advisory Board shall act in an
advisory capacity to the Town Planning Director as he
prepares his written recommendation to present to the
Town Board for the creation of historic districts.
[5] When the Smithtown Town Board holds public hearings on
the creation of historic districts, the Smithtown Historical
Advisory Board shall be prepared to present its own report
on the creation of the district.
(b) Periodic inspections.
[1] The Smithtown Historical Advisory Board shall
periodically inspect the historic districts which are
established by the Town Board to see that:
[a] Buildings and structures in an historic district are not
allowed to deteriorate or decay through neglect so
that they may have to be demolished because of
unsafe or hazardous conditions.
[b] No environmental change has been made in an
historic district without a certificate of
appropriateness.
[2] If either of these conditions are found to exist in an historic
district, the Advisory Board shall report the violations to
the Planning Department and Building Department so that
appropriate action can be taken.
§ 185-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-4
1:525
§ 185-5. Powers and duties of Planning Department.
In order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, the Town Planning
Director, acting on the advice of the Smithtown Historic Advisory Board,
shall supervise the review of the proposed historic districts with the specific
powers and duties outlined in this chapter.
(c) The Smithtown Historical Advisory Board shall have the
following additional functions and responsibilities:
[1] To meet from time to time to review the status of historic
districts and to recommend to the Town Planning Director
and the Town Board the creation of new historic districts if
the Advisory Board deems it appropriate.
[2] To meet for any other purpose related to the preservation
of Smithtown's historical, cultural or architectural
heritage.
[3] To maintain such records of structures protected by the
historic districts created by the Town Board.
[4] To serve as the custodian of any historical items that have
been donated to the Town of Smithtown by its citizenry. In
this capacity, the Advisory Board shall be responsible for:
[a] The safeguarding of these items in the public interest
by depositing these items in a Town building
designated as an historical depository.
[b] Inventorying and maintaining a listing of these items.
[c] Periodically displaying the artifacts donated to the
Town in exhibitions that are open to the public and are
run for the benefit of the citizens of Smithtown.
A. Upon receiving the recommendation for the creation of an historic
district from the Smithtown Historical Advisory Board, the Planning
Department shall:
(1) Make the necessary studies, research investigations and
consultations; prepare the necessary maps, reports and other
material; and undertake such other assignments as it deems
appropriate and as may be requested by the Town Board, all
directed toward the establishment and preservation of the
recommended historic districts.
(2) Submit to the Town Board a written recommendation as to how to
handle the particular historic site or sites and whether or not to
include them in an historic standard performance district or an
historic land use district. This recommendation shall include:
§ 185-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 185-5
1:526
§ 185-6. Powers and duties of Town Board.
(a) A general description of the special features and
characteristics of such districts, the purposes for their being
established and a map showing clearly the properties to be
affected.
(b) The written approval of a majority of the owners of the
properties involved, stating that they wish to have their
properties protected by the covenants of Smithtown's Historic
Districts Local Law.
B. Once an historic district has been created, the Planning Department
shall review all applications for certificates of appropriateness that
must be granted before an environmental change can be made in an
historic district. In its review of all applications for building permits,
moving permits, demolition permits, special use permits, sign permits
and variances concerning the exterior of buildings and the use of land
in historic districts, the Town Planning Department will consider:
(1) The recommendations of the Smithtown Historic Preservation
Commission.
(2) The effect that granting the application would have upon the
special character of the district to be preserved.
C. The Planning Department shall also review all municipal proposals
relative to uses or structures within an historic district.
A. Upon receiving a recommendation for the creation of an historic district
from the Town Planning Department, the Smithtown Town Board shall:
(1) Call a public hearing on the matter, to be held not less than 30 days
nor more than 60 days subsequent to receiving the Planning
Department's written recommendation. The public hearing shall be
advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town at
least 10 days prior to such a hearing, and notice thereof shall be
served by mail upon the owners, shown by the tax rolls of the Town,
of all properties lying within 200 feet of the exterior boundary lines
of the subject parcel, site, building or landmark.
B. At this hearing:
(1) The Town Planning Department shall make a formal presentation of
the proposed historic district that will review the material
contained in the written recommendation.
(2) The Smithtown Historical Advisory Board will act in an advisory
capacity to the Town Board and will be prepared to present its own
report on the creation of an historic district.
§ 185-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-6
1:527
§ 185-7. Certificate of appropriateness required. [Amended
5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
No person owning, renting or occupying property within an historic district
shall make any environmental change unless a certificate of
appropriateness has been issued by the Building Director stating that the
proposed environmental change is appropriate and authorizing the
applicant to undertake such an environmental change.
§ 185-8. Procedure to obtain certificate of appropriateness.
Any applicant requesting an environmental change in a designated historic
district shall follow this procedure in obtaining a certificate of
appropriateness:
(3) The Town Board, on its own motion, may call witnesses, including
architects, engineers, planning consultants or other experts, to
comment on the proposed historic district.
(4) The public will be heard on the proposed historic district.
C. At a subsequent Town meeting, the Town Board shall review the written
recommendation of the Town Planning Department, the evidence
presented by expert witnesses and the comments of the public and then
determine, by majority vote, whether or not to create the historic
district being proposed. In this review, the Town Board shall bear in
mind the purpose of this chapter and shall give consideration to any
report by the Smithtown Historical Advisory Board and the advice of
the Town Historian.
D. The Town Board shall notify all Town agencies of the creation of such an
historic district and shall direct the Town Planning Department to
officially designate the area on the Town Zoning Map.
A. Applications for building permits, moving permits, demolition permits,
special use permits, sign permits and variances within historic districts
shall be referred to the Town Planning Department by the Building
Director or the Board of Appeals. [Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No.
5-2007]
B. The Planning Department shall then review the application and plans in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In making its review, the
Planning Department may confer with the applicant or its authorized
representative and shall, in making its determination, consider the
following:
(1) The compatibility of the proposed building, structure, alteration
thereof or use of the property with neighboring properties and the
historic district as a whole.
(2) The visual and locational relationship between the property in
question and the historic district's existing buildings, structures,
§ 185-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § 185-8
1:528
special character and general appearance in regard to style,
material, scale, proportion, composition, mass, line, color, detail,
setback, landscaping and related items.
(3) Any other factors relating to aesthetic considerations which are
deemed pertinent to the benefit of the historic district.
C. By specific request in a particular case, the Planning Department may
require the submission of such plans, reports, maps, exhibits,
photographs or drawings as are necessary for its determinations. These
submissions shall include but not be limited to site plans; architectural
plans; landscaping plans; proposed signs; proposed exterior lighting;
proposed construction materials; proposed door, window and facade
design details and colors; and photographs or drawings indicating
visual relationships to adjoining buildings and spaces in the historic
district.
D. After its review and examination of the items submitted, and
subsequent to such further deliberations as it deems necessary, but
within 45 days of the receipt of the application and accompanying items
for review, unless the time period is extended as mutually agreed upon
by the Planning Department and the applicant, the Planning
Department shall issue a favorable recommendation to the Building
Director or Chairman of the Board of Appeals only if it finds that the
proposal or modification thereof is, in fact, appropriate to the character,
appearance and efficient functioning of the historic district. When the
recommendation is for denial, the Planning Department shall state the
reasons given for such recommendation. [Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L.
No. 5-2007]
E. In an historic district, no permit shall be issued to erect or alter a
building, structure or sign or to move or demolish a building, structure
or sign in such manner as to change the outside dimensions or exterior
appearance unless and until a recommendation has been received by
the Planning Department. Likewise, no special use permit or variance
shall be granted by the Board of Appeals until a recommendation by the
Planning Department has been received.
F. Demolition permits.
(1) No permit shall be issued for demolishing all or part of a building or
structure within an historic district until the Planning Department
has reviewed such demolition permit application and its potential
effect upon said historic district.
(a) If the Planning Department finds that preservation is physically
or economically unfeasible, it shall recommend in favor of
issuing such demolition permit.
(b) If preservation is found to be physically or economically
feasible, the Planning Department shall take or encourage the
taking of whatever steps appear most likely to lead to such
§ 185-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-8
1:529
§ 185-9. Ordinary maintenance permitted. [Amended 5-8-2007 by
L.L. No. 5-2007]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature of any structure
included within an historic district which does not involve a change in
design, material, color or outer appearance thereof nor to prevent any
environmental change which the Building Director or Inspectors shall
certify is required by public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous
condition.
§ 185-10. Termination of historic designation.
Whenever a site designated as or within an historic district is destroyed
or its exterior is altered to such an extent that it ceases to have historic
significance, the Town Board may direct, by resolution, that it be removed
from the Town Zoning Map as an historic district. Prior to taking such
action, however, the owner shall be given written notice of such proposed
action and an opportunity to be heard thereon before the Town Board.
preservation, either on the site on which the building or
structure is located or on another site to which it might
appropriately be removed.
(2) Within six months from the date of referral of application for a
demolition permit, unless the owner of the property agrees to an
extension of the time period or unless means acceptable to the
owner have been found to preserve the building or structure, the
Planning Department shall give its recommendation to the Building
Director, who shall thereupon be authorized to act upon such
application. [Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
G. In such instances where the Planning Department shall recommend
more or less restrictive regulations than those authorized in this
chapter, in the Town Subdivision Regulations48 and in other Town
ordinances, in order to accomplish the purpose of this chapter, the
Town Board, Planning Board, Building Director and the Board of
Appeals shall be empowered to adopt and enforce such more or less
restrictive regulations. [Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
H. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Planning Department or
Building Director under this chapter may appeal such decision to the
Board of Appeals in the same manner as is provided for zoning appeals;
and the Board of Appeals, after proceeding in the same manner as is
provided for zoning appeals and with the same power and authority
vested in said Board of Appeals, when passing upon appeals before it,
under the provisions of Town Law, may reverse, modify or affirm the
decision of the Planning Department or Building Director. [Amended
5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 248, Subdivision of Land.
§ 185-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 185-11
1:530
§ 185-11. Retroactivity.
This chapter shall not apply to any environmental change which shall occur
prior to the date on which the structure involved is effectively included
within an historic district.
Chapter 188
HOLIDAYS, OBSERVANCE OF
§ 188-1. Purpose.
It is hereby declared that the regulation of the hours of commercial and
business activity on Memorial Day and Independence Day is in the best
interests of the Town of Smithtown and its residents so that such
commercial activity shall not conflict with the appropriate ceremonies and
proper observance of the respective days.
§ 188-2. Suspension of commercial activities.
All commercial and business activities on Memorial Day and Independence
Day shall be suspended until 1:00 p.m. on the aforesaid days, except that
when the same are works of necessity, they may be performed at any time
on those days in an orderly manner so as not to interfere with the proper
observances of said days.
§ 188-3. Selling suspended; exceptions.
All manner of public selling or offering for sale of any property on Memorial
Day and Independence Day shall be suspended until 1:00 p.m. on the
aforesaid days, except as follows:
A. Articles of food may be sold, served, supplied and delivered at any time
before 10:00 a.m.
B. Meals may be sold to be eaten on the premises where sold at any time of
the day.
C. Caterers may serve meals to their patrons at any time of the day.
D. Prepared tobacco, bread, milk, eggs, ice, soda water, fruit,
confectionery, souvenirs, newspapers, gasoline, oil, tires, drugs,
medicines and surgical instruments may be sold and may be delivered
at any time of the day.
E. Grocers, delicatessen dealers and bakers may sell, supply, serve and
deliver cooked and prepared foods, and roadside stands selling fresh
vegetables and other farm produce and bait stores may sell, supply,
serve and deliver merchandise usually sold by them at any time of the
day.
§ 185-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-3
1:531
§ 188-4. Enforcement.
The Suffolk County Police Department shall administer and enforce all
provisions of this chapter.
§ 188-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any persons, associations, partnerships or corporations violating any
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punishable
by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for 15 days, or by both fine
and imprisonment.
Chapter 194
JUNKYARDS AND JUNK DEALERS, LICENSING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 177.
Noise — See Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 322.
§ 194-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Licensing of Junk Dealers, Junkyards
and the Regulation of Junkyards Law of the Town of Smithtown."
§ 194-2. Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Junkyard and Junk Dealer Local Law of
the Town of Smithtown."
§ 194-3. Findings; intent.
F. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as permission to
carry on commercial or business activity, except as otherwise regulated
by law.
G. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the
sale of alcoholic beverages by persons, firms or corporations holding
licenses or permits issued under the provisions of the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Law.
H. The sale of cut flowers, wreaths and plants to be used for purposes
consistent with observance of Memorial Day and Independence Day.
A. In the Town of Smithtown, damaged, worn out, scrapped or discarded
materials or objects, such as automobiles and other vehicles, building
materials, machinery, metal, wastepaper, rags, glassware, tinware and
plastic, have been, are or in the future may be stored, stocked or used in
§ 188-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 194-3
1:532
§ 194-4. Definitions.
Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions
shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic
or eleemosynary person or organization or one purporting to be such and
is registered with the Secretary of State in Albany as such an organization
pursuant to Article 7-A of the Executive Law.
ITINERANT JUNK DEALER — A person who buys, sells, collects or delivers
junk within the Town as a business or employment within the Town but who
a dangerous or unsanitary manner on lands, yards, junkyards or other
places within the Town;
B. The places in which damaged, worn out, scrapped or discarded
materials or objects are stored, have been, are or in the future may be
stored tend to become overgrown with weeds, littered with rubbish and
debris and infested with rats, mice, insects, reptiles and other vermin;
C. Such conditions tend to attract children and other people and endanger
their lives and health, safety and welfare, spread disease, invite
plundering, attract vagrants, create fire hazards and other health and
safety hazards, create, extend and aggravate blight, interfere with the
use and enjoyment of and reduce the value of private property and
interfere with the comfort and well-being of the public;
D. Thieves and receivers of stolen property frequently attempt to dispose
of stolen property by representing it to be legitimately acquired junk,
scrap or debris; and
E. Adequate protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants, visitors and guests in the Town of Smithtown requires that
the business of handling and dealing in junk be regulated and
controlled.
F. Therefore, it is the intent of the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown
that a clean, wholesome, attractive community and environment is
declared to be of importance to the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants and the safeguarding of the material rights against
unwarrantable invasion, and, in addition, such an environment is
deemed essential to the maintenance and continued development of the
economy of the Town and the general welfare of its inhabitants. It is
further declared that the unrestrained accumulation of junk, vehicles,
building materials, machinery, metal, wastepaper, rags, glassware,
tinware and plastic, among others, is a hazard to such health, safety
and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Smithtown, necessitating
the regulation, restraint and elimination thereof. At the same time, it is
recognized that the maintenance of junkyards, as hereinafter defined, is
a useful and necessary business and ought to be encouraged when not
in conflict with the express purposes of this section.
§ 194-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-4
1:533
is not an operator of a junkyard within the Town or an employee of such an
operator.
JUNK — Discarded materials including scrap metal, old iron, steel, brass,
copper, tin, lead or other base metals; old cordage, ropes, rags, fibers or
fabrics; wastepaper; salvage materials; old machinery, equipment and parts,
whether dismantled or not; and motor vehicles no longer used as such,
whether for the purpose of resale of used parts or components therefrom,
for the purpose of reclaiming for use some or all of the materials therein,
whether metal, glass, fabric or otherwise, for the purpose of disposing of
the same or for any other purpose; but "junk" shall not include materials
or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his
own manufacturing processes. This term shall not include construction and
demolition debris.[Amended 11-18-2003]
JUNK DEALER — A person who operates a junkyard, as defined below, or
any person engaged in the business of buying and/or selling junk, as defined
above, within the Town, except that the term "junk dealer" shall not include
bona fide charitable organizations such as that term is defined herein.
JUNKYARD — Includes a lot, land, or structure used as an automobile or
vehicle salvage yard; an automobile or vehicle reduction yard; a motor
vehicle junkyard; an automobile or vehicle wrecking establishment; an
automobile or vehicle graveyard; a scrap metal processing yard or facility;
or a vehicle dismantling yard or facility. This term shall not include a
"transfer station" as defined herein.[Amended 11-18-2003]
MOTOR VEHICLE — All vehicles propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power, originally intended for use on or in public highways,
racetracks, dirt roads, mines, airports, construction sites, sand pits or
quarries.
OLD — A term of art used to describe the condition or state of repair
or disrepair of any object or article that is torn, worn, ripped, damaged,
broken, dismantled, crushed, ruined, used, outdated or no longer used for
its original intended use or purpose or no longer capable of being used
for its original intended use or purpose. The term "old" is not necessarily
meant to serve as a reference in time, reference to time or a reference in
time relative to some other reference or point in time. The term "old" may
refer to an object or article that a person no longer desires to keep, hold or
maintain, for whatever reason, and intends to discard.
PERSON — Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
SALVAGE — See "junk" as defined above.
SCRAP PROCESSOR — Any person operating, maintaining or conducting a
scrap metal processing facility.[Amended 11-18-2003]
TRAILER — Consists of a frame and body, if any, of a vehicle or apparatus
which is designed to be drawn on the public highways and roads by another
motor vehicle.
§ 194-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 194-4
1:534
TRANSFER STATION — Includes a lot, land or structure, or any
combination thereof, where solid wastes, including but not limited to
uncontaminated waste resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and
demolition of structures and roads, masonry materials, concrete, drywall
and refuse, are taken from collection vehicles and placed in or exchanged
with other transportation units for movement to another facility or where
solid wastes are temporarily collected and/or processed and subsequently
placed in transportation units for transport to another facility. This term
shall not include any lot, land or structure or any combination thereof
which handles recycled asphalt products exclusively.[Added 11-18-2003;
amended 5-19-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
VEHICLE DISMANTLER — Any person engaged in the business of acquiring
motor vehicles or trailers for the purpose of dismantling the same for parts
or components or reselling such vehicle as scrap or junk.
§ 194-5. License required.
§ 194-6. Application.
An applicant for license under this chapter shall file with the Town Clerk
a written application signed by himself, if an individual, by all partners,
if a partnership, and by the president or chief officer of a corporation or
other organization, upon forms provided by the Town Clerk, together with
11 conforming copies of such application and all required fees hereinafter
prescribed. The application shall be sworn to by each of its signers before
a notary public or other officer authorized by law to administer oaths and
shall include the following information or material:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a junk dealer or operate a
junkyard in the Town of Smithtown, whether personally, by agents or
employees, singularly or along with some other business or enterprise,
without first having obtained a license and a special permit therefor
from the Town Board in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
A junk dealer who operates more than one junkyard within the Town
shall be required to have in effect a separate special permit for each
yard.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an itinerant junk dealer in
the Town of Smithtown without first having obtained a license therefor
from the Town Clerk in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. The granting of a license in no way guarantees that the licensee may
operate a junkyard. No junkyard license shall be effective unless the
Town Board grants a special permit pursuant to § 322-96. Any license
granted is subject to the provisions of § 322-96.
A. The name, residence address and telephone number of each individual
owner, partner or, if a corporation or other organization, each officer
and director.
§ 194-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-6
1:535
B. The trade names used during the previous five years by the applicant
and each person signing the application, along with the locations of
prior establishments.
C. The names and addresses of employers of each person signing the
application during the previous five years.
D. The trade name and address of the business on behalf of which
application is made and its telephone number.
E. The name, residence address and telephone number of each person
employed or intended to be employed in the business as of the time the
application is filed.
F. The exact address and location of the place where the business is or is
proposed to be carried on, plus a survey and a proposed site plan of the
actual premises to be used in connection with the business, giving
distances in feet and showing adjoining roads, property lines, buildings
and uses.
G. The location of all premises where said applicant stores junk
permanently or temporarily in the Town of Smithtown, including all
premises where it is contemplated that junk may be stored in the
subsequent 12 months. In the event that additional premises are used
for junk storage and if such premises were not included in the previous
application, the applicant is required to file a supplementary
application including all of the information and in the same form and
subject to the same conditions as the original application. If such
supplementary application is duly approved, a supplementary license
will be issued.
H. The zoning classification in which each of the premises described in
Subsections F and G hereof is situated.
I. A statement as to whether each of said premises as described in
Subsections F and G hereof complies in all respects with the Zoning,
Building and Environmental Chapters of the Code of the Town of
Smithtown.
J. A statement that the applicant will not employ any child under 16 years
of age in connection with said junk business.
K. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance or any
violation of Article 6 of the General Business Law since January 1, 1903;
the nature of the offense; the date of its commission; and the
punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
L. Two color photographs of the applicant, taken within 60 days
immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which shall
be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the
applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
§ 194-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § 194-6
1:536
§ 194-7. Issuance of license; revocation.
M. Two complete sets of fingerprints of the applicant, taken within 60 days
immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which shall
give clear and distinct impressions of each and every finger separately
and together. Such prints may only be taken by persons authorized in
the State of New York to take fingerprints and must certify that said
person is duly qualified and authorized to take fingerprints.
Fingerprints must also be certified by the person who took the
fingerprints.
N. A statement listing all federal, state, county and local licenses and
permits the applicant has applied for, plus a certified copy of each
license or permit said applicant possesses. The applicant shall cause to
be delivered to the Town Clerk a certified copy of any license or permit
the applicant has obtained subsequent to the date of the application,
within five days of receipt of said license or permit.
O. Such other information as the Town Board, Town Clerk, Supervisor of
the Department of Environment and Waterways, Director of Planning,
Town Engineer or Building Director may from time to time reasonably
require to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and to arrive at a fair
determination of whether the terms of this chapter have been complied
with. [Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
A. Upon receipt of an application for a junk dealer's license or a license to
operate a junkyard as provided herein, the Town Clerk shall furnish
copies of the same to the Departments of Planning, Building,
Engineering, Highway and Environment and Waterways.
B. The Director of Planning shall approve the application only if he or she
has determined that the applicant has complied with all zoning,
subdivision and/or site plan requirements of the Town of Smithtown.
C. The Building Director shall approve the application only if he or she has
determined that the applicant has complied with the Building Code of
the Town of Smithtown.49 [Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
D. The Town Engineer shall approve the application only if he or she has
determined that the applicant has complied with all sound engineering
requirements and all applicable Town Code requirements.
E. The Supervisor of Environment and Waterways shall approve the
application only if he or she has determined that the applicant has
complied with all applicable environmental laws, regulations and
ordinances, including the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
F. If any of the findings provided for in this subsection are unfavorable to
the applicant, the Town Clerk shall, within 45 days after receipt of a
complete application, notify the applicant that his application is
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Building Construction.
§ 194-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-7
1:537
§ 194-8. Duration of license; license renewal.
disapproved and that no license will be issued. Upon request, the
Town Clerk shall furnish the applicant with a brief written statement
of the ground upon which the application was disapproved. The Town
Clerk shall provide the applicant with said statement within 10 days
of such request. If the findings in this subsection are favorable to the
applicant, the Town Clerk shall, within 45 days after the filing of a
complete application, issue a junk dealer's license or license to operate
a junkyard to the applicant if he finds:
(1) That the applicant has obtained all necessary approvals to the
effect that the junkyard will not be a violation of existing Town
Code regulations; and
(2) That the application has paid all required fees prescribed by the
Code of the Town of Smithtown.
G. The license as issued shall bear the following language conspicuously
on its face:
IMPORTANT:
This license applies only to the remises indicated herein and is
personal to the licensee, which authorizes the licensee to operate
a junkyard in a lawful place and manner only; it is NOT a
substitute for any certificate of occupancy, building permit or
other certificate or permit that might be required by law of the
licensee, and it does NOT relieve the licensee of the responsibility
to have all such required permits and certificates at all times and
comply with all laws affecting the above-described business.
This license shall expire one year from the date of issue.
H. The Town Clerk shall keep a permanent record of all applications filed
and all licenses issued in accordance with this chapter.
A. Any license or renewal license issued hereunder shall be effective as of
the date of its issuance and shall expire one year from said date.
B. An applicant for a renewal license shall file with the Town Clerk a
written application upon forms provided by the Town Clerk, signed and
sworn to in the manner required in the case of an original application,
together with 11 conforming copies of the application and all required
fees as hereinafter prescribed. The application shall contain such
information about the applicant's conduct (including any criminal or
civil litigation involving the applicant or operation of the junkyard) and
operation of the licensed business during the preceding license period
as is reasonably necessary to enable the Town Board to determine the
applicant's eligibility for a renewal license.
§ 194-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 194-9
1:538
§ 194-9. License fees.
The fee to be paid for any initial license issued hereunder shall be $1,000,
except that no fee shall be required of a bona fide nonprofit, charitable
organization. An annual license renewal fee shall be $500, except that
no renewal fee shall be required for any bona fide nonprofit, charitable
organization.
§ 194-10. License not transferable.
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred or assigned or
used by any person other than the one to whom it was issued, and no junk
dealer's license shall be used at any location other than the one described
in the application upon which it was issued.
§ 194-11. General operating requirements.
A. The following general operating requirements shall apply to all junk
dealers and junkyards licensed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter:
(1) The license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be plainly
displayed on the business premises.
(2) The junkyard, together with things kept therein, shall at all times
be maintained in a sanitary condition.
(3) No space not covered by the license shall be used in the licensed
business.
(4) No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in
such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes.
(5) No drums, barrels, tanks or other vessels of any kind shall be
stored outdoors at any time.
(6) No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract
vermin shall be kept on the premises, nor shall any refuse of any
kind be kept on the premises unless such refuse is junk as defined
herein and is in use in the licensed business.
(7) No junk shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public
street, walkway or curb or become scattered or blown off the
business premises.
(8) In the event that the Town Board waives the requirement of a
building as provided for in § 322-96B(5), junk shall be stored in
piles not exceeding six feet in height and shall be arranged so as to
permit easy access to all such junk for fire-fighting purposes.
(9) No combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to
the licensed business shall be kept on the premises, nor shall the
premises be allowed to become a fire hazard. All combustible
§ 194-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-11
1:539
materials shall be properly contained and stored according to all
applicable local, county, state and federal rules, regulations and
laws.
(10) Gasoline and oil and other vehicular fluids shall be removed from
all engines or vehicles on the premises.
(11)No junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in any
incinerator not meeting the requirements of all federal, state,
county and local laws, rules and regulations, and no junk or other
material shall be burned on the premises in the open except in
accordance with fire codes or other applicable provisions of law
governing burning with open fires.
(12)No junkyard operation, activity or business shall be carried on or in
connection with the licensed business on Sundays, Christmas Day,
Thanksgiving Day, New Year's Day, Lincoln's Birthday,
Washington's Birthday, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s Birthday,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Memorial Day, Columbus Day or
Veterans Day or at any time between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m.
(13) The area on the premises where junk is kept (other than indoors)
shall be enclosed, except for entrances and exits, with a solid,
vertical wall or fence of a minimum height of six feet measured
from ground level and in accordance with § 322-96B(5)(b).
Entrances and exits shall not be wider or more numerous than
reasonably necessary for the conduct of the licensed business.
(14) The license shall permit inspection of the business premises by any
member or representative member of the Town Board, the Building
Director or his designates, the Supervisor of the Department of
Environment and Waterways or his designates or the Director of
Public Safety or his designates at any time. [Amended 5-8-2007
by L.L. No. 5-2007]
(15)No junk dealer licensed hereunder or his agent or employee shall
purchase or receive any junk for use in the licensed business from
any person under the age of 18 years without the written consent of
a parent or guardian of such person. Such writing shall be held
available for inspection by any member or representative of the
Town Board for a period of at least seven years.
(16) Each acquisition of junk shall be recorded in English in a
permanent-type register kept on the business premises, giving the
name and residence address of the person from whom the
acquisition was made, a description of the junk acquired and the
date of the transaction. Such data shall be held available for
inspection by any member or representative of the Town Board for
a period of at least seven years.
§ 194-11 SMITHTOWN CODE § 194-11
1:540
(17)No junkyard shall be allowed to become a nuisance, nor shall any
junkyard be operated in such manner as to become injurious to the
health, safety or welfare of the community or of any residents close
by.
(18) All pumps and lubricating and other devises shall be located within
the enclosed building described in § 322-96B(5), except that the
location of gasoline pumps, which shall only be used to pump
gasoline or diesel fuel into vehicles necessary for the operation of a
junkyard, shall be located at least 35 feet from any street or lot line
or highway right-of-way. Storage tanks for any substance or fluid
shall be totally underground at locations other than any building
and shall not be less than a two-foot distance from each other.
(19) Each fluid shall be removed from the premises by a duly licensed
waste hauler who shall be registered with the Town Clerk.
(20) The shredding or compacting of vehicles or machinery or parts
thereof or of any metal is strictly prohibited.
(21)No gasoline, diesel fuel, oil or other similar automobile fuel or fluid
shall be sold, either wholesale or retail, from the subject premises,
except as otherwise provided herein.
B. The following general operating requirements shall apply to all
itinerant junk dealers licensed in accordance with this chapter:
(1) The licensee shall have the license issued to him under this chapter
in his immediate possession at all times when he is acting as an
itinerant junk dealer in the Town and shall exhibit it to any person
upon request.
(2) He shall not purchase or receive any junk from any person under
the age of 18 years without the written consent of a parent or
guardian of such person. He shall retain such writing for a period of
at least seven years and shall produce it within a reasonable time
upon the request of any member or representative of the Town
Board.
(3) He shall record, in English, in a permanent-type register each
acquisition of junk within the Town, giving the name and residence
address of the person from whom the acquisition was made, a
description of the junk acquired and the date of the transaction. He
shall retain such data for a period of at least seven years and shall
produce them within a reasonable time upon the request of any
member or representative of the Town Board.
(4) The itinerant license as issued shall bear the following language
conspicuously on its face:
§ 194-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-11
1:541
§ 194-12. Inspections.
§ 194-13. Revocation and suspension; penalty.
IMPORTANT:
This itinerant license applies only to the person indicated
herein and is personal to the licensee, which authorizes the
licensee to be an itinerant junk dealer; it is NOT a substitute
for any other certificate or permit that might be required
by law of the licensee, and it does not relieve the licensee
of the responsibility to have all such required permits and
certificates at all times and comply with all laws affecting the
business of junk dealers.
This license shall expire one year from the date of
issue.
A. The Director of Public Safety or his designee, the Building Director or
their duly authorized representatives shall inspect the junkyards of all
junk dealers licensed under this chapter at least once a year to
determine whether such yards are being operated in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of law.
[Amended 9-7-1993 by L.L. No. 8-1993; 5-8-2007 by L.L. No.
5-2007]
B. No person shall refuse entry to any Town inspector or officer
attempting to enter any premises for the purpose of inspection. Such
entry shall be permitted not only to areas open to the public but also to
all other areas, provided that no employee shall be required to
accompany any inspector in any area that the employee deems to be
dangerous, if the employee tells the inspector or officer that the area is,
in the employee's opinion, dangerous.
A. When the Town Board determines that the public interest so requires, it
shall revoke or suspend the license of any junk dealer or itinerant junk
dealer when it finds, after due investigation and opportunity to be heard
by the licensee, that:
(1) The junk dealer or any agent or officer of such dealer who takes
part in the operation of the licensed business or the itinerant junk
dealer is not of good character or reputation or is not capable of
operating the licensed business or carrying on the licensed activity
in a manner consistent with public health, safety and good morals;
(2) The junk dealer has failed to comply with the provisions of this
chapter or any provision of law applicable to the premises,
equipment or operation of the licensed business, or that the
itinerant junk dealer has failed to comply with this chapter or any
provision of law applicable to his equipment or licensed operations;
§ 194-11 SMITHTOWN CODE § 194-13
1:542
§ 194-14. Hearing on denial, renewal or revocation of license.
(3) The licensee has obtained his license through any fraud,
misrepresentation or misstatement;
(4) The licensed business or activity is being conducted in a manner
detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the public or
is a nuisance or is being operated or carried on in any unlawful
manner; or
(5) The licensed business or activity is no longer being operated or
carried on.
B. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown after notice and hearing for
violation of the provisions of this chapter or § 322-96 of the Town Code.
C. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the
time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed postage prepaid
to the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the
date set or hearing. Said hearing shall be conducted in a manner
wherein the accused licensee is afforded full due process of law.
D. At the conclusion of said hearing and as a result of the evidence
adduced therein, the Town Board may, in its discretion, revoke said
license or, in lieu thereof, suspend the subject license for a specific
period of time, censure the licensee or impose a fine not to exceed
$5,000.
A. Any person aggrieved by an order of the Town Board denying or
revoking a license for a proposed or existing business or activity subject
to the provisions of this chapter may file a written request for a
rehearing before the Town Board within 10 days after the issuance of
such order. The Town Board shall give notice of a public hearing upon
this request, to be held in not less than five days after service of the
notice on the person requesting the hearing. The Town Board shall also
give notice of the hearing to other persons directly interested in the
order in question. At such hearing, the Town Board shall determine
whether the denial or revocation of the license was in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and shall issue written findings of fact,
conclusions of law and an order to carry out its findings and
conclusions. These findings of fact and conclusions of law and order
shall be filed with the Town Clerk and served by the Clerk upon all
parties appearing or represented at said hearing.
B. The Town Attorney shall furnish such assistance and advice to the Town
Board as the Town Board shall request.
§ 194-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-15
1:543
§ 194-15. Compliance.
Any person acting as a junk dealer or itinerant junk dealer within the Town
on the effective date of this chapter shall have a period of three months to
obtain a special permit and license and one year to construct the necessary
site and building improvements, but any person acting as a junk dealer or
itinerant junk dealer within the Town on the effective date of this chapter
shall have a period of 90 days after such effective date to comply with all
operating provisions of this chapter.
§ 194-16. Site requirements.
In addition to all other requirements imposed by state or local law, rule or
regulation, no person may engage in the business of a junk dealer unless
the following items have been complied with:
A. A site plan has been approved by the Board of Site Plan Review of the
Town of Smithtown when such site plan is required by Chapter 322 of
the Town Code.
B. A certificate of occupancy, certificate of existing use or certificate of
zoning compliance exists for the site and all improvements contained
thereon.
C. A six-foot-high, solid, nontransparent fence according to
§ 322-96B(5)(b) surrounds all sides of the premises if the Town Board
waives the building requirements of § 322-96B(5).
D. The licensee and/or the owner shall provide and covenant for the
protection of the groundwater.
E. Vehicle dismantling.
(1) In the event that vehicle dismantling is to take place, a vehicle
dismantling pad must be installed, used and maintained in
conformance with the reasonable requirements of the Supervisor of
the Department of Environment and Waterways and the Town
Engineer. In no event shall compacting or shredding take place.
(2) The Supervisor of Environment and Waterways and the Town
Engineer shall, within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter,
make recommended minimum standards for vehicle dismantling
pads to the Town Board. The Town Board may, in its sound
discretion, adopt the recommendation of the Supervisor of
Environment and Waterways and the Town Engineer or, in the
alternative, confer with any department, including the
Departments of Environment and Waterways and Engineering, in
order to adopt reasonable minimum standards.
F. No license shall be issued unless the owner of the land and the tenant of
the premises submits an acknowledged consent authorizing the Town
§ 194-15 SMITHTOWN CODE § 194-16
1:544
Board or its duly authorized representative to enter and inspect the
premises.
G. A statement from the Town Engineer and the Supervisor of the
Department of Environment and Waterways exists, certifying that a
minimum of four permanent test wells, if built according to the required
specifications and requirements, will conform to all applicable laws,
rules and regulations.
(1) The owner and/or operator of the junkyard shall cause to be
performed, by a person whose qualifications are acceptable to the
Supervisor of Environment and Waterways for performing such
tests, a testing and evaluating of groundwater conditions for
materials, elements, compounds and other related substances as
indicated by the Supervisor of Environment and Waterways within
seven days of the first of each of the following months:
(a) February.
(b) May.
(c) August.
(d) November.
(2) Said owner and/or operator of the junkyard shall cause to be served
upon the Town Clerk a certified copy of the groundwater test
results within seven days of the completion of said testing. No
certified copy of the groundwater test shall be acceptable to the
Supervisor of Environment and Waterways to indicate satisfactory
compliance with the testing requirements of this Subsection G if
the qualifications of the tester have not been accepted by the
Supervisor of Environment and Waterways prior to each test.
(3) A conforming copy of the certified groundwater test shall be kept
by the owner and/or operator of the junkyard and by the tester for a
period of not less than seven years from the date of its certification.
It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or operator of the junkyard
and for the tester to fail to keep a copy of the certified test results
for the required seven-year period.
(4) The certified copy of the groundwater test results shall contain a
legally authorized form notice to the effect that false statements
made knowingly or negligently are punishable pursuant to § 210.45
of the Penal Law.
(5) A certified copy of the groundwater test results not properly
completed and/or not subscribed by the tester shall not be
acceptable to the Town.
H. All storage facilities, tanks, barrels or other similar vessels or parts
thereof must be provided with a means of monitoring frequently and
accurately for any leakage and spillage that might occur. All leak
§ 194-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-16
1:545
§ 194-17. Penalties for false statements.
Any applicant for a license, as hereinabove described, who knowingly makes
a false statement in such application shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be liable to a fine of not more than $5,000 or imprisonment
for not more than 30 days, or both. In addition, any license issued by
the Town of Smithtown in reliance on any false statement material to the
application shall be immediately suspended until such time as the applicant
submits a new application, together with supporting documentation and all
appropriate fees. Upon approval of the application, the Town Clerk shall
remove the suspension from the license and the same shall continue to be
in effect until the expiration date stamped on the license.
§ 194-18. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate or neglect or refuse to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be liable to a fine of not more than $5,000 or imprisonment for not more
than 30 days, or both. Each week shall constitute a separate violation and
subject any person who shall violate or neglect or refuse to comply with
any provisions of the chapter to liability to the same extent as a first-time
violator.
§ 194-19. Waivers.
Any requirement, mandate, prohibition or time limitation imposed by this
chapter or any regulation, standard or order generated hereunder may be
waived or modified, in the discretion of the Town Board, by order of the
Town Board.
Chapter 207
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Radio-free zones in beaches and parks — See
Ch. 101.
Dogs — See Ch. 135.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 215.
§ 207-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be defined as
set forth below:
detection systems and tanks shall be monitored by the junkyard
operator at least on a weekly basis, and the results shall be recorded
and kept with the operator's records for a period of not less than seven
years.
§ 194-16 SMITHTOWN CODE § 207-1
1:546
AMBIENT SOUND — An all-encompassing composite of sounds from many
sources associated with a given environment.
AUDIBLE — That which can be heard by a person of normal hearing
ability.[Added 10-7-2003]
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure level as measured
in decibels on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network slow
response (dBA).[Amended 11-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY — Any property currently or hereinafter zoned
for any classification of business or commercial zoning according to the
Zoning Map of the Town of Smithtown or any facility or property used
for activities involving the furnishing or handling of goods or services,
including but not limited to:[Added 5-3-1988]
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition, of buildings or
structures.[Added 5-3-1988]
CONTINUOUS SOUND — Any sound that is not an impulsive sound.
dBA — The A-weighted sound level in decibels, as measured by a generalpurpose
sound level meter complying with the provisions of the American
National Standards Institute Specifications for Sound Level Meters (ANSI
SI.4 1971), properly calibrated and operated on the A-weighting
network.[Added 11-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
DECIBEL — A unit for measuring the pressure level of a sound, equal to 1/
10 of a bel.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
services, including but not limited to repairing water, gas, electricity,
telephone and sewer facilities and public transportation, removing fallen
trees on public rights-of-way and abating life-threatening
conditions.[Added 5-3-1988]
IMPULSIVE SOUND — A sound characterized by brief excursions of peak
sound pressure which significantly exceed the ambient sound.
A. Commercial dining.
B. Off-road vehicle operation, such as repair and maintenance.
C. Retail services.
D. Wholesale services.
E. Banking and office activities.
F. Recreation and entertainment.
G. Community services.
H. Public services.
I. Other commercial activities.
§ 207-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-1
1:547
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY — Any facility or property used for activities
involving the production, fabrication, packaging, storage, warehousing,
shipping or distribution of goods, including any property currently or
hereinafter zoned for any classification of industrial zoning according to the
Zoning Map of the Town of Smithtown.[Added 5-3-1988]
NOISE DISTURBANCE[Added 5-3-1988; amended 11-1-2016 by L.L.
No. 2-2016] —
PEAK SOUND PRESSURE — The maximum absolute value of the
instantaneous sound pressure level during a specified time interval.
PERSON — Any firm, partnership, corporation, association or
individual.[Added 7-11-1995]
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place that is owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.[Added 5-3-1988]
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures therein that are owned or
controlled by a governmental entity.[Added 5-3-1988]
REAL PROPERTY LINE[Added 5-3-1988; amended 10-7-2003] —
Any sound that:
(1) Endangers the safety or health of any person.
(2) Disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities.
(3) Endangers personal or real property.
Is audible outside the real property boundary from which it
originates and is loud, disturbing, unreasonable and/or
unnecessary under the circumstances, as well as plainly audible in
any other person's residence and the source of sound is discernible
regardless of whether doors and windows are closed.
(4)
A.
A noise disturbance may be substantiated by either of the following:
Sworn affidavits from two or more residents who are in general
agreement as to the times and durations of the noise and who
reside in separate residences.
(1)
A noise in excess of the maximum permissible A-weighted sound
levels as determined by a qualified technician using a sound level
device and reported on a form approved by the Smithtown Public
Safety Department.
(2)
B.
The imaginary line, including its vertical extension, that separates one
parcel of real property from another; or
A.
The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is in a
multidwelling building.
B.
§ 207-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § 207-1
1:548
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property used for human
habitation.[Added 5-3-1988]
SOUND — Any variation in ambient barometric pressure.
SOUND DEVICE OR APPARATUS — Any radio device or apparatus or
any device or apparatus for the amplification of sounds from any radio,
phonograph or other sound-making or sound-producing device or any
device or apparatus for the reproduction or amplification of the human
voice or other sounds.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — When measured in decibels, equal to 20
times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the effective pressure of
the sound measured to the standard reference pressure of a sound.
SOUND SOURCE — Any person, animal, device, operation, process, activity,
or phenomenon which emits or causes sound.[Added 10-7-2003]
STANDARD REFERENCE PRESSURE OF A SOUND — Twenty
micronewtons per square foot.
§ 207-2. Prohibitions. [Amended 8-14-1984; 5-3-1988; 8-2-1989;
10-7-2003]
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be made verbally,
electronically, or mechanically any noise disturbance.
B. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the following acts:
(1) Sound device or apparatus: operating, playing or permitting the
operation or playing of any sound device or apparatus as defined in
§ 207-1 in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance; or the
operation of any such device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be audible at a distance of 50 feet
from the building, structure, vehicle or area in which it is located.
[Amended 11-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
(2) Commercial music: music originating from or in connection with
the operation of any commercial facility, establishment or
enterprise between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a
manner as to be audible across a real property line. That such
sound is audible and its source determinable at such real property
line by anyone empowered to enforce this chapter shall be
sufficient to establish that a violation of this section has been
committed.
(3) Animals and birds: owning, possessing or harboring any animal or
bird that frequently or for continued duration makes sounds that
create a noise disturbance across a residential real property line.
For the purpose of this section, a "noise disturbance from an animal
or bird" shall be defined as the making of any sound which is
audible across a real property line for 15 minutes in any one-hour
interval.
§ 207-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-2
1:549
(4) Motor vehicle repairs and testing: repairing, rebuilding, modifying
or testing any motor or engine in such a manner as to exceed any
applicable limit in Table I50 across a residential area property line.
(5) Construction: operating or permitting the operation of any tools or
equipment used in construction, drilling, earthmoving, excavating
or demolition work between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
the following day on weekdays or at any time on weekends or legal
holidays, except for:
(a) Emergency work;
(b) When the sound level does not exceed any applicable limit
specified in Table I;
(c) When it is the result of the operation of any said equipment by
or for any municipal agency.
(6) Standing motor vehicles: operating or permitting the operation of
any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) in
excess of 10,000 pounds or any auxiliary equipment attached to
such a vehicle for a period longer than five minutes in any hour
while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic
congestion on a public right-of-way or public space or for
emergency purposes, within 150 feet of a residential area between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day. [Added
6-28-2005]
(7) Horns and signaling devices: the sounding of any horn, signaling
device or alarm (except as in danger warning pursuant to § 375 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Code of the State of New York) which results
in a harsh or loud sound or repetitive sounds for any unreasonable
or unnecessary period of time so as to create a noise disturbance.
[Added 11-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
(8) Shouting and yelling: shouting, yelling, singing, calling, hooting or
whistling so as to create a noise disturbance. [Added 11-1-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016]
(9) Condition of vehicle or load: the use of any automobile, motorcycle,
or vehicle so out of repair, or loaded in such a manner so as to
create loud, grating, grinding, rattling or other sounds so as to
create a noise disturbance. [Added 11-1-2016 by L.L. No.
2-2016]
(10) Loading and unloading: the loading or unloading of any vehicle,
boat, barge or train or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes,
crates and containers, or the loading and unloading of any
materials, equipment or garbage cans so as to create a noise
disturbance. [Added 11-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
50.Editor's Note: Table I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 207-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 207-2
1:550
(11) Construction or repairing of buildings and incidental areas: any
construction, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair which
creates a noise disturbance, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays and except in cases of emergency or in
the interest of public safety. [Added 11-1-2016 by L.L. No.
2-2016]
(12) Institutional buildings: the creation of any noise disturbance on any
street adjacent to any school, place of worship, court, or hospital,
while same is in use, which unreasonably interferes with the
workings of such institution or which disturbs or unreasonably
annoys occupants, visitors or employees of such institutions,
provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets
indicating that the same is a school, hospital, court, or place of
worship. [Added 11-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
(13) Hawkers, peddlers, and vendors: the shouting and crying of
peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet
of the neighborhood so as to create a noise disturbance. [Added
11-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
(14) Transportation of metal rails, pillars and columns: the
transportation of metal rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or
other material over and along streets and other public places upon
carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so as to create a
noise disturbance. [Added 11-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
(15) Domestic equipment: the operation of or permitting to be operated
any power saw, drill, sander, router, lawn or garden device, leaf or
snow blower, insect control device or domestic equipment so as to
create a noise disturbance, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays, 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Saturdays
and between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Sundays, and
except in cases of emergency or in the interest of public safety.
[Added 11-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016; amended 9-20-2018]
(16) Sound device or apparatus: operating, playing or permitting the
operation or playing of any sound device or apparatus, including,
but not limited to, loudspeakers, speaker systems, outdoor public
address systems, or any device for the production or reproduction
of sound, in such a manner so as to create a noise disturbance.
[Added 11-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
(17) Explosives, firearms, fireworks and similar devices: the use or
firing of explosives, firearms, fireworks or similar devices so as to
create a noise disturbance, except as permitted by any other
federal, state, county or local law. [Added 11-1-2016 by L.L. No.
2-2016]
§ 207-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-2
1:551
§ 207-3. Maximum permissible A-weighted sound pressure levels.
[Amended 5-3-1988]
§ 207-4. Commercial and business advertising.
(18) Generators: the use of a generator when there is no power outage
caused by a storm or other emergency, except for routine testing.
[Added 11-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
(19) Trash collection: the collection of trash between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Added 11-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any
source of sound on a particular category of property or any public lands
or right-of-way in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds
the particular sound level limits set forth in Table I51 when measured at
or within the real property line of the receiving property, except those
acts specifically prohibited in § 207-2 of this chapter for which no
measurement of sound is required.
B. The following are exempt from the A-weighted sound pressure level
limits of Table I:
(1) The noise of domestic power tools, lawn mowers and agricultural
equipment, when operated with a muffler during permitted hours
designated in § 207-2B(15), provided that they produce less than
70 dBA at any real property line of a residential property.
[Amended 10-7-2003; 9-20-2018]
(2) The sound from church bells and church chimes when a part of a
religious observance or service.
(3) The noise from construction activity, except as provided in
§ 207-2B(5).
(4) The noise from snowblowers, snow throwers and snowplows, when
operated with a muffler, for the purpose of snow removal.
(5) The noise from a burglar alarm of any building or motor vehicle,
provided that such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation
within 15 minutes after it has been activated and shall not operate
more than 15 minutes in any one-hour period. [Amended
10-7-200352]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate or cause to be used
or operated any sound device or apparatus in, on, near or adjacent to
any public street, park or place for commercial or business advertising
purposes.
51.Editor's Note: Table I is included at the end of this chapter.
52.Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Subsection B(5), concerning signaling
devices used in connection with an emergency, and renumbered former Subsection B(6)
as B(5).
§ 207-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 207-4
1:552
§ 207-5. Exceptions. [Added 5-3-1988]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 207-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-7-2003; 11-1-2016 by
L.L. No. 2-2016]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense, and such violation shall be punishable by a fine of up to
$250 for the first offense, not less than $500 for the second offense and not
less than $1,000 for the third and subsequent offenses or imprisonment of
not more than 15 days, or both.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive or to employ,
procure or induce another to operate, drive, lend, lease or donate any
automobile, truck or other type of vehicle or to operate or aviate or
procure or induce another to operate, aviate, lend, lease or donate any
airplane or other type of flying device or commercial or business
advertising by means of any sound device or apparatus in violation of
this chapter.
C. The use of the name of any person or of any proprietor, vendor or
exhibitor or the use of any trade business or corporate name in
connection with such commercial or business advertising shall be
presumptive evidence that such advertising was conducted by reason of
employment, procurement or induction on the part of said person,
proprietor, vendor or exhibitor or the person or persons represented by
said trade, business or corporate name.
A. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency or the creation of sound in the performance
of emergency work.
B. Noise from noncommercial public speaking and public assembly
activities conducted on any public space or public right-of-way.
C. Noise from municipally sponsored celebrations or events.
§ 207-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-6
1:553
NOISE CONTROL TABLE I
Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Pressure Levels by Receiving Property Category, in
Dba
[Amended 10-7-2003]
Receiving Property Category
Sound Source
Property
Category
Residential, 7:00
a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
(dBA)
Residential,
10:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
(dBA)
Commercial, all
times
(dBA)
Industrial, all
times
(dBA)
Residential 45 40 65 70
Commercial or
public lands or
rights-of-way
55 45 65 70
Industrial 55 45 65 70
Chapter 215
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handbills — See Ch. 181.
Noise — See Ch. 207.
Trespassing — See Ch. 288.
§ 207-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § 207-6
1:554
ARTICLE I
Peddlers
[Adopted 8-5-1980]
§ 215-1. Title.
This Article is to be known as the "Peddlers Ordinance."
§ 215-2. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 10-6-2009]
§ 215-3. License requirements. [Amended 10-6-2009]
A. The following definitions shall govern the interpretation of this Article
unless otherwise expressly defined herein:
PEDDLE — The act of traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or
any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house
or from street to street and offering or exposing for sale goods, wares,
merchandise or provisions of any kind or description, or making sales
and delivering articles to purchasers or otherwise offering, exposing or
selling the same.
PEDDLER — Any natural person or any organization or entity that
peddles, as herein defined, whether directly or indirectly, and whether
in person or through another person or employee.
REGISTER — To supply to the Clerk of the Town of Smithtown the name
and address of an organization or entity, together with the dates that
said organization or entity will engage in peddling activities within the
Town of Smithtown.
TOWN — Includes all areas within the Town of Smithtown, exclusive of
areas wholly within any incorporated village.
B. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and vice versa. The
word "shall" is always mandatory.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 to peddle within
the Town of Smithtown, unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle within the Town of
Smithtown without first having obtained a valid license therefor, as
provided hereunder.
C. Every employer who hires a person to peddle on its behalf without first
having obtained a valid license therefor shall be subject to the penalties
hereunder.
§ 215-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-4
1:555
§ 215-4. Application for license; fee. [Amended 9-21-1982;
7-24-1990; 5-21-1992; 4-5-1994; 7-22-2003; 10-6-2009]
To procure a license required under § 215-3, or any renewal thereof, a
verified application shall be made to the Department of Public Safety setting
forth the following information:
A. The name and residence address of the applicant. If the applicant is a
corporation, partnership or other business entity, the applicant shall
also provide the name and address thereof and the names and
residence addresses for all principals, officers, directors, partners and
members.
B. The residence and business addresses of the applicant during the past
five years. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other
business entity, the applicant shall also provide the business and
residence addresses for all principals, officers, directors, partners and
members.
C. The applicant's business(es) for the past five years. If the applicant is a
corporation, partnership or other business entity, the applicant shall
also provide the business(es) for all principals, officers, directors,
partners and members for the past five years.
D. If employed by the owner of a licensed vehicle, the name and address of
such employer, together with credentials establishing the exact
relationship.
E. If for a vehicle license, a description of the vehicle, together with the
license number or other means of identification, including a copy of
vehicle registration and insurance card.
F. The applicant shall provide a New York State sales tax number.
G. Individual photographs (three of each principal, each two inches by two
inches).
H. (Reserved)53
I. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other business entity,
the applicant shall furnish the name, address, and date of birth of each
and every principal, officer, director, partner, and member, as well as
the percent of ownership interest of each such person, and an affidavit
from each such person describing his or her duties and responsibilities.
J. The applicant shall provide a record of a prior conviction or convictions
of any crime for which the applicant plead or was found guilty. If the
applicant is a corporation, partnership or other business entity, it shall
also provide a record of a prior conviction or convictions of any crime
for which it plead or was found guilty.
53.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection H, regarding fingerprinting for applicants, as amended,
was repealed 9-4-2018.
§ 215-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 215-4
1:556
§ 215-5. Issuance of or refusal to issue license; appeals. [Amended
10-6-2009]
§ 215-6. Additional requirements prior to issuance.
K. The applicant shall provide a list of any and all pending lawsuits to
which it is a party and an explanation of each pending lawsuit, including
any civil, criminal or administrative proceeding.
L. The applicant shall provide any other information or documentation
required by the Town Clerk and/or Department of Public Safety for the
purpose of implementing the intent of this chapter.
A. All applications and documentation shall be submitted to the
Department of Public Safety. Upon receipt of any such application and
documentation, the Department of Public Safety shall review same and
shall verify the truth and accuracy of said application and
documentation. The Department of Public Safety, in order to establish
the truth and accuracy of the information contained in the application,
may request any information pertinent to the processing of said
application and may, as necessary, request any additional information
during the application process and for the entire term of said permit. If
the Department of Public Safety cannot confirm the truth or accuracy of
said material contained in the application; or if it determines that a
material misrepresentation is contained therein; or if the applicant shall
have been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony which is determined to
render the applicant unfit to carry on the aforesaid operation; provided,
however, that proper consideration is given to New York State
Correction Law §§ 701 through 703-b and §§ 751 through 753 in making
any such determination; or if it determines the applicant to be unfit or
incapable of properly conducting the aforesaid operation, it shall issue
a report to the Town Clerk, who shall deny said application. The Town
Clerk shall notify the applicant within 30 days after receipt of a
completed application as to whether the application shall be approved
or denied. If the application is denied and the applicant has been
operating within the Town prior to the denial, then the applicant shall
discontinue all operations within the Town of Smithtown within 15 days
of such notification. An applicant who is denied a permit hereunder may
request a review by the Town Board, which shall, upon such request,
review the basis for such denial and shall determine whether such
denial shall be affirmed or reversed.
B. The Town Clerk shall issue licenses pursuant to the requirements of this
article, except for any such license that is to be denied pursuant to
§ 215-5A.
C. The Town Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued.
A. If the applicant's business involves the use of scales or measures, the
Town Clerk shall not issue any license until such time as there has been
filed with him a certificate by the Suffolk County Sealer of Weights and
§ 215-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-6
1:557
§ 215-7. Fees.
§ 215-8. License plates. [Amended 9-4-2018]
For each vehicle licensed under this article, the Town Clerk shall issue
a license card which shall bear the word "peddler," the number of the
license and the calendar year for which such license is issued, in figures
plainly discernible. Said license card shall be displayed in each vehicle in a
conspicuous place and shall be kept clear and readable at all times.
§ 215-9. Display of license.
Every peddler licensed under this Article shall have his license in his
immediate possession at all times when peddling and shall display the same
upon demand of any person.
§ 215-10. Transferal of license.
No license or license plate issued under the provisions of this Article may
be transferred from one person to another person or from one vehicle to
another vehicle.
§ 215-11. Use of streets.
Measures that the applicant's scales or measures have been tested or
sealed.
B. If the application is for a license to handle food in any form, the Town
Clerk shall not issue the license until there has been submitted to him
evidence that the applicant has complied with the provisions of the
Suffolk County Public Health Ordinance.
A. For each person proposing to peddle, whether on foot or from a licensed
vehicle: $25. [Amended 11-20-1984; 9-4-2018]
B. For each commercial or suburban vehicle: $25. [Amended
11-20-1984; 9-4-2018]
C. The annual fee herein provided for shall be assessed on a calendar-year
basis, and all licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December
immediately following the date of issuance. There shall be no reduction
in fees for fractional parts of the year.
A. No peddler, including those otherwise exempt from this Article, may
remain in a stationary location in the public streets, nor shall any
peddler be permitted to operate in any congested area where his
operation might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of
this Article, the judgment of any police officer, exercised in good faith,
shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the
public impeded or inconvenienced. [Amended 10-6-1981]
§ 215-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § 215-11
1:558
§ 215-12. Prohibitions.
§ 215-13. Exemptions. [Amended 10-6-2009]
The following organizations and individuals shall, upon supplying the
requisite proof to the Clerk of the Town of Smithtown, be exempt from
§§ 215-3B, 215-3C and 215-4 of this article:
B. No peddler, including those otherwise exempt from this Article, shall
conduct business on the following roads within the Town of Smithtown
or within the lines of the following highways or within a distance of 250
feet therefrom of any intersecting street:
(1) State Route 25.
(2) State Route 25-A.
(3) Terry Road between State Route 25 and Annette Avenue.
(4) Smithtown Boulevard.
(5) Veterans Memorial Highway.
(6) State Road 347, also known as Smithtown Bypass.
(7) Indian Head Road.
(8) Motor Parkway.
(9) Route 111. [Added 10-6-1981]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon private or public
property for the purpose of peddling before the hour of 8:00 a.m. of any
day or after sundown of any day, except upon the invitation of the
householder or occupant. [Amended 9-4-2018]
B. No peddler shall peddle, vend or sell his goods or wares within 200 feet
of any church or place of worship or any place occupied exclusively as a
public or private school or for school purposes.
C. No peddler, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, cry out or blow a
horn upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of said
Town or upon any private premises or any other place in said Town.
D. It shall be unlawful for any peddler, or any person on his behalf, to enter
upon property whereon there is any sign stating “No Peddlers,” “No
Solicitors,” “No Agents,” or any other such wording, indicating that
peddling, soliciting or canvassing is prohibited on the premises.
[Added 9-4-2018]
A. Charitable, religious, or other not-for-profit organizations. However, for
the purposes of this article, said organizations must register with the
Clerk of the Town of Smithtown and provide proof of organizational
status before engaging in any peddling activities.
§ 215-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-13
1:559
§ 215-14. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Suffolk County Police
Department and/or the Ordinance Inspector of the Town of Smithtown to
require any person who is engaged in peddling to produce his peddler's
license and to enforce the provisions of this Article against any person found
to be violating the same.
§ 215-15. Report of violations; suspension of permit.
§ 215-16. Revocation of license.
B. Honorably discharged veterans of the armed forces of the United States
who have obtained a veteran's license from the Suffolk County Clerk to
hawk, peddle or vend pursuant to law.
C. Persons maintaining a regular delivery route in the Town of Smithtown.
D. Commercial salesmen or deliverymen calling exclusively upon retail or
wholesale establishments or other business firms within the Town of
Smithtown.
A. The Suffolk County Police Department and/or the Ordinance Inspector
of the Town of Smithtown shall report to the Town Clerk all convictions
for violations of this Article, and the Town Clerk shall record the reports
of such violations.
B. Whenever it shall be shown, or whenever the Town Board of the Town of
Smithtown or the Suffolk County Police have knowledge, that any
person to whom a permit has been issued under this Article has violated
any of the provisions of this Article or that any promoter, agent or
solicitor of a permittee has misrepresented the purpose of the
solicitation, the Town Board or the Suffolk County Police shall
immediately suspend the permit and give the permittee written notice,
by certified mail, of a hearing to be held within five days of such
suspension to determine whether or not the permit should or should not
be revoked.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this Article may be revoked by
the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown after notice and hearing for
any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as peddler.
(3) Any violation of this Article.
§ 215-13 SMITHTOWN CODE § 215-16
1:560
§ 215-17. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-24-1982]
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of any ordinances of the Town of Smithtown shall be guilty of an offense
punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both; however, for the purpose of
confirming jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers, such violations
shall be deemed to be misdemeanors, and for such purposes only all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm, association or corporation
violating any provisions of any ordinance of the Town of Smithtown shall be
subject to a penalty in a minimum sum of $750 for the first such violation,
$1,500 for the second such violation and $2,500 for any subsequent
violation, said penalties to be recoverable in a civil action in the name of the
Town of Smithtown as damages.
(4) Conviction of a felony or a misdemeanor, which misdemeanor, in
the judgment of the Town Board, renders the applicant unfit or
undesirable.
(5) Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time
and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date
set for hearing.
§ 215-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-17
1:561

ARTICLE II
Solicitors and Canvassers
[Adopted 8-5-1980]
§ 215-18. License requirements. [Amended 10-6-2009]
§ 215-19. Definitions. [Amended 10-6-2009]
SOLICIT or CANVASS — To go from place to place, from house to house,
from street to street, or from store to store to sell or take orders for goods,
wares, merchandise or provisions for future delivery or for services to be
performed or for information to be obtained, or to distribute advertising
matter, or for the purpose of obtaining contributions of money or of goods,
wares or provisions at any place within the Town of Smithtown.
SOLICITOR OR CANVASSER — Any natural person or any organization
or entity that solicits or canvasses, as herein defined, whether directly or
indirectly, and whether in person or through another person or employee.
§ 215-20. Application for license; fees. [Amended 9-21-1982;
7-24-1990; 5-21-1992; 4-5-1994; 7-22-2003; 10-6-2009]
To procure a license required under § 215-18, or any renewal thereof, a
verified application shall be made to the Department of Public Safety setting
forth the following information:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 to solicit within
the Town of Smithtown, unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit within the Town of
Smithtown without having first obtained a valid license therefor, as
provided hereunder.
C. Every employer who hires a person to solicit on its behalf without
having first obtained a valid license therefor shall be subject to the
penalties hereunder.
A. The name and residence address of the applicant. If the applicant is a
corporation, partnership or other business entity, the applicant shall
also provide the name and address thereof and the names and
residence addresses for all principals, officers, directors, partners and
members.
B. The residence and business addresses of the applicant during the past
five years. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other
business entity, the applicant shall also provide the business and
residence addresses for all principals, officers, directors, partners and
members.
C. The applicant's business(es) for the past five years. If the applicant is a
corporation, partnership or other business entity, the applicant shall
§ 215-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-20
1:563
§ 215-21. Issuance of or refusal to issue license; appeals. [Amended
10-6-2009]
also provide the business(es) for all principals, officers, directors,
partners and members for the past five years.
D. If employed by the owner of a licensed vehicle, the name and address of
such employer, together with credentials establishing the exact
relationship.
E. If for a vehicle license, a description of the vehicle, together with the
license number or other means of identification.
F. The applicant shall provide a New York State sales tax number.
G. Individual photographs (three of each principal, each two inches by two
inches).
H. (Reserved)54
I. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other business entity,
the applicant shall furnish the name, address, and date of birth of each
and every principal, officer, director, partner, and member, as well as
the percent of ownership interest of each such person, and an affidavit
from each such person describing his or her duties and responsibilities.
J. The applicant shall provide a record of a prior conviction or convictions
of any crime for which the applicant plead or was found guilty. If the
applicant is a corporation, partnership or other business entity, it shall
also provide a record of a prior conviction or convictions of any crime
for which it plead or was found guilty.
K. The applicant shall provide a list of any and all pending lawsuits to
which it is a party and an explanation of each pending lawsuit, including
any civil, criminal or administrative proceeding.
L. The applicant shall provide any other information or documentation
required by the Town Clerk and/or Department of Public Safety for the
purpose of implementing the intent of this chapter.
A. All applications and documentation shall be submitted to the
Department of Public Safety for review. If the Department of Public
Safety determines that a material misrepresentation is contained
therein; or if the applicant shall have been convicted of a misdemeanor
or felony which is determined to render the applicant unfit to carry on
the aforesaid operation; provided, however, that proper consideration is
given to New York State Correction Law §§ 701 through 703-b and
§§ 751 through 753, it shall issue a report to the Town Clerk, who shall
deny said application. The Town Clerk shall notify the applicant within
30 days after receipt of a completed application as to whether the
54.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection H, regarding fingerprinting for applicants, as amended,
was repealed 9-4-2018.
§ 215-20 SMITHTOWN CODE § 215-21
1:564
§ 215-22. Fees.
§ 215-23. (Reserved)55
§ 215-24. Cards.
The Town Clerk shall issue to each licensee at the time of delivery of
his license a card which shall contain the words "licensed solicitor" and/
or "licensed canvasser," the period for which the license is issued and
the number of the license, in letters and figures easily discernible from a
distance of 10 feet.
§ 215-25. Prohibitions. [Amended 9-4-2018]
application shall be approved or denied. If the application is denied
and the applicant has been operating within the Town prior to the
denial, then the applicant shall discontinue all operations within the
Town of Smithtown within 15 days of such notification. An applicant
who is denied a permit hereunder may request a review by the Town
Board, which shall, upon such request, review the basis for such denial
and shall determine whether such denial shall be affirmed. [Amended
9-4-2018]
B. The Town Clerk shall issue license pursuant to the requirements of this
article, except for any such license that is to be denied pursuant to
§ 215-21A.
C. The Town Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued.
A. The license fee which shall be charged by the Town Clerk for such
license shall be $25 per year for each person, provided that any
authorized agent or representative of an employer licensed hereunder
shall be issued a license under this Article for no additional fee if such
agent or representative produces a statement from his licensed
employer to the effect that said person is in fact an authorized agent or
representative of the licensed employer and is a reliable and reputable
person. Such certification shall be in a manner satisfactory in form to
the Town Clerk. All other individual solicitors and/or canvassers shall
pay said fee of $25.
B. The annual fees herein provided shall be assessed on a calendar-year
basis, and all licenses shall expire on December 31 immediately
following the date of issuance. There shall be no reduction in fees for
fractional parts of the year.
A. No solicitor and/or canvasser shall enter upon private or public
property for the purpose of soliciting and/or canvassing before the hour
of 8:00 a.m. or after sundown of any day, except upon the express
invitation of the householder or occupant.
55.Editor’s Note: Former § 215-23, Surety bond, was repealed 9-4-2018.
§ 215-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-25
1:565
§ 215-26. Display of license.
Solicitors and canvassers are required to carry with them while soliciting
and/or canvassing and to exhibit their licenses at the request of any person.
§ 215-27. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Suffolk County Police
Department and/or the Ordinance Inspector of the Town of Smithtown
to require any person who is engaged in soliciting and/or canvassing to
produce his solicitor's or canvasser's license and to enforce the provisions
of this Article against any person found to be violating the same.
§ 215-28. Reports of violations; records.
The Chief of Police shall report to the Town Clerk all convictions for
violation of this Article, and the Town Clerk shall maintain a record for each
license issued and record the reports of violations therein.
§ 215-29. Revocation of license.
B. It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser, or any person on his
behalf, to enter upon property whereon there is any sign stating “No
Peddlers,” “No Solicitors,” “No Agents,” or any other such wording,
indicating that peddling, soliciting or canvassing is prohibited on the
premises.
A. Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this Article may be
revoked by the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown, after notice and
hearing, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as solicitor or as canvasser.
(3) Any violation of this Article.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(5) Conducting the business of soliciting or of canvassing in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a menace to
the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time
and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date
set for hearing.
§ 215-25 SMITHTOWN CODE § 215-30
1:566
§ 215-30. Exemptions. [Amended 10-6-2009]
The following organizations and individuals shall, upon supplying the
requisite proof to the Clerk of the Town of Smithtown, be exempt from
§§ 215-18B, 215-18C and 215-20 of this article:
§ 215-31. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of any ordinances of the Town of Smithtown shall be guilty of an offense
punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both; however, for the purpose
of confirming jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers, such violations
shall be deemed to be misdemeanors, and for such purposes only all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm, association or corporation
violating any provisions of any ordinance of the Town of Smithtown shall
be subject to a penalty in a sum not exceeding $100 for the first such
violation and in a sum not exceeding $250 for any subsequent violation; said
penalties shall be recoverable in a civil action in the name of the Town of
Smithtown as damages.
A. Charitable, religious, or other not-for-profit organizations. However, for
the purposes of this article, said organizations must register with the
Clerk of the Town of Smithtown and provide proof of organizational
status before engaging in any soliciting activities.
B. Honorably discharged veterans of the Armed Forces of the United
States who have obtained a veteran's license from the Suffolk County
Clerk to hawk, peddle or vend pursuant to law.
C. Persons maintaining a regular delivery route in the Town of Smithtown.
D. Commercial salesmen or deliverymen calling exclusively upon retail or
wholesale establishments or other business firms within the Town of
Smithtown.
§ 215-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-31
1:567
Chapter 221
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 115.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 164.
Solid waste management — See Ch. 177.
Public nuisance abatement — See Ch. 222.
Trees — See Ch. 285.
Zoning — See Ch. 322.
§ 215-31 SMITHTOWN CODE § 215-31
1:568
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 221-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Ordinance of the
Town of Smithtown."
§ 221-2. Findings and purpose.
§ 221-3. Word usage; definitions.
A. It is hereby declared by the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown that
all properties shall be maintained in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter so as to ensure the desirable character of the property, to
prevent blight and the spread thereof and to prevent hazards to the
public health, safety, and welfare.
B. It is found and declared that, by reason of lack of maintenance and
progressive deterioration, certain structures, properties and lots have
the effect of creating blighting conditions and initiating slums,
dangerous conditions and unsightliness and that, if the same are not
curtailed and removed, the aforesaid conditions will grow and spread
and will necessitate in time the expenditure of large amounts of public
funds to correct and eliminate the same.
C. By reason of timely regulations and restrictions as herein contained,
the growth of slums and blight may be prevented and neighborhood and
property values thereby maintained, neighborhood characteristics,
amenities and aesthetics may be enhanced and improved and the
desirability and amenities of commercial residential and neighborhood
uses may be enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare
protected and fostered. Therefore, this chapter has been prepared and
adopted with consideration to the character of the various zoning
districts and the stability for the particular uses therein.
A. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and vice versa.
B. The following definitions shall govern the interpretation of this chapter
unless otherwise expressly defined herein:
ABANDON — Includes leaving, discarding, dumping, throwing or
placing of personal property in public or private places.
COMMERCIAL — That which relates to or is connected with trade,
traffic or commerce in general; that which is used or occupied as
or with business or commerce; any building, structure or lot used
to manage conduct or carry out any business, whether for profit,
nonprofit, not for profit or charitable, and is intended to include
buildings, structures or lots used for commercial, retail, industrial or
professional purposes and shall include warehouse or storage facilities.
§ 221-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-3
1:569
FIRE AND HEALTH HAZARD — Includes but shall not be limited to
weeds, brush, grass, rubbish or poisonous shrubs or weeds, or others
items and conditions described in Chapter 164 of the Code of the Town
of Smithtown entitled, "Fire Prevention."
PERSON — An individual, firm, association, corporation, labor
organization, partnership, legal representative, trustee, trustee in
bankruptcy, receiver, tenant, mortgagee or vendee in possession,
assignee of rents, executor, lessee, agent or employee, directly or
indirectly in control of a building, lot or property, or any combination of
individuals.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes all areas in the Town of Smithtown which
are open to the public for ingress, egress, transportation, vehicular
traffic and pedestrian traffic, including but not limited to parking lots,
shopping centers, yards, streets or sidewalks.
RESIDENTIAL — Any single-family or two-family home or multiple
dwelling, including but not limited to houses, apartment buildings,
garden apartments, townhouses, condominiums or cooperatives; any
structure used for or intended to be used as or designed to be used as
a place for the residence of any person.
SHOPPING BASKET, WAGON OR CART — Includes any rolling or
nonrolling basket or container, or any part or parts thereof, commonly
used in supermarkets or self-service stores as a conveyer of goods,
wares and merchandise.
SOLID WASTE — All putrescible and nonputrescible materials or
substances discarded or rejected as being spent, useless, worthless or
in excess to the owners at the time of such discharge or rejection,
garbage, refuse, litter, industrial and commercial waste, sludges from
air- or water-control facilities, rubbish, ashes, contained gaseous
material, incinerator residue, demolition and construction debris,
discarded automobiles and offal sewage or other liquid or semiliquid
materials or substances and those in gaseous form. "Solid waste"
includes any material or scrap separated from the waste stream and
held for the purpose of recycling.
TOWN — Includes all areas in the Town of Smithtown exclusive of areas
wholly within any incorporated village.
§ 221-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 221-3
1:570
ARTICLE II
Property Maintenance
§ 221-4. Standards.
A. Open areas.
(1) Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to
protect buildings, properties and lots so as to prevent the
weakening of the structural integrity of any building or subsurface
of any lot or property as well as to prevent altering surface
conditions and to prevent the development of stagnant ponds.
(2) No shopping baskets, carts or wagons shall be left unattended or
standing, and said baskets, carts or wagons shall be regularly
collected and removed to the interior of the building or buildings
from which they were taken by the person responsible for said
building or buildings.
(3) All fences shall be maintained by the person owning or having
responsibility for the property or by the person having use and
enjoyment of the property. Such maintenance shall include but not
be limited to the replacement and/or repair of fences which may
become in disrepair.
(4) All landscaping and shrubbery shall be well maintained so that
lawns, hedges, bushes and trees shall be kept trimmed and free
from becoming a hazard or an obstruction to traffic or vehicular
visibility or where such comes into contact with or covers, hides or
obstructs any traffic sign.
(5) All recharge stormwater basins shall be maintained by the person
owning or having responsibility for the property. Such maintenance
shall include but not be limited to:
(a) The cleaning of storm sewers and other drainage
appurtenances serving the said basin so that said installations
function as designed; and
(b) The removal of any garbage, rubbish, silt, topsoil or other
foreign materials which create an unsanitary condition or
prevent or impede the leaching action of said basin.
(6) All owners, occupants, lessors or persons having responsibility or
control of all property within the Town of Smithtown, including, but
not limited to, buildings, lots or structures used for residential or
commercial purposes, shall maintain steps, walks, driveways,
parking spaces and similar paved areas so as to afford safe passage
under normal use and weather conditions. All owners, occupants,
lessors or persons in control of all buildings or structures used for
commercial purposes and the owners or occupants of lands
fronting or abutting on any street or highway in a business or
§ 221-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-4
1:571
industrial district shall maintain and repair the sidewalks adjoining
their lands and shall keep the sidewalk adjacent to such premises
free and clear from snow, ice, dirt or other obstruction. No salt,
calcium chloride or derivatives thereof or other corrosive materials
shall be used. Any holes or other hazards that may exist on private
roads, streets, parking lots or other private paved or unpaved
areas, except residential driveways, shall be filled and necessary
repairs or replacements shall be made. All commercial or
nonresidential off-street parking facilities shall be kept free of
rubbish, sticks, wood, leaves, weeds, paper, cardboard or debris of
any kind.
(7) Yards, courts and vacant lots shall be kept clean and free of
physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation or solid waste.
They shall be maintained in a manner that will prevent solid waste
from being blown about a public place or residential area by the
elements or by being scattered by animals.
(8) Open wells, cesspools and cisterns shall be securely closed or
barricaded from access by the public.
(9) All permanent signs exposed to public view shall be maintained in
good repair. Excessively weathered or faded signs shall be removed
or put into a good state of repair. All nonoperative or broken
electrical signs shall be repaired or removed. All temporary signs,
except "For Rent" and other signs otherwise authorized or
permitted by the Code of the Town of Smithtown, shall be removed
at the expiration of the event or sale for which it is erected or
within 60 days after erection, whichever occurs sooner.
(10)No person shall deposit, throw, scatter or suffer, permit, maintain
or allow the accumulation of any filth, dirt, ashes, junk, garbage,
wastepaper, dust, rubbish, sticks, stones, grass, wood, leaves,
paper, paper boxes, cardboard, corrugated boxes, iron, tin, nails,
bottles or glass of any kind, old cars and parts thereof, tires or any
other kind of solid waste or shopping baskets, carts or wagons upon
any sidewalk, highway or public place or upon any vacant or
improved lot, piece or parcel of ground abutting upon any sidewalk,
highway, road or public place or upon any private property within
the Town except in accordance with the provisions of the Code of
the Town of Smithtown.
(11) Any white good as defined in § 177-4 or any other container of any
kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released
or opened from the inside of said white good or container shall not
be left outside of any building or dwelling or upon any lot or
property that is accessible to any children. Any white good or
container which is placed outside for authorized pickup shall have
had the door detached from the white good or container prior to
placing the white good or container outside.
§ 221-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 221-4
1:572
(12) It shall be unlawful for any person of any capacity to store, deposit,
place, maintain or cause or permit to be stored, deposited, placed
or maintained outdoors any abandoned, junked, discarded, wholly
or partially dismantled, registered or unregistered motor vehicle or
vehicles upon any private or public property within the Town of
Smithtown unless specifically permitted and authorized pursuant
to the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
(13) All owners, tenants or occupiers of property located anywhere
within the Town of Smithtown shall be required to cut, trim or
remove from the land owned or possessed by them brush, grass,
solid waste, garbage, rubbish or weeds or to remove poisonous
shrubs or weeds on such land, and, upon default, the Town of
Smithtown may cause such grass, brush, solid waste, garbage,
rubbish or weeds to be cut, trimmed or removed and such
poisonous shrubs or weeds to be removed in accordance with the
provisions contained herein at the expense of the property owner,
tenant or occupier.
(14)No owner, tenant or occupier of property anywhere within the
Town of Smithtown shall cause, suffer or allow bamboo to be
planted, maintained or otherwise permitted to exist within 10 feet
of any property line, street, sidewalk or public right-of-way.
(15) Property owners have the duty, at their own expense, to trim
broken or decayed limbs from trees, to cut down and remove any
trees upon their property which are dead, dying, blown over,
leaning precariously, harbor insects or disease, and remove any
tree stumps or rootballs that are severely damaged or exposed
more than 50% above grade which pose a hazard to vehicular
traffic or pedestrians within any street, sidewalk, or public right-ofway.
B. Buildings and structures.
(1) All exterior exposed surfaces not inherently resistant to
deterioration shall be repaired, coated, treated or sealed to protect
them from deterioration or weathering.
(2) Floors, walls, ceilings, stairs, furnishings and fixtures of buildings
shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. Every
floor, exterior wall, roof and porch or appurtenances thereto shall
be maintained in a manner so as to prevent collapse of the same or
injury to the occupants of the building or to the public.
(3) The foundation walls of every building shall be maintained in good
repair and be structurally sound.
(4) Exterior walls (including doors and windows), roofs and the areas
around doors, windows, chimneys and other parts of the building
shall be so maintained as to keep water from entering the building
and to prevent undue heat loss from occupied areas. Materials
§ 221-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-4
1:573
§ 221-5. Higher standards to prevail.
In any case where the provisions of this code impose a higher standard than
set forth in any other ordinance of the Town of Smithtown or under the
laws or regulations of the State of New York, then the standards as set forth
herein shall prevail. If the provisions of this code impose a lower standard
than any other ordinance of the Town of Smithtown or of the laws and
regulations of the State of New York, then the higher standard contained in
any such ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 221-6. Liability for damage to third party.
Any owner of real property in the Town of Smithtown or any person who
fails to adhere to or violates any provision of this article shall be liable for
any defect, injury, fault or damage to any third party.
which have been damaged or show evidences of dry rot or other
deterioration shall be repaired or replaced and refinished in a
workmanlike manner. Exterior walls, roofs and other parts of the
building shall be free from loose and unsecured objects and
materials. Such objects or materials shall be removed, repaired or
replaced.
(5) The owner of a vacant building shall take such steps and perform
such acts as may be required of said owner from time to time to
ensure that the building and its adjoining yards remain safe and
secure and do not present a hazard to adjoining property or to the
public.
(6) Buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect, vermin
and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
exterminating insects, vermin and rodents shall conform with
generally accepted practices.
§ 221-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 221-6
1:574
ARTICLE III
Shopping Carts
§ 221-7. Identification tag required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to provide carts for patrons' use on store
or business premises unless the cart has permanently affixed to it a sign,
metallic tag or other means for clearly identifying the owner of the cart and
the specific store location at which said cart is regularly used and regularly
kept.
§ 221-8. Abandonment.
§ 221-9. Collection by Town employees.
All employees of the Town of Smithtown are hereby authorized to seize and
remove or cause to be removed any abandoned or discarded shopping cart
from any public place within the Town of Smithtown without notice and
shall take or cause the same to be taken to a facility within the Town for
redemption or disposition as hereinafter provided.
§ 221-10. Redemption.
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any owner to
suffer, permit or allow any person to take any cart from the owner's
premises or parking area and thereafter abandon, discard, leave, place
or suffer or permit any cart to be left or placed in any public or private
place.
B. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to
suffer, permit, cause, allow or take any cart from the owner's premises
or parking area and thereafter abandon, discard, leave, place or suffer,
permit or allow any cart to be left or placed in or on any public or
private place or business not authorized by the cart's rightful legal
owner.
A. Whenever an employee of the Town of Smithtown removes or causes to
be removed any shopping cart having identification of ownership or
right of possession, notice of the removal shall be sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, advising of the removal, the facility to which it
was removed and the amount necessary to redeem the article.
B. Any shopping cart removed from public places within the Town of
Smithtown may be redeemed by the owner thereof any time prior to
disposal by the Town by tendering to the Town of Smithtown, during
regular business hours at a location to be designated by the Town
Board, the sum of $30 for each cart.
C. The Town of Smithtown shall require satisfactory proof of ownership or
lawful right to possession of the property sought prior to release. Any
return of property by the Town of Smithtown to a person claiming the
§ 221-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-10
1:575
same pursuant to this chapter shall be an absolute defense to the Town
against any other person claiming the same. The Town of Smithtown
shall have the right to require that an affidavit attesting to ownership
be submitted prior to releasing said property.
§ 221-10 SMITHTOWN CODE § 221-10
1:576
ARTICLE IV
Penalties and Enforcement
§ 221-11. Penalties for offenses.
§ 221-12. Administrative remedy.
A. A person who violates any of the provisions of Article II (standards) or
who fails to comply with any condition imposed by Article II shall have
committed a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,500 or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both, for a conviction of a
first offense and punishable by a fine of $5,000 or imprisonment for not
more than 60 days, or both, for a conviction of a second or subsequent
offense. A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. A person who violates any of the provision of Article III (shopping
carts), or who fails to comply with any condition imposed by Article III
shall have committed a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding
$500 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both, for a
conviction of a first offense and punishable of a fine not to exceed
$1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both, for
conviction of a second or subsequent offense. A separate violation shall
be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
A. Authority to remove. In the event that the owner, occupant or person in
control of such land shall fail to remove filth, dirt, junk, garbage,
wastepaper, rubbish, sticks, stones, wood, leaves, paper, paper boxes,
cardboard, iron, tin, nails, bottles, glass, brush, grass, solid waste,
rubbish, weeds, trees, tree stumps, rootballs, or other items and
conditions in violation of the standards set forth in § 221-4A, the Town
shall have the authority as provided for herein to enter onto such land
and clean the same and charge the cost of expense of such action
against the owner and establish a lien in the manner herein provided.
B. In the event that any person fails to comply with any of the standards
contained in § 221-4 of this chapter, the Town Board of the Town of
Smithtown shall cause a notice to cure to be sent to the property owner
or the occupier of the property, requiring the owner or occupier to
remove all violations subject to the notice to cure to be remedied within
72 hours. Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail and ordinary
mail to the property owner or the occupier of the property at the
owner's or occupier's last known address. In the event that 72 hours
shall have passed without any remedial measures or action taken, the
property owner shall be considered in default, and the Town may
proceed with the adoption of a Town Board resolution requiring the
owners to cure such default.
C. Notice to be served. Whenever the Town Board shall adopt a resolution
pursuant to § 221-12A requiring the owners of land to remove violations
§ 221-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-12
1:577
§ 221-13. Additional remedies.
which exist thereon, the Town Board shall specify the time within which
such work shall be completed. Such notice shall be set forth, with
reasonable certainty, the location at which the condition exists and
the manner in which the work shall be performed. The owners shall
be given at least 30 days from the date of the mailing of the notice
during which the work shall be performed, and such notice shall grant
a reasonable period of time for the owner to cure the violations. Notice
of the adoption of a resolution requiring the removal work shall be
served upon the owners of the property at which the condition exists by
certified mail, addressed to the last known address of said owner.
D. Failure to comply: removal.
(1) Wherever a notice referred to in § 221-12B of this chapter has been
served and the owner neglects or fails to comply with such notice
within the time provided therein, the Town Board may hold a public
hearing on whether the Town should take action to remove the
violations. The public hearing shall be held upon notice posted
conspicuously on the affected property and forwarded to the last
known address of the property owner as it appears on the current
tax records of the Town by certified mail. Posting and service of
such notice shall not be less than 15 days prior to the date of such
hearing.
(2) The Town Board, after a public hearing, may cause the violation to
be removed and shall provide for the cost thereof, to be paid from
general Town funds as directed by Town Board resolution.
E. Manner of collection of costs incurred. In any case where it shall be
necessary for the Town Board to have the work performed due to the
failure of the owner to comply with the Town Board's resolution, the
Town shall be reimbursed for the cost of the work performed or the
services rendered at its direction, by levy upon the tax bill of the lots or
parcels of land where such work was performed or such services
rendered. All costs actually incurred by the Town upon each lot or
parcel and the charge therefor shall be levied and collected in the same
manner and at the same time as other Town charges.
F. The remedies provided for by this section are in addition to and not in
lieu of such other remedies as the Town of Smithtown may elect to take.
Nothing herein shall be construed as a requirement that notice of any
kind be served prior to issuance of a summons.
A. The Town Attorney is authorized to institute any and all actions and
proceedings necessary to enforce this chapter. The Town Attorney is
also authorized to seek damages and any civil penalties in any civil
action, and such penalties shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any
criminal prosecution and penalty.
§ 221-12 SMITHTOWN CODE § 221-13
1:578
§ 221-14. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the Director of Public
Safety, the Supervisor of Environment and Waterways, the Building
Director, the Town Attorney, or their designated representatives, or agents
of the Suffolk County Police Department.
(1) In the event of any actual or pending violation of this chapter, the
Town Attorney may, in addition to other remedies, institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or
abate such violation.
(2) In addition to any fine or penalty imposed, the defendant shall pay
all costs and expenses incurred by the Town in enforcing this
chapter and/or remedying such violation.
§ 221-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 221-14
1:579
Chapter 222
PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 115.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 164.
Solid waste management — See Ch. 177.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 221.
Zoning — See Ch. 322.
§ 222-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Public Nuisance Abatement Law of the
Town of Smithtown."
§ 222-2. Findings and purpose.
The Town Board hereby finds that buildings and properties used for illegal
activities within the Town of Smithtown as set forth herein have a
devastating impact on the surrounding communities, including the
promotion of other illegal activities, the threat to the public health, safety
and welfare and the interference in the community's quality of life. The
Town Board finds and determines that the existence of these activities
constitutes a public nuisance that endangers the health, safety and general
welfare of the people of the Town of Smithtown and the businesses thereof
and visitors thereto. Therefore, this chapter has been prepared and will be
adopted in consideration of the standardization of procedures for securing
legal and equitable remedies, and to strengthen existing laws so as to
effectively prevent buildings, residences, premises and real estate within
the Town of Smithtown from being used in such a manner as to constitute a
"public nuisance."
§ 222-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PROHIBITED CONDUCT —
Any conduct or occurrence that is in violation of the following parts of
the New York State Penal Law, as modified or amended:
(1) Article 220 (controlled substances).
(2) Article 230 (prostitution).
(3) Article 225 (gambling).
Sections 221.40, 221.45, 221.50 and 221.55 (criminal sale of
marijuana in the fourth degree through first degree).
(4)
A.
§ 221-14 SMITHTOWN CODE § 222-3
1:580
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any building, residence, premises, structure, place
or lot, developed or undeveloped, vacant or occupied, where an owner
or person in charge thereof has been given written notice that a search
warrant has been executed, an arrest and/or conviction for prohibited
conduct as defined herein has taken place or evidence of prohibited conduct
has been seized at said location and within 12 months of that arrest,
conviction, seizure and/or warrant executed at such location for prohibited
conduct for which the owner or person in charge thereof is again notified in
writing.
§ 222-4. Prohibitions.
It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or his/her agent, the occupant
or person in charge of any building, residence, premises, structure, place
or lot, developed or undeveloped, vacant or occupied, to allow, cause, own,
lease, permit, facilitate or maintain the creation or occurrence of a public
nuisance.
§ 222-5. Service of notice of prohibited conduct.
Sections 165.45, 165.50, 165.52 and 165.54 (criminal possession of
stolen property in the fourth degree through first degree).
(5)
Sections 165.09, 165.10 (auto stripping in the second and first
degrees).
(6)
(7) Section 170.65 (forgery of a vehicle identification number).
Section 170.70 (illegal possession of a vehicle identification
number plate).
(8)
Any building, structure or place used for the commission of a
criminal nuisance as that term is defined in § 240.45 of the Penal
Law.
(9)
Any intentional conduct or occurrence that is in willful violation
of §§ 65, 65-a, 82, 123 or 126 of the New York Alcoholic Beverage
Control Law and § 260.20 of the New York Penal Law.
(10)
Any building, structure, or place used for the purpose of conducting any
business, activity or enterprise which is not licensed as required by any
federal, state, county or local enactment.
B.
Any criminal conduct which creates or results in the maintaining of a
condition which endangers the health, safety or welfare of the public
or that creates or results in the maintenance of any premises or place
where persons gather for the purpose of engaging in criminal conduct.
C.
A. Notice that prohibited conduct has occurred at a location shall be
served by personal service upon the owner or person in charge of the
affected building, structure, place or lot; or if such person cannot
reasonably be found, by mailing said owner such notice by certified
mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of same as
§ 222-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-5
1:581
§ 222-6. Presumptions.
§ 222-7. Penalties for offenses; additional remedies.
shown by the records of the Assessor of the Town of Smithtown and by
securely affixing a copy of such notice at the affected location.
B. The notice described herein shall contain the following:
(1) A statement of the date or dates upon which the prohibited conduct
occurred at the property;
(2) The nature of the prohibited conduct and a directive that such
conduct be abated within five days of receipt of said notice;
(3) A copy of the chapter and notice that a second occurrence of the
prohibited conduct within 12 months of the first arrest, conviction,
seizure and/or warrant being executed may result in action being
taken by the Town pursuant to this chapter.
A. In any action or proceeding instituted pursuant to this chapter, the
person in whose name ownership of the real property affected by such
action is recorded in the office of the Assessor shall be presumed to be
the owner thereof.
B. Whenever there is evidence that a person was the manager, operator,
supervisor or in any other way in charge of the premises at the time a
public nuisance exists because prohibited conduct is being conducted,
maintained or permitted, such evidence shall be presumptive that such
person is or was an agent of the property owner.
A. A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall have
committed a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $500 or
imprisonment for up to one year, or both, for a conviction of a first
offense, and a fine of up to $1,000 or imprisonment for up to one year,
or both, for a conviction of a second and each subsequent offense. A
separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
upon which a violation of this chapter occurs or continues.
B. Upon a second or subsequent occurrence or prohibited conduct
occurring within 12 months of the first offense, the Town Board may
declare such public nuisance to be an immediate and substantial threat
to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of
Smithtown and visitors thereto in accordance with the following
requirements:
(1) The Town Board may conduct a public hearing to consider the
prohibited conduct occurring within a building, residence,
premises, structure, place or lot, as well as any other information it
deems relevant in determining whether the prohibited conduct is to
be deemed a public nuisance.
§ 222-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 222-7
1:582
§ 222-8. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the Director of Public
Safety or his designated representatives or agents and the Suffolk County
Police Department.
(2) Notice of the public hearing herein shall be in writing and shall be
served not less than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to the
owner, lessee, or other person or legal entity in control of the
building, residence, premises, structure, place or lot in question in
the same manner as service of a summons is authorized pursuant to
the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Such notice shall be posted at the
subject property at least 10 days prior to the public hearing and
shall be published in an official Town newspaper at least seven days
prior to the public hearing.
(3) In the event the Town Board finds such location to be an immediate
and substantial threat to the health, safety and welfare of the
public, the Town Board may immediately authorize said location to
be physically boarded up and secured from further occupancy for a
period of up to one year, and direct that a sign be posted declaring
that occupancy thereof is prohibited for such time as directed by
the Town Board. The expense related to boarding up the location
and the cost of insurance indemnifying the Town of Smithtown, its
employees and agents against any loss arising from injuries to
persons or property shall be assessed against the real property, and
the expense shall constitute a lien and charge on the real property
upon which it is levied until paid or otherwise satisfied or
discharged and shall, be collected in the same manner or other
authorized manner and at the same time as other Town charges.
(4) Provided that the requisite finding is made pursuant to § 222-7B(3)
of this chapter, the Town Board may authorize the Town Attorney to
institute any and all actions or proceedings to enjoin, restrain,
correct, prevent or abate the public nuisance; to seek damages and
any civil penalties in addition to and not in lieu of any criminal
prosecution or penalty; and for seizure and forfeiture of property as
well as any other available equitable remedies.
(5) In the event the Town Board authorizes any location to be
physically boarded up and secured from further occupancy as
provided for herein, the Town Attorney may apply to a court of
competent jurisdiction for appointment of a temporary receiver to
manage, operate and bring the building, residence, premises,
structure, place or lot into compliance with the Smithtown Town
Code during the pendency of any action or proceeding. The
temporary receiver shall have such powers as are enumerated in
Article 64 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 222-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-9
1:583
§ 222-9. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon filing with the Secretary of State of the
State of New York.
Chapter 227
(RESERVED)
Chapter 233
SHELLFISH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beaches and parks — See Ch. 101.
§ 233-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NONRESIDENTS — Any person who does not have, and has not had for the
preceding six contiguous months, his principal place of abode and domicile
in the Town of Smithtown.
PERSON — Any firm, partnership, corporation, association or individual.
RESIDENT — Any person who has, and has had for the preceding six
months, his principal place of abode and domicile in the Town of Smithtown.
SHELLFISH — All varieties and types of the following forms of marine
life, commonly known as "oysters," "clams," "scallops," "mussels," "winkles,"
"whelks" and "conches."
TAKING — The removal of shellfish by any means and all lesser acts of
disruption of shellfish and, further, any attempt to take.
THE WATERS OF SAID TOWN — The Nissequogue River, Stony Brook
Harbor and Sunken Meadow Creek, all in the Town of Smithtown, and the
lands under said waters and the foreshore of said bodies of water and the
lands of Long Island Sound adjacent to the Town of Smithtown included
between the high- and low-water marks and lands underwater in Long
Island Sound within the jurisdiction of the Town of Smithtown.
§ 233-2. Restrictions for nonresidents.
No nonresident shall gather or take, either on his own account or for his
own benefit or for the benefit of any other persons, any clams, oysters,
mussels or other shellfish or jingles, quarterdeckers or other shells or
§ 222-9 SMITHTOWN CODE § 233-2
1:584
scallops or bloodworms, sandworms or clamworms from their beds or
places of natural or man-induced growth in the waters of said Town.
§ 233-3. Noncommercial shellfishing.
§ 233-4. Commercial shellfishing.
§ 233-5. Permit required for gathering worms.
A. Residents shall be permitted to take and remove from the waters of said
Town during each day, in the manner hereinafter provided, for the
purpose of consumption as food in his or her own household, shellfish in
the amount not to exceed 1/2 bushel in the aggregate of all kinds taken.
B. For noncommercial shellfishing, it shall be unlawful for any person to
take hard clams with any device other than a hand-held rake with a
head no wider than 14 inches measured perpendicular to the tines and
a straight handle not in excess of seven feet in length. The possession or
use of a device other than described above shall be presumptive
evidence of an intent to harvest shellfish for commercial purposes. In
the event that a resident is 65 years or older and possesses proof of his
age, he or she shall not be subject to the hand-held rake size
requirements as set forth herein. A resident 65 years or older shall still
be subject to the requirements of § 233-3A. [Amended 3-30-1999]
A. No person shall take shellfish for commercial purposes, including resale
purposes, from the waters of said Town unless such person or, in the
case of any firm, partnership, corporation or association, each
individual who engages in the taking of shellfish shall:
(1) Be a citizen of the United States.
(2) Be a resident of the Town of Smithtown.
(3) Have obtained a permit issued therefor from the Town Clerk as
prescribed by this chapter.
B. The place of landing of all commercially taken shellfish shall be at the
Town-owned boat ramps located at the Town of Smithtown Roger J.
Balducci Marina at Long Beach, the long Beach Mooring Area and the
Town of Smithtown Kings Parks Bluff. [Amended 10-30-2008]
A. No person shall take sandworms or bloodworms from the waters of said
Town, except that residents 16 years of age and over may take such
sandworms or bloodworms upon obtaining a permit to do so, as
provided hereinafter.
B. On application to the Town Clerk, a written permit may be given to
residents 16 years of age and over to take sandworms or bloodworms
from the waters of said Town. The permit so granted shall specify the
location in which said worms may be taken and may be revoked at the
pleasure of the Supervisor or by a majority of the Town Board. A fee of
§ 233-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-5
1:585
§ 233-6. Application for permit; fee.
Any person who seeks a permit as required by § 233-4 of this chapter shall
make application therefor pursuant to the following requirements:
§ 233-7. Duration of permits.
Permits issued pursuant to § 233-4 of this chapter shall be valid from the
date of issuance and shall expire on the last day of December of the year of
issuance, unless such permits shall be suspended or revoked as hereinafter
provided.
§ 233-8. Display of permit.
Any person engaged in taking shellfish from the waters of said Town and/
or working aboard a boat upon which shellfish are so taken shall exhibit his
or her permit to any constable or other peace officer on request. Failure to
do so shall be presumptive evidence that such person has not obtained such
permit.
§ 233-9. Voiding, suspension or transfer of permits.
$0.50 will be charged for such permits, and the same shall expire on
December 31 of each year issued.
A. Each applicant shall set forth, in writing, on duplicate forms to be
provided by the Town Clerk, the applicant's name, residence with street
and number, length of residence in the Town of Smithtown, whether or
not the applicant is a citizen of the United States, age, weight, height
and color of hair and eyes.
B. Each applicant shall submit with the application two full-face
photographs of the applicant taken within three months prior to the
application date.
C. Each applicant shall submit with the application a permit fee of $50,
payable to the Town Clerk of the Town of Smithtown.
D. Before issuing a permit, the Town Clerk shall be satisfied of the identity
of the applicant and may require the applicant to be identified by a
resident known to the Town Clerk. The name of the resident so
identifying shall be noted on the application.
A. All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be void if the holder
thereof ceases to be a resident of the Town of Smithtown.
B. Permits may be suspended for a period of not less than six months from
the date of conviction if the holder thereof is convicted of any violation
of this chapter and/or state law enacted for the conservation or
protection of shellfish.
§ 233-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 233-9
1:586
§ 233-10. Revocation of permits.
§ 233-11. Commercial buying of shellfish.
C. Such permit shall not be transferred or assigned by the permittee, and
any attempt to transfer or assign such permit shall terminate the same
and render it null and void.
D. Permits may be suspended for a period of not less than six months from
the date of compromise of civil penalties if the holder thereof is
permitted to settle by agreement or civilly compromise any violation of
this chapter and/or the Environmental Conservation Law of the State of
New York and/or any state law enacted for the conservation and
protection of shellfish.
A. Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown after notice of a hearing for a
violation of the provisions of this chapter. [Amended 2-5-1985]
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the
time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage
prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address and at least five
days prior to the date set for the hearing. Said hearing shall be
conducted in a manner wherein the accused permittee is afforded full
due process of law.
A. Permit required. No person shall operate as a commercial buyer of
shellfish unless such person has obtained a permit from the Town Clerk
after making a proper application therefor and paying an annual fee of
$100 in advance. Any agent or employee of a commercial buyer of
shellfish who is authorized to engage in or otherwise engages in any
transaction or activity relative to the purchasing of shellfish, including
the authority to operate or the act of operating a motor vehicle used to
transport shellfish and/or the authority to make or the act of making
any payment for such shellfish, shall be registered by said buyer with
the Town Clerk who shall, upon receipt of a fee of $50 and a proper
application, issue a permit to said employee.
B. Permit application requirements.
(1) Each applicant for a permit required by this section shall set forth,
in writing, on duplicate forms to be provided by the Town Clerk, the
applicant's name, residence with street number, age, weight,
height, color of hair and eyes and whether any criminal
proceedings had been commenced against the applicant, along
with the nature and disposition thereof.
(2) Each applicant shall submit with the application two full-face
photographs of the applicant taken within three months prior to the
date of application.
§ 233-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-11
1:587
§ 233-12. Altering or damaging buoys or markers.
No person shall in any way alter, damage, mutilate, move or carry away any
buoy or marker placed by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation or by the Town of Smithtown that is used to designate, mark
or define uncertified waters or shellfish management areas.
(3) In the event that the applicant is a shipper or processor of shellfish,
the Town Clerk shall require the applicant to produce his state
shellfish shippers or processors permit.
C. Form of permit; nontransferability; display.
(1) Permits shall be in the form prescribed by the Town Clerk, with a
photograph of the permit holder affixed thereto, and shall contain
the matters set forth upon the applications. A decal shall be issued
by the Town Clerk for each vehicle used by the buyer in conducting
the business of purchasing shellfish, and said decal shall be
prominently displayed on the vehicle.
(2) Permits shall not be transferable.
(3) Any person engaged in the commercial buying of shellfish shall
carry his permit with him at all times when engaged in such
business. Failure to display the permit to any constable or peace
officer when requested to do so shall be presumptive evidence that
such person has not obtained such permit.
D. Duration of permit. Permits issued pursuant to this § 233-11 of this
chapter shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall expire on the
last day of December of the year of issuance, unless sooner suspended
as hereinafter provided.
E. Suspension of permits.
(1) No commercial buyer of shellfish shall possess, offer for sale or
purchase any shellfish which do not conform to the minimum size
requirements for the taking of shellfish pursuant to this chapter.
This subsection shall not apply when shellfish unavoidably taken in
the possession of a commercial shellfish buyer do not compose a
percentage of the buyer's total store of shellfish in excess of the
percentages set forth in §§ 233-17 and 233-18.
(2) A violation of Subsection E(1) above shall be cause for suspension
of the permit for a period of six months for a first conviction and for
a period of one year for a second violation.
(3) The conviction of any commercial buyer of shellfish for violating
any provision of the New York State Environmental Conservation
Law enacted for the protection and conservation of shellfish shall
be cause for suspension of the permit for a period of one year.
§ 233-11 SMITHTOWN CODE § 233-13
1:588
§ 233-13. Uncertified waters.
§ 233-14. Closing of waters.
The Town Board may from time to time, in its discretion, close any portion of
the waters of said Town and prohibit the taking of all shellfish therefrom for
such period as it may deem necessary for the conservation, protection and
growth of shellfish therein or to promote the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the Town of Smithtown. No person may take shellfish from
such designated areas during the time specified by the Town Board.
§ 233-15. Night restrictions.
No person shall take shellfish, sandworms or bloodworms from the waters
or flats within the jurisdiction of the Town of Smithtown between sunset and
sunrise.
§ 233-16. Prohibited devices. [Amended 7-14-1992]
§ 233-17. Hard clams.
A. No person shall take shellfish from land or lands under water which are
designated as "uncertified areas" by the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation.
B. Uncertified areas within the Town of Smithtown will be posted by the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and the
Town of Smithtown. Posted signs will designate the areas as restricted
areas.
C. No person shall operate, use or place, for whatever purposes, any
dredges, rakes, tongs, baskets or other devices for the taking of
shellfish from uncertified areas declared by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation orfrom areas otherwise
closed by the Town Board pursuant to § 233-14 of this chapter.
A. Dredges. No device commonly known as a "dredge," including but not
limited to scraper tongs or blades, or other devices operated by power
or by boats propelled by motor or other mechanical means may be used
for the taking of shellfish from the waters of said Town.
B. Diving equipment. No contrivance that permits or aids a person to
breathe underwater may be used during shellfish harvesting in the
waters of the Town of Smithtown.
A. Implements or devices employed.
(1) No implement or device shall be used in taking clams, except:
(a) Hand-operated tongs having teeth in the heads thereof spaced
not less than one inch apart, measured in the clear, and having
a distance between the heads of not less than one inch,
§ 233-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-17
1:589
§ 233-18. Soft or steamer clams.
§ 233-19. Oysters.
measured in the clear at the intersection of handles with the
heads thereof.
(b) Hand-operated rakes having teeth spaced not less than one
inch apart, measured in the clear.
(c) Baskets attached to such hand-operated rakes having bars not
less than seven-eighths (7/8) of an inch apart, measured in the
clear.
(2) No wire, netting or other foreign matter shall be used between the
teeth or bows of such tongs or rakes.
B. Size.
(1) No hard clams measuring less than one inch in thickness,
measured at right angles to the shell hinge, shall be taken from the
waters of said Town. All clams taken which shall not be at least one
inch in thickness in size shall be immediately returned to the
waters from which taken and left there.
(2) Hard clams which may not be taken pursuant to this subsection
may compose an amount not to exceed 3% of the total catch when
unavoidably taken. Such 3% may be determined by the
measurement of any container of hard clams taken from the catch.
C. Quantity. No person shall take in excess of five bushels of hard clams in
any one day.
A. Implements or devices employed. Soft-shell clams may be taken only by
implements known as shovels, forks, hoes and tongs. No churns,
dredges, propellers or other mechanical devices may be used.
B. Size.
(1) No soft clams less than one and one-half (1 1/2) inches in length, as
measured on the longest diameter, shall be taken from the waters
of said Town. All soft clams taken which shall be less than one and
one-half (1 1/2) inches in length shall be immediately returned to
the waters from which taken and left there.
(2) Soft clams which may not be taken pursuant to this subsection may
compose an amount not to exceed 3% of the total catch when
unavoidably taken. Such 3% may be determined by the
measurement of any container of soft clams taken from the catch.
C. Quantity. No person shall take in excess of three bushels of soft clams in
any one day.
§ 233-17 SMITHTOWN CODE § 233-19
1:590
§ 233-20. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to the following penalties:
A. Size. No oyster under the size of five inches shall be taken from the
waters of said Town. The length of the oyster added to its width shall
determine the size thereof. All oysters taken which are not five inches in
size shall be immediately returned to the waters from which taken and
left there.
B. Quantity. No person shall take in excess of five bushels of oysters in any
one day.
A. Any person convicted of taking shellfish without a permit as required by
§ 233-4 or engaging in the commercial buying of shellfish without a
permit as required in § 233-11 shall be guilty of a violation, which shall
be punishable as follows:
(1) For the first conviction, by a fine of not less than $200 nor more
than $500.
(2) For a second conviction or subsequent conviction within five years
of a previous conviction for a like offense, by a fine of not less than
$500 not more than $1,000.
B. Uncertified and closed areas:
(1) Any person convicted of taking shellfish from uncertified or closed
areas in violation of § 233-13 or 233-14 shall be guilty of the
following:
(a) A violation for the first conviction, punishable by a fine of not
less than $250 nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for not
more than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(b) A misdemeanor for a second conviction or subsequent
conviction within five years of a previous conviction for a like
offense, punishable by a fine of not less than $500 not more
than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not less than six months
nor more than one year, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.56
C. Any person convicted of taking shellfish from the waters of said Town
during the night in violation of § 233-15 shall be guilty of the following:
(1) A violation for the first conviction, punishable by a fine of not less
than $200 nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more
56.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), which immediately followed this subsection and
which established a penalty for violation in winter and provided for suspension of the
penalty in the case of a winter conditional opening, was deleted 7-14-1992.
§ 233-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-20
1:591
§ 233-21. Civil penalties.
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall, in
addition to the penalties imposed therefor, be subject to a civil penalty of
$25 and an additional penalty of $5 for each bushel of shellfish taken or, in
than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. [Amended
7-14-1992]
(2) A misdemeanor for a second conviction or subsequent conviction
within five years of a previous conviction for a like offense,
punishable by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or
by imprisonment for not less than six months nor more than one
year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
D. Any person convicted of taking, buying, selling or possessing shellfish
of less than legal size in violation of § 233-17B, 233-18B or 233-19A
shall be guilty of the following:
(1) A violation for a first conviction, punishable by a fine of not less
than $300 nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(2) A misdemeanor for a second conviction or subsequent conviction
within five years of a previous conviction for a like offense,
punishable by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or
by imprisonment for not less than six months nor more than one
year, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
E. Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter, except
as otherwise provided in Subsection A, B, C or D of this section, shall be
guilty of the following:
(1) A violation for a first conviction, punishable by a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $200.
(2) A misdemeanor for a second conviction or subsequent conviction
within five years of a previous conviction for a like offense,
punishable by a fine of not less than $200 nor more than $400 or by
imprisonment for not less than three months nor more than six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
F. The Town Board, upon recommendation of the enforcing authorities,
may suspend or revoke any permit issued under this chapter to any
person convicted of one or more violations of this chapter or to any
person convicted of a crime or to any partnership where any partner
has been convicted of one or more violations of this chapter or
convicted of a crime or to any corporation, if any person having a
financial interest in the corporation is convicted of one or more
violations of this chapter or convicted of a crime, pursuant to the
provisions of § 233-9 or 233-10. [Amended 2-5-1985]
§ 233-20 SMITHTOWN CODE § 233-21
1:592
the case of a commercial shellfish buyer, each bushel possessed in violation
of the section convicted under.
Chapter 235
(RESERVED)
Chapter 242
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES AND STRUCTURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
Noise — See Ch. 207.
Zoning — See Ch. 322.
§ 242-1. Legislative intent.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown, Suffolk County, New York,
finds herewith that personal wireless communications services and
personal wireless service facilities comprise a rapidly growing segment
of the utilities and communications sector and have merit and value for
the community as a whole. The United States Congress adopted the
Telecommunica-tions Act of 1996, including Section 704 which defines
personal wireless service and personal wireless service facilities and
preserves local zoning authority over decisions regarding the
placement, construction and modification of personal wireless service
facilities except for five limitations, to wit:
(1) A local government shall not unreasonably discriminate among
providers of functionally equivalent services.
(2) A local government shall not prohibit or have the effect of
prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services.
(3) A local government shall act on any requests for authorization to
place, construct or modify personal wireless service facilities
within a reasonable period of time after the request is filed.
(4) A local government shall put any decision to deny a personal
wireless service facility into writing and support such decision by
substantial evidence contained in a written record.
(5) A local government shall not regulate personal wireless service
facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of radio
frequency emission to the extent that such facilities comply with
the Federal Communications Commission Guidelines for Evaluating
the Environmental Effects of Radiofrequency Radiation (FCC
Guidelines).
§ 233-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-1
1:593
§ 242-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
B. The Town of Smithtown is authorized to adopt laws to provide for the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Smithtown, and
the regulation of the placement, installation and construction of
personal wireless service facilities preserves and protects the health,
safety, welfare and general well-being of the citizens of the Town of
Smithtown. The Town of Smithtown Planning Department and the Town
of Smithtown Town Board have, during the period of a current
moratorium, undertaken a deliberative process to establish policy,
standards and procedures related to the location, siting and design of
mounts and antenna arrays for personal wireless services; and the
Town of Smithtown Town Board has conducted workshops during the
current moratorium on deployment of wireless communications and has
found that alternatives to towers exist for the purpose of deploying
personal wireless service facilities.
C. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish standards for the
location, siting and design of personal wireless service facilities, and
the goals of this chapter are to:
(1) Allow for alternative types of personal wireless service facilities in
any location subject to standards.
(2) Encourage the use of existing structures, including, but not limited
to, rooftops, utility poles and steeples, for deploying personal
wireless service facilities.
(3) Expedite the review process for those applications choosing the
least intrusive alternative of deploying personal wireless service
facilities.
(4) Encourage users of guyed and lattice towers, monopoles and
antennas to locate, site and design them in a way that minimizes
the adverse visual impact of the lattice or guyed towers, monopoles
and antennas.
(5) Enhance the ability of the providers of personal wireless services to
provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and
efficiently.
(6) Promote personal wireless service facilities compatible with
surrounding land uses and protect the attractiveness, health,
safety, general welfare and property values of the community.
D. Therefore, the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown has prepared this
chapter to revise the Town of Smithtown Zoning Law to more clearly
reflect the above facts.
§ 242-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § 242-2
1:594
A. Abbreviations.
AGL — Above ground level.
AMSL — Above mean sea level.
CMRS — Commercial mobile radio services.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
PWSF — Personal wireless service facility.
RF — Radio frequency.
RFR — Radio frequency radiation.
SMR — Specialized mobile radio.
B. Definition of terms.
AGL — Above ground level. The actual height of the PWSF from the
ground to the highest part of the mount or the antenna, whichever is
higher.
ANTENNA — A whip (omnidirectional antenna), panel (directional
antenna), disc (parabolic antenna) or similar device used for
transmission and/or reception of radio frequency signals.
ANTENNA ARRAY — One or more whips, panels, discs or similar
devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency
signals, which may include omnidirectional antennas (whips),
directional antennas (panels) and parabolic antennas (discs). The
antenna array does not include the mount as defined herein.
APPLICANT — A person or entity with an application before the Town
for a permit for a personal wireless service facility (PWSF).
CAMOUFLAGE — A way of painting and mounting a PWSF that
requires minimal exterior changes to the host structure in order to
accommodate the facility.
CARRIER — A company licensed by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) that provides wireless services. A tower builder is
not automatically a carrier.
CELLULAR — A mobile telephone service operating in the 800 MHz
spectrum.
COAPPLICANT — Any person and/or entity joining with an applicant in
an application for a permit for a PWSF, including the owner(s) of the
PWSF, owner(s) of the subject property and any proposed tenant(s) for
the PWSF.
COLLOCATION — The use of a common PWSF or common site by two
or more wireless license holders or by one wireless license holder for
more than one type of communications technology and/or placement or
two or more PWSF's on adjacent properties.
§ 242-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-2
1:595
COMMERCIAL MOBILE RADIO SERVICES (CMRS) — Any of several
technologies using radio signals at various frequencies to send and
receive voice, data and video as per Section 704 of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996. According to the FCC, these services
are "functionally equivalent services." Section 704 of the
Telecommunications Act prohibits unreasonable discrimination among
functionally equivalent services.
CONCEAL — To enclose a PWSF with a natural or man-made feature
resulting in the facility being either invisible or made part of the feature
enclosing it.
DESIGN — The appearance of PWSF's, such as their materials, colors
and shape.
DISGUISE — To design a PWSF to appear to be something other than a
PWSF.
ELEVATION — The measurement of height above sea level. Also
"AMSL," or "above mean sea level."
ENHANCED SPECIALIZED MOBILE RADIO (ESMR) — Private land
mobile radio with telephone services.
EQUIPMENT CABINET/EQUIPMENT SHELTER — An enclosed
structure at the base of the mount within which is housed the
equipment for the PWSF, such as batteries and electrical equipment.
FALL ZONE — The area on the ground within a prescribed radius from
the base of a PWSF. The fall zone is the area within which there might
be a potential hazard from falling debris or collapsing material.
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (FCC) — An
independent federal agency charged with licensing and regulating
wireless communications at the national level.
FUNCTIONALLY EQUIVALENT SERVICES — Cellular, PCS, enhanced
specialized mobile radio, specialized mobile radio and paging. Section
704 of the Telecommunications Act prohibits unreasonable
discrimination among functionally equivalent services.
GUYED TOWER — A monopole or lattice tower that is anchored to the
ground or to another surface by diagonal cables.
HEIGHT — The distance measured from above ground level (AGL) to
the highest point of a PWSF, including the antenna array. For purposes
of measuring height, all antennas or other attachments mounted on a
structure shall be included in the measurements to determine overall
(i.e., combined) height.
LATTICE TOWER — A type of mount that is usually ground-mounted
and self-supporting with multiple legs and cross-bracing of structural
steel.
§ 242-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 242-2
1:596
LICENSED CARRIER — A company authorized by the FCC to construct
and operate a commercial mobile radio services system. A licensed
carrier must be identified for every PWSF application.
LOCATION — The area where a PWSF is located or proposed to be
located.
MICROCELL — Any PWSF that is designed and limited to generate
lower power density than that limited by the FCC Guidelines for
Evaluating the Environmental Effects of Radiofrequency Radiation.
MITIGATION — The reduction or elimination of visual impacts by the
use of one or more methods, including but not limited to concealment,
camouflage and disguise.
MODIFICATION — The changing of any portion of a PWSF from its
description in a previously approved permit. The FCC definitions for
"modification" are different than local government rules.
MONOPOLE — A structure that is self-supporting with a single shaft
of wood, steel or concrete and antennas at the top and/or along the
shaft.[Amended 4-9-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
MOUNT — The structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted,
e.g:
(1) ROOF-MOUNTED -- Mounted on the roof of a building.
(2) SIDE-MOUNTED -- Mounted on the side of a building.
(3) GROUND-MOUNTED -- Mounted on the ground.
(4) STRUCTURE-MOUNTED -- Mounted on a structure other than a
building.
(5) INTERIOR-MOUNTED -- Mounted within a building.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY (PWSF) — A facility for
the provision of personal wireless services, as defined by Section
704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. A PWSF is any facility
for the transmission and/or reception of personal wireless services,
usually consisting of an antenna array, transmission cables,
equipment shelter and a mount.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES — Any personal wireless service
defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act, which includes
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) licensed commercial
wireless telecommunications services, including cellular, personal
communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR),
enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging as well as
unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless
exchange access services.
RADIO FREQUENCY (RF) ENGINEER — Someone with a
background in electrical engineering or microwave engineering
who specializes in the study of radio frequencies.
§ 242-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-2
1:597
§ 242-3. Purpose and intent; applicability.
RADIO FREQUENCY RADIATION (RFR) — The emissions from
PWSF's which are by-products of the RF signal.
RADIO FREQUENCY (RF) SIGNAL — The actual beam or radio
waves sent and received by a PWSF. A signal is the deliberate
product of a PWSF. The RF radiation is the by-product.
SECURITY BARRIER — A locked, impenetrable wall, fence or berm
that completely seals an area from unauthorized entry or trespass.
SEPARATION — The distance between one carrier's antenna array
and another carrier's antenna array.
SHORT MOUNTS — Alternatives to monopoles or guyed and lattice
towers, such as masts or poles. For example, two short poles or
three short masts might be an alternative to one tall lattice tower.
SITE — That portion of a subject property where a PWSF is to be
placed. Any acceptable location may have several potential sites
within it.
SITING — The method and form of placement of PWSF's on a
specific area of a subject property.
SPECIALIZED MOBILE RADIO (SMR) — A form of dispatch or
two-way communication used by companies that rent space or
time from an SMR carrier; used primarily for data, delivery vans,
truckers or taxis within a small, definable geographic area.
STANDARDS — Rules or measures by which acceptability is
determined. Personal wireless service facilities are measured by
standards measuring visibility or safety. Wireless planning tends to
regulate PWSF's on three levels: location (or where the PWSF site
can go), siting (or how the PWSF is placed within its setting) and
design (or what the PWSF looks like)
TOWER — A term used to describe a tall, nonhabitable structure
which may be used for a variety of purposes, such as a water tower,
lattice tower, an antenna tower, and so forth. For purposes of this
chapter, the term "tower" shall not include monopoles, as defined
in this section, utility poles, flagpoles, transmission line facilities,
or similar structures.[Amended 4-9-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
UNLICENSED WIRELESS SERVICES — Commercial mobile
services that can operate on public domain frequencies and
therefore need no FCC license for their sites.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS — Any form of signaling by
wireless, including personal wireless services, that require a
transmitter, a receiver and a path, sometimes straight, sometimes
indirect, between them.
§ 242-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 242-3
1:598
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to
establish standards for the location, siting and design of PWSF's, and
the goals of this chapter are to:
(1) Allow for alternative types of PWSF's in any location subject to
standards.
(2) Encourage the use of existing structures, including but not limited
to rooftops, utility poles and church steeples, for deploying PWSF's.
(3) Expedite the review process for those applications choosing the
least intrusive alternative of deploying PWSF's.
(4) Encourage users of guyed and lattice towers, monopoles and
antennas to locate, site and design them in a way that minimizes
the adverse visual impact of the lattice or guyed towers, monopoles
and antennas.
(5) Enhance the ability of the providers of personal wireless services to
provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and
efficiently.
(6) Promote PWSFs' compatibility with surrounding land uses, and
protect the attractiveness, health, safety, general welfare and
property values of the community.
B. Preexisting personal wireless service facilities.
(1) Permits and renewals.
(a) A PWSF for which a building permit has been issued prior to
the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed a permitted
use, subject to the conditions of that permit. When an
unpermitted PWSF is identified by the Town of Smithtown to
be attached to a mount approved for another use or PWSF, a
separate permit must be applied for it, even when:
[1] Sharing a legal mount;
[2] Already in operation, and
[3] Duly licensed by the Federal Communications
Commission.
(b) The issuance of permit renewals or other new permits for such
facilities shall be in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Unpermitted PWSF's will be considered out of
compliance with this chapter.
(2) Placement of any attached array, microcell or any other portions of
a PWSF on an existing structure, whether legally nonconforming or
in, as well as out of, compliance, shall require a permit to be
obtained for the PWSF under the terms of this chapter.
§ 242-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-3
1:599
§ 242-4. Specification of land use classifications.
(3) Any carrier with at least one preexisting PWSF in the Town of
Smithtown that is out of compliance with the Town of Smithtown
building or zoning requirements shall not be eligible for any new
approvals of personal wireless service facilities by the Town until
the preexisting PWSF or PWSF's are brought into compliance with
this chapter.
C. Exclusions for amateur radio facilities. This chapter shall not govern
the installation of any amateur radio facility that is owned and operated
by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used
exclusively for noncommercial, receive-only antennas.
D. Unpermitted facilities, mounts or equipment ineligible for collocation.
(1) No permit shall be issued under this chapter for a request to
collocate, attach or share an existing PWSF site, mount or facility
when such existing site, mount or facility is found to have one or
more PWSF's without permits and/or any structure, mount or
facility is found to lack one or more building permits, electrical
permits or any other permits required by the Town of Smithtown.
(2) Any application by a wireless carrier or other entity shall not be
approved by the Town of Smithtown if that wireless carrier has a
preexisting PWSF on, or the other entity owns, a mount, rooftop or
tower, on which there is any unpermitted PWSF until that PWSF is
brought into compliance with this chapter.
E. Relationship to other laws. This chapter shall supersede conflicting
requirements contained in the Town of Smithtown Building Zone
Ordinance57 regarding the siting and permitting of PWSF's.
A. No PWSF shall be permitted except in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and § 322-8 of the Building Zone Ordinance.
B. All PWSF's shall be classified as follows:
(1) Tier One. This tier is limited to applications that: [Amended
4-9-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
(a) Place PWSF's on existing utility poles (telephone poles, utility
distribution poles, streetlights and traffic signal stanchions),
flagpoles, transmission line towers, public water towers, or
similar structures as determined by the Board of Site Plan
Review; or
(b) Place PWSF's on new utility poles or similar structures as
determined by the Board of Site Plan Review when the carrier
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Zoning.
§ 242-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 242-4
1:600
§ 242-5. Standards.
The approval of PWSF's shall be subject to meeting or exceeding the
following standards:
specifies a utility pole structure that meets the Town of
Smithtown specifications; and
(c) Meet all location standards, design standards and safety
standards in this law. In the event that any of the standards in
this law are in conflict for a particular application, one or the
other conflicting standard shall be met. The decision of which
standard shall be met shall be subject to the approval of the
Town of Smithtown.
(2) Tier Two. This tier is limited to applications that:
(a) Do not qualify for Tier One status; and
(b) Propose to place PWSF's on or in buildings or propose to
conceal PWSF's in natural or man-made features approved by
the Smithtown Planning Board; and
(c) Meet all location standards, design standards and safety
standards in this chapter. In the event that any of the standards
in the chapter are in conflict for a particular application, one or
the other conflicting standard shall be met. The decision of
which standard shall be met shall be subject to the approval of
the Town of Smithtown.
(3) Tier Three. This tier is limited to applications that:
(a) Do not qualify as either Tier One or Tier Two status; and
(b) Require the erection, establishment, siting, location,
construction, modification or development of a guyed tower,
monopole, lattice tower or similar structure as determined by
the Town Board; and
(c) Meet all location standards, design standards and safety
standards in this chapter. In the event that any of the standards
in the chapter are in conflict for a particular application, one or
the other conflicting standard shall be met. The decision of
which standard shall be met shall be subject to the approval of
the Town of Smithtown.
C. All PWSF's require final approval pursuant to Chapter 322, Article XIII,
Site Plan Review, and issuance of a building permit and certificate of
occupancy or compliance from the Building Director. [Amended
5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
A. Location standards.
§ 242-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-5
1:601
(1) Opportunity sites. A PWSF shall be located at one of the following
opportunity sites:
(a) LIPA transmission towers.
(b) Public water tanks.
(c) Inside or concealed around steeples or similar architectural
features.
(d) Rooftops.
(e) Utility poles in publicly owned rights-of-way or similar public
properties as identified by the Town of Smithtown.
(2) Avoidance areas. A Tier 2 or Tier 3 PWSF shall not be located in the
following avoidance areas:
(a) Flood hazard zones.
(b) Historically and culturally significant resources.
(c) Designated conservation areas.
(d) Parklands, including common areas of clustered subdivisions.
(e) Parkways.
(f) Nissequogue River Corridor.
(g) Scenic or visual corridors as defined by the Town.
(h) Wetlands, both tidal and freshwater.
(3) Interpretation of opportunity sites and avoidance areas shall be
based on maps or aerial photographs provided by the Town of
Smithtown Department of Planning and Community Development
and/or the applicant.
(4) Personal wireless service facilities may also be permitted in areas
that are not opportunity sites subject to the following siting, design
and safety standards and permitted in avoidance areas subject to
the following siting, design and safety standards.
(5) These standards apply regardless of radio frequency (RF)
engineering considerations.
B. Siting standards.
(1) Personal wireless service facilities shall meet the following siting
standards:
(a) To the greatest extent possible, PWSF's shall be concealed
within existing structures or where camouflaged conditions
surround them, or on inconspicuous mounts.
§ 242-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 242-5
1:602
(b) Placement within trees shall be encouraged, but no antennas
shall extend higher than 10 feet above the average tree height.
(c) Placement on existing roofs or nonwireless structures shall be
favored over ground-mounted PWSF's.
(d) Roof-mounted PWSF's shall not project more than 10
additional feet above the height of a building. If the roofmounted
PWSF's project above the height limit, they shall be
screened pursuant to § 322-20F.
(e) Side-mounted PWSF's shall not project more than 20 inches
from the face of the mounting structure.
(2) These standards shall apply regardless of RF engineering
considerations.
C. Design standards.
(1) Personal wireless service facilities shall meet the following design
standards:
(a) Color. All PWSF's shall be painted or complemented with
natural tones (including trees and sky).
(b) Size. The silhouette of the PWSF shall be reduced to the
minimum visual impact.
(c) Personal wireless service facilities near or within view of
residences shall either:
[1] Provide underground vaults for equipment shelters; or
[2] Place equipment shelters within enclosed structures
approved by the Town of Smithtown.
(d) Equipment. The following types of equipment shall be
discouraged:
[1] Roof-mounted monopoles, lattice towers or guyed towers.
[2] Ground-mounted lattice towers.
[3] Ground-mounted guyed towers.
(e) Height shall be kept to a minimum.
[1] Heights of PWSF's shall be no higher than the height of the
uppermost height of nearby structures (within 300
horizontal feet when measured along the ground) of the
proposed PWSF, regardless of prevailing height limits in
the zoning district.
§ 242-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-5
1:603
§ 242-6. Fall zone and setback requirements for Tier Three PWSF's.
Tier Three applications shall meet the following standards:
[2] In the event that there are no nearby buildings (within 300
horizontal feet when measured on the ground) of the
proposed site of the PWSF, the following shall apply:
[a] All ground-mounted PWSF's (including the security
barrier) shall be surrounded by nearby dense tree
growth for a radius of 20 horizontal feet (when trunk
center lines are measured on the ground) from the
PWSF in any direction. These trees can be existing on
the subject property or installed to meet the twentyfoot
requirement as part of the proposed PWSF or
they can be a combination of both.
[b] Ground-mounted PWSF's shall not project more than
10 feet above the average tree height.
(2) These standards apply regardless of RF engineering
considerations.
D. Safety standards. Personal wireless service facilities shall meet the
following safety standards:
(1) Hurricane and tornado design standards shall be those of the local
building codes used in the Town of Smithtown58 or EIA-TIA 22
(latest version), whichever is stricter.
(2) Roof mounts on buildings shall have railings to protect workers.
Notices shall be posted, as directed by the Building Director to
warn of radio frequency radiation. [Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L.
No. 5-2007]
A. Fall zone.
(1) No habitable structure or outdoor area where people congregate
shall be within a fall zone of two times the height of the PWSF or its
mount.
(2) No adjoining property line shall be within the fall zone of a radius
equal to the height of the PWSF.
B. Setback.
(1) All PWSF's, including mounts and equipment shelters, shall comply
with the minimum setback requirements of the applicable zoning
district as set forth in the Town of Smithtown Building Zone
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Building Construction.
§ 242-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 242-6
1:604
§ 242-7. Submittal requirements.
An applicant shall submit the following information as part of an application
for a PWSF:
Ordinance,59 depending upon whether any structure is considered
a principal use or an accessory use.
(2) The antenna array for an attached PWSF, with the exception of a
side-mounted PWSF, is exempt from the setback requirements of
this chapter and from the setback for the zoning district in which it
is located, provided that no such antenna array shall project more
than five feet horizontally from the attachment structure at the
point of attachment.
(3) No portion of any PWSF shall project into a required setback more
than the maximum projection permitted in the zoning district in
which the facilities are located, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.
(4) On parcels with a principal building housing a principal use, all
components of the PWSF shall be located behind the building line.
A. Application information.
(1) Name, address and telephone number of applicant and all
coapplicants as well as any agents for the applicant or
coapplicants.
(a) Coapplicants shall include the landowner(s) of the subject
property, licensed carrier(s) and tenant(s) for the PWSF.
(b) A licensed carrier shall either be an applicant or a coapplicant.
(2) The applicant shall provide a copy of the lease between the
applicant and coapplicant(s) and shall provide a description which
shall include the following:
(a) Whether the landowner can enter into leases with other
carriers for collocation and that the landowner is aware that
any future collocation will be subject to a new application.
(b) How the landowner will remove the PWSF in the event that the
licensed carrier fails to remove it upon abandonment.
(3) Original signatures for the applicant and all coapplicants applying
for a special exception permit and/or site plan review; if the
applicant or coapplicant will be represented by an agent, original
signature authorizing the agent to represent the applicant and/or
coapplicant. Photo reproductions of signatures will not be
accepted.
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Zoning.
§ 242-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-7
1:605
B. Location information. The following information is required for all
applications:
(1) Identification of the subject property by including the name of the
nearest road or roads, and street address, if any.
(2) Tax parcel number of subject property.
(3) Zoning district designation for the subject parcel and for all parcels
within 1,000 feet of the property lines of the subject parcel.
(4) A line map to scale showing the subject property and all properties
within 1,000 feet and the location of all buildings, including
accessory structures, on all properties shown.
(5) A Town-wide map showing the other existing PWSF's in the Town
and outside the Town within one mile of its corporate limits.
(6) The specific locations for this carrier of all existing and future
PWSF's in the Town on a Town-wide map.
C. Siting information.
(1) A one-inch-equals-two-hundred-feet vicinity plan showing the
following:
(a) Property lines for the subject property.
(b) Property lines of all properties adjacent to the subject property.
(c) Tree cover on the subject property and all properties adjacent
to the subject property, by species and average height, as
measured by or available from a verifiable source.
(d) Outline of all existing buildings, including purpose (e.g.,
residential buildings, garages, accessory structures, etc.), on
subject property and all properties adjacent to the subject
property.
(e) Proposed location of antenna, mount and equipment shelter(s).
(f) Location of all roads, public and private, on the subject
property and on all properties adjacent to the subject property,
including driveways proposed to serve the PWSF.
(g) Distances, at grade, from the proposed PWSF to each building
on the vicinity plan.
(h) Contour lines.
(i) Lines representing the sight line showing viewpoint (point
from which view is taken) and visible point (point being
viewed) from "Sight lines" subsection below.
(2) Sight lines and photographs as described below:
§ 242-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 242-7
1:606
(a) Sight line representation. A sight-line representation shall be
drawn from the closest facade of each residential building
(viewpoint) included on the vicinity plan to the highest point
(visible point) of the PWSF. Each sight line shall be depicted in
profile, drawn at one-inch-equals-forty-feet. The profiles shall
show all intervening trees and buildings. In the event that
there is only one (or more) residential building on the vicinity
plan, there shall be at least two sight lines from the closest
habitable structures, if any.
(b) Existing (before condition) photographs. Each sight line shall
be illustrated by one four-inch-by-six-inch color photograph of
what can currently be seen from the residential building.
(c) Proposed (after condition). Each of the existing-condition
photographs shall have the proposed PWSF superimposed on it
to show what will be seen from residential buildings if the
proposed PWSF is built.
(3) A one-inch-equals-forty-feet site plan showing the following:
(a) The entire subject property, including all lands held in effective
common ownership, property lines and roads (public and
private) adjacent to the subject property.
(b) All existing buildings, including accessory structures.
(c) All existing vegetation, by mass or individually by diameter
(four feet from the ground) of each stand-alone tree or shrub.
Tree masses or individual stand-alone trees shall be identified
by specie(s).
(d) Proposed security barrier, indicating type and extent as well as
point of controlled entry.
(e) All proposed changes to the existing property, including
grading, vegetation removal and temporary or permanent
roads and driveways.
(f) Representations, dimensioned and to scale, of the proposed
mount, antennas, equipment shelters, cable runs, parking
areas and any other construction or development attendant to
the PWSF.
(4) Siting elevations, or views at-grade from the north, south, east and
west for a fifty-foot radius around the proposed PWSF plus from all
existing public and private roads that serve the subject property.
Elevations shall be at either one-quarter-inch-equals-one-foot or
one-eighth-inch-equals-one-foot scale and show the following:
(a) Antennas, mounts and equipment shelter(s), with total
elevation dimensions and AGL of the highest point.
§ 242-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-7
1:607
(b) Security barrier. If the security barrier will block the views of
the PWSF, the barrier drawing shall be cut away to show the
view behind the barrier.
(c) Any and all structures on the subject property.
(d) Existing trees and shrubs at current height and proposed trees
and shrubs at proposed height at time of installation, with
approximate elevations dimensioned.
(e) Grade changes, or cuts and fills, to be shown as original grade
and new grade line, with two-foot contours AMSL.
D. Design information.
(1) Equipment brochures for the proposed PWSF, such as
manufacturer's specifications or trade journal reprints. These shall
be provided for the antennas, mounts, equipment shelters, cables,
as well as cable runs, and security barrier, if any.
(2) Materials of the proposed PWSF specified by generic type and
specific treatment (e.g., anodized aluminum, stained wood, painted
fiberglass, etc.). These shall be provided for the antennas, mounts,
equipment shelters, cables, as well as cable runs, and security
barrier, if any.
(3) Colors of the proposed PWSF represented by a color board showing
actual colors proposed. Colors shall be provided for the antennas,
mounts, equipment shelters, cables, as well as cable runs, and
security barrier, if any.
(4) Dimensions of the PWSF specified for all three directions: height,
width and breadth. These shall be provided for the antennas,
mounts, equipment shelters and security barrier, if any.
(5) Appearance shown by at least two scaled cross sections of the
PWSF within the subject property. The cross sections shall be
provided for the antennas, mounts, equipment shelters, cables, as
well as cable runs, and security barrier, if any, for the total height,
width and breadth.
(6) Landscape plan, including existing trees and shrubs and those
proposed to be added, identified by size of specimen at installation
and species.
E. Narrative information.
(1) Carrier shall provide a:
(a) Certified copy of Form 6000 on file with the FCC.
(b) Certified copy of an FCC license (radio authorization form).
(2) Carrier shall identify:
§ 242-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 242-7
1:608
(a) Site latitude.
(b) Site longitude.
(c) AGL to the radiation center and the top of highest projection
(e.g., lightning rod).
(3) Applicants should provide two alternatives to the proposed PWSF.
(a) Alternatives should comply with criteria in § 242-8 of this
chapter for differences between the proposed PWSF and the
alternatives.
(b) Failure of the applicant to provide two alternatives shall
constitute an incomplete application.
F. Geographic information.
(1) Area to be served by the proposed PWSF.
(a) Within the Town of Smithtown.
(b) Outside the Town of Smithtown.
(2) Tax Map showing adjoining (abutting) properties.
(3) Land use map showing existing land use.
(4) Zoning Map showing existing zoning.
(5) Relationship to other PWSF's.
(a) Existing and/or proposed by the carrier.
(b) Existing for other carriers.
(c) Proposed by other carriers.
G. Fees. The Town shall have the right to properly plan for and evaluate
applications for PWSF's and to charge reasonable fees for such services
to the applicant. The Town has retained independent consultants and
experts on wireless planning and may retain future independent
consultants and experts to assist Town staff with proper planning for
PWSF's. The fee for applications shall include, but shall not be limited
to, the prorated share for each applicant of such costs for the
independent consultants and experts and for Town staff. The fee shall
be prorated among all applications on an equal basis. Such fees shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(1) Site plan or site plan exemption applications.
(2) Special exception applications.
(3) Building permit applications.
§ 242-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-7
1:609
§ 242-8. Alternatives analysis and comparison.
Each application for a PWSF should also contain at least two alternatives
that differ from the PWSF proposed in the application.
(4) Other review fees. The Town shall have the right to retain
independent technical consultants and experts that it deems
necessary to properly evaluate applications for PWSF's. This fee
will be assigned to the applicant and shall not exceed $10,000.
A. Differences. The alternatives need not be totally different from the
proposed PWSF; however, the alternatives should contain measurable
differences, such as:
(1) Height. An alternative can be identical to the proposed PWSF
except to be a shorter height.
(2) Number. An alternative could be for two or more PWSF's that are
shorter than the proposed PWSF.
(3) Location. An alternative could be located on a different property
than the proposed PWSF.
(4) Siting. An alternative could be in a different place on the same
property as the proposed PWSF.
(5) Design. An alternative could be of the same height, location and
siting as the proposed PWSF, but be designed to appear differently.
B. Submittal requirements for alternatives. The materials submitted for
each alternative should show only the differences between each of the
alternatives and the proposed PWSF.
(1) If the applicant has not submitted two alternatives, the Town of
Smithtown Department of Planning and Community Development
staff shall prepare at least two alternatives.
(2) If the applicant has submitted two or more alternatives, the Town of
Smithtown Department of Planning and Community Development
staff shall prepare at least one alternative.
C. Comparison of proposed personal wireless service facility and
alternatives. The Town of Smithtown Department of Planning and
Community Development staff shall compare the proposed PWSF to the
alternatives on the basis of the following:
(1) Change in community scale, as exhibited in relative height, mass or
proportion of the PWSF within its proposed surroundings.
(2) New visible elements proposed on a contrasting background.
(3) Different colors and textures proposed against a contrasting
background.
§ 242-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 242-8
1:610
§ 242-9. Tiered permit process.
§ 242-10. Application procedures.
Applicants shall use the following procedure when applying for PWSF's,
although Town staff may waive some steps if they are redundant.
(4) Use of materials that are foreign to the existing built environment.
(5) Conservation of opportunities to maintain community scale, not
compromising buffering areas and low-lying buildings so as to start
a trend away from the existing community scale.
(6) Amount and diversity of landscaping and/or natural vegetation.
(7) Preservation of view corridors, vistas and view sheds.
(8) Continuation of existing colors, textures and materials.
D. Ranking of proposed personal wireless service facility and alternatives.
The Town of Smithtown Department of Planning and Community
Development staff shall rank the proposed PWSF and each alternative
based on the above criteria. The ranking of the proposed PWSF and
each alternative shall be submitted to the appropriate board along with
each application. The reviewing board shall consider the alternatives
along with the proposed PWSF.
A. Department of Planning and Community Development. After assigning
each application to a tier, the Town of Smithtown Department of
Planning and Community Development shall:
(1) Prepare an alternative analysis for each application according to
§ 242-8 of this chapter.
(2) Prepare a staff report for each application based on § 242-11 of this
chapter.
(3) Forward the application, alternative analysis and staff report to the
reviewing board.
B. Findings. All decisions resulting in approvals or denials by the
reviewing board shall be in writing and supported by findings of fact
and conclusions of law based upon competent substantial evidence in
the record.
A. Preapplication conference. Applicants shall meet with Town staff prior
to submitting an application for a PWSF.
(1) At the preapplication conference:
(a) The applicant shall inform Town staff of the location of the
proposed facility, as well as its scale and design.
§ 242-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-10
1:611
§ 242-11. Staff reports.
(b) Town staff shall inform the applicant about the classification of
the application and the appropriate procedures to be followed.
(2) If the applicant disagrees with the classification or procedures, the
applicant may appeal to the Board of Site Plan Review for a
determination.
B. Application form. The applicant shall submit the Town's application
form and all required items as specified in Chapter 322 and in § 242-7
above when applying for PWSF's.
C. Initial review by the Department of Planning and Community
Development. The Town of Smithtown Department of Planning and
Community Development shall:
(1) Perform an alternatives analysis in accordance with § 242-8 above.
(2) Forward the application to the appropriate board for review and
action.
A. Tier One applications. Tier One applications do not need staff reports.
B. Tier Two and Tier Three applications. The Town of Smithtown
Department of Planning and Community Development shall prepare
staff reports for Tier Two and Three applications. The staff report shall
contain the following:
(1) Description of the proposed PWSF.
(a) Other PWSF's in the area.
(b) Nearest three PWSF sites to the proposed PWSF for the same
carrier.
(2) Location.
(a) Identification of whether the proposed PWSF is an avoidance
area.
(b) Identification of whether the proposed PWSF is at an
opportunity site.
(c) Determination of whether location standards have been met.
(3) Siting.
(a) Determination of whether siting standards have been met.
(b) Identification of any necessary practical measures to avoid,
minimize and/or mitigate (in that order of preference) adverse
impacts of the proposed PWSF.
(4) Design.
§ 242-10 SMITHTOWN CODE § 242-11
1:612
§ 242-12. Modifications.
The Town of Smithtown shall require the review and approval of all
modifications to PWSF's.
§ 242-13. Collocations/public sites.
(a) Type of mount.
(b) Type of antenna(s).
(c) Treatment of equipment cabinet or shelter.
(d) Determination of whether design standards have been met.
(5) Alternatives analysis.
(a) Alternatives provided by the applicant.
(b) Alternatives studied by Town staff.
(c) Comparison and ranking of the proposed PWSF and the
alternatives as provided in § 242-8.
(6) Description of narrative attachments.
(7) Recommended decision.
(a) Findings of fact.
(b) Approve or deny.
A. Types of modification. A modification of a PWSF is any of the following:
(1) Change in technology used for the PWSF, such as an "overlay."
(2) Addition or replacement of any equipment in the PWSF, excluding
direct, like-for-like substitutions.
(3) Change in design of the PWSF.
(4) Addition to any PWSF for the purpose of collocation.
B. Applications for modification. Applicants for modifications shall submit
an application to the Town for a modified PWSF. The application shall
include all materials required in § 242-7 that would change due to the
modification.
C. Subsequent ownership. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
not be transferable in any way. Any subsequent owner of the PWSF or
the subject property shall be required to obtain a permit in accordance
with this chapter.
§ 242-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-13
1:613
§ 242-14. Registry, monitoring, inspection, abandonment and
obsolescence.
A. Tall mounts discouraged. Tall mounts are discouraged in the Town of
Smithtown, and proliferation of short mounts is considered preferable
to collocation.
B. Collocation discouraged. Collocation shall be discouraged for all PWSF
applications.
C. Worst-case review. The Town of Smithtown shall review applications for
collocations on the basis of all positions on the mount, i.e., the
cumulative, worst-case condition.
D. Collocation review includes entire facility. Applications for collocations
on mounts, when they are constructed prior to the effective date of this
chapter, require review of the existing mount as well as collocation
under the requirements of this chapter.
E. Collocations not previously reported. Applications for collocations on
mounts constructed after the effective date of this chapter, when they
did not previously show the proposed collocation, require review of the
existing mount as well as collocation under the requirements of this
chapter.
F. Public sites. The Town of Smithtown shall work with carriers to
facilitate the siting of PWSF's on Town-owned or other publicly-owned
property, by identifying existing structures, the appropriate contact
persons and the appropriate leasing procedures.
A. Registry. Each carrier shall file the following information with the Town
on an annual basis, beginning with the date of approval.
(1) Owner/lessee/intermediary/agent and carrier(s) at the site.
(2) Location by latitude and longitude, addresses and parcel numbers.
(3) Height, AGL.
(4) Collocation status and capability (including if a former collocation
has been removed).
(5) Last date at which site was modified and the nature of the
modification.
(6) A list of toxic/hazardous materials at the PWSF (including in the
equipment shelter).
(7) Instructions for emergency personnel on the approach action to be
taken in case of an emergency involving any toxic/hazardous
substances.
(8) The name and telephone number of a representative of the carrier
to be contacted in the event of any emergency at the PWSF site.
§ 242-13 SMITHTOWN CODE § 242-14
1:614
§ 242-15. Radio frequency radiation emissions.
§ 242-16. Noise.
No equipment shall be operated at a PWSF so as to produce noise in
excess of the applicable noise standards under the Town of Smithtown
Noise Ordinance.60
The contact representative is to be available on a twenty-four-houra-
day, seven-days-a-week basis.
B. Inspection. [Amended 5-8-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
(1) The owner or operator of PWSF shall provide for and conduct an
inspection of mounts at least once every five years. A report shall
be provided to the Town of Smithtown Building Director verifying
compliance with previous approvals and the Town Code.
(2) The owner or operator of PWSF shall provide for and conduct an
inspection of radio frequency radiation at least once every two
years by a licensed radio frequency engineer. Three copies of a
report shall be provided to the Town of Smithtown Building
Director, who shall forward one copy to the Director of the
Department of Environment and Waterways and one copy to the
Director of Planning and Community Development, verifying that
the radio frequency radiation is in compliance with FCC Guidelines.
C. Abandonment and removal. Any PWSF that is not operated for a
continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the
owner of such PWSF shall remove same within 90 days of notice from
the Town of Smithtown Department of Public Safety that the PWSF is
abandoned. If such PWSF is not removed within said 90 days, the Town
of Smithtown may have the PWSF removed at the PWSF owner's
expense.
D. Hazardous materials. A PWSF shall be registered as a hazardous
facility if petroleum products are used to fuel power supplies or any
toxins are contained in equipment cabinets or shelters or alternative
power sources.
A. FCC Guidelines. A statement certifying that, as proposed, the PWSF
complies with the FCC Guidelines for Evaluating the Environmental
Effects of Radio Frequency Radiation (FCC Guidelines) concerning
radio frequency radiation and emissions shall be provided at the time of
final site plan review, or building permit application for facilities not
requiring site plan review.
B. No contravention of FCC Guidelines. A PWSF that meets the FCC
Guidelines shall not be conditioned or denied on the basis of radio
frequency impacts.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 207, Noise.
§ 242-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-17
1:615
§ 242-17. Lighting and security.
§ 242-18. Signs/identification plaques.
No signage shall be permitted on any PWSF other than that required for
public safety purposes or by the FCC or FAA, except that each PWSF shall
have a weatherproof plaque mounted at eye level identifying the carrier,
frequency and date of permit approval.
§ 242-19. Screening and landscaping.
A. A PWSF shall not be artificially lighted, except for:
(1) Security and safety lighting of equipment buildings if such lighting
is shielded and directed downward to keep light within the
boundaries of the site; and (2) Such lighting of the PWSF as may be
required by the Federal Communications Commission, Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) or other applicable authority
installed in a manner to minimize impacts on adjacent residences.
Only red lighting shall be utilized unless otherwise recommended
by FAA guidelines.
B. Security barriers. A security barrier, conforming to the Town of
Smithtown Building Zone Ordinance,61 shall be required around the
perimeter of mounts(s) or equipment structure, and any anchor points.
In the case of a roof-mounted PWSF, the security barrier need only be
around the antenna. The security barrier shall be maintained by the
operator of the PWSF or mount for the life of the installation. No
security barrier is needed around side-mounted PWSF's, but distances
from windows and balconies should conform to § 242-17C(2) below.
C. Security barriers for certain populations. The security barriers around
all PWSF's shall be reviewed by the Town Board and found to be
acceptable for:
(1) Controlled population: those persons who are trained in
procedures for working near or around radio frequency radiation.
(2) General population: All other persons, some of whom have no
concept of what radio frequency radiation is or how it can cause
harm. Members of the general population should not be allowed
within 10 meters of any antenna.
A. Natural vegetation. Existing natural vegetation shall be undisturbed to
the greatest extent practicable.
B. Landscaping. Landscaping of disturbed areas of the PWSF site and
security barriers shall be required as follows:
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Zoning.
§ 242-17 SMITHTOWN CODE § 242-19
1:616
§ 242-20. Access and parking.
§ 242-21. Penalties for offenses; other remedies.
(1) At least one row of evergreen shrubs capable of forming a
continuous hedge at least five feet in height within two years of
planting shall be spaced not more than five feet apart within 15 feet
of the site boundary; and
(2) At least one row of evergreen trees or shrubs, at least four feet in
height when planted and spaced not more than 15 feet apart, shall
be located interior to the perimeter of the shrubs required in
Subsection B(1) above; and
(3) For ground mounts greater than 200 feet tall, at least one row of
deciduous trees, not less than 11/2 inches' diameter measured
three feet above grade and spaced not more than 20 feet apart,
shall be located within the perimeter of the evergreen trees or
shrubs required in Subsection B(2) above.
(4) All security barriers for guy wire anchor points shall be screened
from view by at least one row of evergreen shrubs spaced not more
than five feet apart and capable of forming a continuous hedge at
least five feet in height within two years of planting.
(5) Existing vegetation, topography, walls and fences combined with
shrubs or other features may be substituted for the required
buffers if the Town Board finds they:
(a) Achieve the same degree of screening as the required buffer;
or
(b) Affect the stability, security or maintenance of guy wires.
(6) Landscaping materials shall consist of xeric or drought-resistant
native species and shall be maintained by the operator of the PWSF
for the life of the installation.
A. Parking. Areas sufficient for the temporary off-street parking of at least
two vehicles shall be provided for mounts. The type and configuration of
parking shall be subject to approval by the Town Board.
B. Private access. A copy shall be provided to the Town of Smithtown
Department of Planning and Community Development of any road
maintenance agreement for any site accessed by private easement.
A. Each violation of this chapter, any regulation, order or ruling
promulgated hereunder or any permit issued hereunder shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500 or imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or both; a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues. In
addition to such a fine, the defendant shall pay all costs and expenses
§ 242-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-21
1:617
§ 242-22. Severability.
It is the declared intent of the Town of Smithtown Town Board that, if
any section, clause, phrase or provision of this chapter is held invalid
or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity
or unconstitutionality shall not be so construed as to render invalid or
unconstitutional the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 242-23. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon filing with the Secretary of State of the
State of New York.
Chapter 245
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations and regrading — See Ch. 154.
Solid waste management — See Ch. 177.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 221.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 248.
incurred by the Town in determining such violation. The foregoing shall
be in addition to all other remedies available under the law to the Town
or the Town Board.
B. In the event of any actual or impending violation of this chapter, the
Town Board, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct or abate
such violation.
C. In addition to other remedies by law, any appropriate action or
proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise, may be instituted or
taken to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use to restrain, correct or
abate such violation, to prevent the use of said structure or land or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such
premises.
§ 242-21 SMITHTOWN CODE § 242-23
1:618
ARTICLE I
Deposits on Streets, Highways and Sidewalks
[Adopted as Ch. 12 of the 1964 Code]
§ 245-1. Deposits prohibited.
No person shall cause or permit any accumulation of sand, gravel, cinders,
topsoil, mud, earth or other material to be placed, deposited, tracked or
flowed upon any Town street and/or highway.
§ 245-2. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be guilty of an
offense punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both; however, for the
purpose of confirming jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers,
such violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and for such purposes
only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such
violations. In lieu of the foregoing, any person violating any provision of
this Article shall be subject to a penalty in the sum of not more than $50
for the first violation and in the sum of not more than $100 for
subsequent violations, said penalties to be recovered in a civil action in
the name of the Town of Smithtown.
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of the prohibited conditions.
§ 245-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-2
1:619

ARTICLE II
Maintenance of Streets and Sidewalks; Newsracks
[Adopted 12-4-1984]
§ 245-3. Title.
This Article shall be known as the "Streets and Sidewalks Ordinance of the
Town of Smithtown."
§ 245-4. Word usage; definitions.
§ 245-5. Duty to repair and maintain.
Owners, occupants, lessors or persons in control of all buildings or
structures used for commercial purposes and the owners or occupants
of lands fronting or abutting on any street or highway in a business or
industrial district shall maintain and repair the sidewalks adjoining their
lands and shall keep such sidewalks free and clear of and from snow, ice and
all other obstructions. Such owner, occupant or lessor, and each of them,
shall be liable for any injury or damage by reason of omission, failure or
A. The following definitions shall govern the interpretation of this Article
unless otherwise expressly defined herein. Words used in the singular
shall include the plural and vice versa. The word "shall" is always
mandatory.
B. As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — The person responsible for placing and maintaining a
newsrack in a public right-of-way.[Added 6-24-1986]
NEWSRACK — Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage
unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and
sale of newspapers, periodicals or other printed matter and commonly
known as "honor boxes."[Added 6-24-1986]
PERSON — Includes a natural person or persons, corporation,
copartnership, unincorporated association or any other organization of
two or more persons, who is or are the owner or owners, mortgagee
or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee,
lessee or agent directly or indirectly in control of a building within the
confines of the Town as defined aforesaid.
SIDEWALK — The area between the curbline and the abutting property
owner's line.
STREET — All that area dedicated to public use for public street
purposes, and shall include but not be limited to roadways, parkways,
alleys and sidewalks.[Added 6-24-1986]
TOWN — Includes all areas within the Town of Smithtown, exclusive of
areas wholly within any incorporated villages.
§ 245-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-5
1:621
negligence to maintain or repair such sidewalk or to remove snow, ice or
other obstructions therefrom.
§ 245-6. Duty to keep free of litter.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Town the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the Town shall keep the sidewalks and parking areas on, and the
sidewalks in front of, their business premises free from litter and shall
sweep clean the sidewalks on and in front of their premises before 10:00
a.m. of each day except Sundays and legal holidays.
§ 245-7. Maintenance by Town; recovery of costs.
§ 245-8. Newsracks. [Added 6-24-1986]
A. Upon default, the Town may cause such sidewalks to be maintained or
repaired.
B. The total expense of such maintenance and repair and the cost of
insurance indemnifying the Town against any loss arising from injuries
to persons or property as a result of such default on the part of the
owner shall be assessed on the real property on which such work was
done, and the expense so assessed shall constitute a lien and charge on
the real property on which it is levied until paid or otherwise satisfied or
discharged and shall be collected in the same manner and at the same
time as other Town charges.
A. Legislative declaration. The unregulated placement of newsracks in
public streets and rights-of-way presents an inconvenience and danger
to the safety and welfare of persons using such rights-of-way, including
pedestrians, persons entering and leaving vehicles, whether
automobiles, taxicabs, private liveries or omnibuses, and buildings and
persons performing essential utility, traffic-control and emergency
services. These unregulated newsracks are so located as to cause an
inconvenience or danger to persons using public rights-of-way, are
unsightly and constitute a public nuisance. The provisions contained in
this Article are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and
promoting the public health, morals and general welfare of persons in
the Town of Smithtown in their use of public rights-of-way.
B. Prohibition; standards.
(1) No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which
projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public
street.
(2) No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which, in
whole or in part, rests upon, in or over any sidewalk or other public
§ 245-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 245-8
1:622
place when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the
safety of persons or property or when such site or location is
used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or
government use or when such newsrack unreasonably interferes
with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the
ingress into or egress from any residence, place of business or any
legally parked or stopped vehicle or the use of poles, posts, traffic
signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at
or near said location.
(3) Any newsrack which, in whole or in part, rests upon, in or over any
sidewalk or other public place shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) No newsrack shall exceed four feet in height, 30 inches in
width or two feet in depth.
(b) No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to
any property owned or maintained by the Town of Smithtown.
(c) No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
[1] Within three feet of any crosswalk.
[2] Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant.
[3] Within five feet of any fire or police call box or other
emergency facility.
[4] Within five feet of any driveway, public or private.
[5] Within three feet ahead or 15 feet to the rear of any
designated bus stop, taxi stand or place marked for
handicapped parking.
[6] Within three feet of any bus bench or shelter.
[7] At any location whereby the clear space for the
passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than four
feet.
[8] Within three feet of any display window of any building
abutting the sidewalk or other public place in such a
manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use
of such window for display purposes.
(d) No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity
purposes other than that which is essential to identify, and no
more than two sides of the newsrack, the newspaper,
periodical or other printed matter offered for sale therein. No
letter thereon shall exceed two square inches in size.
Advertising signs, promotional decorations, banners and
§ 245-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-8
1:623
§ 245-9. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-14-1992 by L.L. No.
5-1992]
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be guilty of an
offense punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both; however, for the
purpose of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers, such
violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor and for such purposes only all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person violating any provisions of this
article shall be subject to a penalty in the sum of not more than $250 for the
first violation and in the sum not to exceed $500 for subsequent violations.
Said penalties to be recovered in a civil action in the name of the Town of
Smithtown.
§ 245-10. Enforcement. [Amended 5-8-2007]
This article shall be enforced by the Ordinance Inspectors or the Building
Director of the Town or by deputies whom said Building Director designates
for this purpose.
moving signs shall not be permitted on the newsrack, except
as otherwise provided in this subsection.
(e) Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean and neat
condition and in good repair at all times, and it shall be of one
color that does not unnecessarily contrast with the immediate
surroundings, except that the lettering permitted in
Subsection B(3)(d) and B(3)(f) of this section may contrast with
such one color. Neither such one color nor any of the permitted
lettering shall employ reflectorized paint, Day-Glo, fluorescent
or scotchlite reflective materials or materials of like nature.
(f) Every person who places or maintains a newsrack on the
streets of the Town of Smithtown shall have his name, address
and telephone number affixed thereto in a place where such
information may easily be seen.
(g) No newsrack shall be placed or allowed to remain in any
location so that it interferes with the removal of snow or ice or
the removal of leaves or debris, whether the removal is a public
or private duty.
(h) No newsrack shall be placed or allowed to remain within 100
feet of any other newsrack on the same side of the street in the
same block which contains the same issue or edition of the
same newspaper or news periodical.
§ 245-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 245-10
1:624
ARTICLE III
Civil Claims Notice
[Adopted 4-23-1991 by L.L. No. 3-199162]
§ 245-11. Title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as "Civil Claims Notice" of
the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
§ 245-11.1. Supersession. [Added 2-22-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007;
amended 3-29-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
This article shall supersede § 65-a(1) and (3) of the New York State Town
Law insofar as it is inconsistent with such section.
§ 245-12. Compliance required. [Amended 7-22-2003]
No civil action shall be maintained against the Town of Smithtown, the
Town of Smithtown Water District, the Town of Smithtown St. James Water
District, the Town of Smithtown Industrial Development Agency, the Town
of Smithtown Housing Development Corporation, the Town of Smithtown
Multifamily Housing Corporation, the Town of Smithtown Parking District,
the Town of Smithtown Department of Parks, the Town of Smithtown
Department of Recreation, the Town of Smithtown Highway Department or
the Town of Smithtown Traffic Safety Department or the Town of Smithtown
Community Development Agency or any other department or agency of the
Town of Smithtown unless the requirements of this article are fully met.
§ 245-13. Written notice of defects required. [Amended 2-22-2007
by L.L. No. 1-2007]
No civil action shall be maintained against the Town of Smithtown for
damages or injuries to person or property sustained by reason of any
highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, sewer, manhole or appurtenance or curb
being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed or due to any
missing highway sign or the failure to provide by ordinance or otherwise
for the erection of any highway sign unless written notice of such defective,
unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition shall be filed with the Town Clerk
at least 15 calendar days prior to the event giving rise to the alleged claim.
§ 245-14. Insufficient notice.
A. In the absence of written notice that is required above, no civil claim
shall be maintained against the Town of Smithtown, nor shall any civil
claim be maintained based on an allegation that such defect, danger or
obstruction existed for so long a period of time that the same should
have been discovered and remedied in the exercise of reasonable care
and diligence, nor a claim that any Town employee possessed actual
62.Editor's Note: This local law superseded former Art. III, Civil Claims Notice, adopted
6-25-1985 by L.L. No. 9-1985.
§ 245-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-14
1:625
§ 245-14.1. Statement of location and condition.
The written notice required by this section shall state the exact location
of the alleged defect, danger or obstruction and shall specifically state the
condition complained of. If this requirement is not met, such notice shall be
void.
§ 245-14.2. When effective.
This article shall become effective upon filing with the Secretary of State.
knowledge of such defect, danger or obstruction, unless written notice
is filed with the Town Clerk as required above.
B. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to relieve a claimant of the
obligation to serve a notice of claim on the Town of Smithtown as
provided in § 50-e of the General Municipal Law.
§ 245-14 SMITHTOWN CODE § 245-14.2
1:626
ARTICLE IV
Excavations
[Adopted 6-6-1967; amended in its entirety 1-19-1989]
§ 245-15. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation, including public service companies, which
for the purpose of this Article are deemed such as the New York Telephone
Company, the Long Island Lighting Company, the Suffolk County Water
Authority, private (non-municipally owned) water companies and municipal
districts, shall make any excavation in any Town street, filed map street,
highway or sidewalk in the Town of Smithtown for any purpose without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the Superintendent of Highways of the
Town of Smithtown as hereinafter provided.
§ 245-16. Application for permit; deposit.
A. Applications, in writing, shall be filed with the Superintendent of
Highways upon application blanks which he shall provide or in such
other manner as he shall prescribe, which applications shall state the
nature, location, extent and purpose of the proposed excavations.
B. Applications by public service companies, excluding municipal districts,
must be accompanied by a general undertaking in such form as may be
approved by the Town Board. Said general undertaking is tendered to
assure that, after completing the excavation, said applicant leaves the
street, highway or sidewalk, pavement, curb or gutter in the same
condition it was prior to excavation.
C. Applications by applicants other than public service companies or
municipal districts must be accompanied by a minimum deposit of
$300, which is to be deposited with the Comptroller of the Town of
Smithtown to assure that, after completing the excavation, said
applicant leaves the street, highway or sidewalk, pavement, curb or
gutter in a condition to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of
Highways. In the event that the applicant fails to repair or replace such
pavement, sidewalk, curb or gutter within the time provided in the
permit, the Superintendent of Highways will assess the damage and
report the same to the Town Board. The Town Board may thereafter
order the Comptroller to pay to the Superintendent of Highways, out of
the moneys deposited, a sufficient sum of money to repair or replace
said street, highway or sidewalk, pavement, curb or gutter or other
improvements for a mutually agreed upon sum. In the alternative, the
Superintendent of Highways may require such additional
improvements as he deems necessary and appropriate for the health
and safety of the public and to ensure proper construction procedures
on the Town roads and rights-of-way. Where it is estimated that the
work will exceed $300, the applicant must make an additional deposit
of 10% of the cost of the estimated work in excess of said $300. The
Superintendent of Highways, at his discretion, may require a bond for
§ 245-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-16
1:627
§ 245-16.1. Emergencies. [Added 7-16-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
In the event that any pipe, main, conduit or other utility installation in
or under any street, alley, sidewalk or public way shall burst, break or
otherwise be in such condition as to seriously endanger persons or property,
the owner of such sewer, main, conduit or other installation shall
immediately contact the Town of Smithtown Superintendent of Highways
describing the location of the break, extent of repairs and any emergency
measures required to reroute traffic. Upon approval by the Superintendent
of Highways, the owner shall immediately remedy such trouble and shall
immediately take all such necessary steps to make said location safe and
secure. Such owner shall not, however, begin making any permanent
repairs to such street, alley or sidewalk until he or she shall have secured
a permit as provided above. Such permit shall be applied for within 48
hours after such break or serious trouble shall have developed, and the
necessary permanent repairs to the street, alley or sidewalk shall be made
as directed by the Superintendent of Highways and shall be completed as
soon as practicable after receipt of the permit.
§ 245-17. Permit fee. [Amended 2-26-2002; 6-25-2009; 4-9-2019]
Each applicant must pay a permit filing fee pursuant to the Town of
Smithtown Highway Department fee schedule set forth in § 245-18 to the
Highway Department for each excavation, including those for utility poles.
This application filing fee shall cover the processing fee for the initial
excavation, i.e., connection to a water main, tapping a gas main or installing
a utility pole.
§ 245-18. Fee schedule. [Amended 4-9-2019]
100% of the estimated cost of the project. Upon completion of said
excavation, moneys deposited hereunder are to be returned to the
applicant, provided that all or part has not been expended pursuant to
this subsection. Notwithstanding the foregoing, bonds will be forfeited
if work is not completed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent
of Highways within one year of issuance of permit. [Amended
6-25-2009; 4-9-2019]
D. Upon compliance with the foregoing requirements, a permit shall be
issued in the name of the Superintendent of Highways of the Town of
Smithtown, except that no permit shall be issued for an opening on any
roadway which has been resurfaced by the Town of Smithtown during a
period of three calendar years prior to the application date, except for
permits for emergency openings as described in § 245-16.1 below. In
the case of a newly constructed or reconstructed roadway, the time
period shall be five years. The prohibitions stated in this subsection
shall not apply to applications to install new gas connections to
residential properties. [Amended 7-16-2019 by L.L. No. 2-2019]
A. Town of Smithtown Highway Department fees shall be as follows:
§ 245-16 SMITHTOWN CODE § 245-18
1:628
(1) Road improvement initiation fee: $150 (to be applied to total fee).
(2) Driveway apron permit:
(a) Residential: $150 per apron.
(b) Commercial: $200 per apron.
(3) Bell hole excavation:
(a) Up to 50 square feet: $150 each
(b) Greater than 50 square feet: $250 each.
(4) Directional drill: $150 for first 100 feet plus an additional $1 per
foot thereafter.
(5) Test hole/monitoring well: $200 each.
(6) Excavation:
(a) Up to sixty-inch depth: $150 for first 100 feet; additional $1 per
foot thereafter.
(b) Greater than sixty-inch depth: $175 for first 100 feet;
additional $1 per foot thereafter.
(7) Sidewalk excavation: $150 for first 100 feet; additional $1 per foot
thereafter.
(8) Curb or curb cut and sidewalk excavation: $150 for first 100 feet;
additional $1 per foot thereafter.
(9) Communication/utility pole install or replacement: $150 per pole.
(10) Emergency processing surcharge (utilities only): $50 for less than
48 hours' notice.
(11) Block party: $75 each.
(12) Reinspection fee:
(a) Second inspection: $75.
(b) Each additional inspection: $100.
(13) Permit renewal fee: $150 each.
(14) Transfer of highway work permit to new permit holder: $150 each.
(15)Winter bonding: $150 each.
(16) Encroachment easement: $200 each.
(17) Heavy or overweight loads (80,000 pounds or more): $250 each.
(18) Over width loads (more than 10 feet wide): $250.
§ 245-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-18
1:629
§ 245-19. Liability insurance.
The applicant shall file with the Superintendent of Highways a general
liability insurance policy or certificate of insurance naming the Town of
Smithtown as an additional insured at the same time he files his application
for a permit. The Town Board shall approve the policy for form. The policy
shall insure the Town of Smithtown and the applicant and shall cover all
operations relative to the excavation and reconstruction thereto. Said policy
shall have limits of liability of $500,000 for bodily injury to each person
and $1,000,000 of liability in the aggregate for each accident and property
damage of $500,000 for each accident and an aggregate property damage
liability of $1,000,000.
§ 245-20. Prior notice to utilities.
The Superintendent of Highways requires any person making an excavation
pursuant to the permit granted hereunder to give notice of such excavation
to public service companies or municipal districts having lines, mains or
other property in the streets, and no work shall be commenced or done
under such permit until such requirement of notice has been fully complied
with under the rules of the Public Service Commission.
§ 245-21. Guarding of excavations and protection of property.
Any person making an excavation covered by this Article shall erect suitable
barriers or guards for the protection of persons using the streets and
sidewalks and, in addition thereto, shall set up and maintain during the
hours of darkness sufficient lights or flares to properly illuminate the area
and shall also take precautions for the protection of the property of the
Town and of public service companies or municipal districts and others
which may be endangered by such excavation or the work incident thereto
and shall comply with all directions given by the Superintendent of
Highways with respect to such barriers, lights, flares and protective
measures.
§ 245-22. Regulations and specifications.
(19) Utility cabinet: $500 each.
A. Commencement of work. Work under the permit shall be commenced
within 30 days from the date of permit and continued in a expeditious
manner unless extension of this period is approved by the
Superintendent of Highways.
B. Construction.
(1) When working on any Town road, no pavement cuts or trenches are
to be left unfilled overnight, except in emergencies, and in such
cases adequate precautions must be exercised to protect traffic.
§ 245-18 SMITHTOWN CODE § 245-22
1:630
(2) When working on any Town road, contractors must complete final
backfilling (see Subsection E hereof) of the trench within 18 days
from the day of opening.
(3) All pipes or mains crossing highway pavements shall, wherever
possible, be driven beneath the roadway without disturbance to the
pavement. The point of driving shall not be less than five feet from
the edge of the pavement. Such crossover pipes shall, whenever
possible, be enclosed in sleeves or larger pipes so that repairs or
replacements may be made in the future without further
disturbances of the roadway pavement.
(4) If the boring method in the driving of crossover pipes is found to be
impracticable, the representative of the Highway Department shall
be consulted to determine the manner of placing the pipe by the
open-cut method. This request is to be made in writing to the
Highway Superintendent and may be granted by the
Superintendent upon such conditions as he deems necessary and
proper under the circumstances.
(5) The Superintendent of Highways may require that special
conditions be met as he deems necessary in conjunction with work
performed within the Town right-of-way under this permit. Such
special conditions will be made known to the applicant on the
permit or attachment thereto.
C. Excavations: method and type of opening.
(1) Openings in concrete shall have a minimum width of five feet.
(2) No roads are to be tunneled, but pipes may be driven or trenched
across.
(3) All openings are to be made either by pinwheel trenching machine
or hand labor, unless otherwise specified in the permit.
(4) Highway pavement is not to be broken or undermined.
D. Restoration of excavation. Temporary patching. Upon completion of the
final backfilling, if final pavement is not to be accomplished within 20
days of opening, the trench will be brought to within two inches of the
road level and then paved with two inches of asphaltic concrete within
20 days of opening, which shall be placed as a temporary surface in any
pavement opening and shall be maintained to the same grade as any
adjacent pavement.
E. Procedure for final backfilling.
(1) Clean fill will be used and the trench will be compacted in twelveinch
lifts with either vibratory soil compactors or by suitable
hydraulic compaction by water jetting at three-foot intervals.
§ 245-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-22
1:631
(2) Density tests. The applicant shall, at his own expense, have an
independent testing laboratory that is acceptable to the
Superintendent of Highways perform density tests after the
backfilling. The results of these tests shall be presented to the
Superintendent of Highways for his approval. The testing shall be
performed to 98% of the Standard Proctor Maximum Density
before final pavement is installed.
F. Final pavement replacing.
(1) Concrete. Minimum size replacements in concrete or asphalt on
concrete base shall be 10 by 10 feet, or as directed. In all cases, if
the ten-foot-by-ten-foot replacement is within five feet of a joint, the
replacement must extend to the joint. Concrete openings shall be
saw cuts, and the mix shall be high-early one to one to two and onehalf
(1:1:2 1/2).
(2) Asphalt. The trench will be compacted to within five inches of the
road surface and the existing asphalt surface shall then be cut back
at least 12 inches on either side of the undisturbed subgrade on a
straight line. At the discretion of the Highway Superintendent, the
contact surfaces, the patched surfaces and/or adjacent pavement
edges shall be painted and sealed with approved bituminous and/or
bluestone material before or after placing the course of asphalt.
The asphalt shall be installed in two lifts at the discretion of the
Superintendent of Highways. The base lift shall be three inches of a
binder course (Type 3) Standard Specification of the State of New
York and a two-inch lift of (Type 7) Standard Specification of the
State of New York. This course shall be rolled with an eight- or tenton
roller, and surface variations in excess of 1/4 inch shall be
eliminated or the pavement relaid.
(3) At the discretion of the Superintendent of Highways, if the
temporary patching is not accomplished, final pavement replacing
must be completed within 20 days of opening. If temporary
patching is accomplished as specified, then final pavement
replacing must be completed within 30 days of temporary patching
or within such additional time as may be authorized by the
Highway Superintendent, at his discretion, upon application.
G. Shoulder areas. If the trench work is in the earthen shoulder of the
roadway, then proper compaction as outlined in Subsection E above will
apply, with the addition of a covering of sod or grass seeding as
specified by the Highway Department.
H. Traffic control.
(1) Maintenance and protection of traffic. Traffic is to be maintained at
all times during the progress of work. Adequate signs, barricades
and lights necessary to protect the public shall be provided.
Flagmen to direct traffic shall be employed continuously during
§ 245-22 SMITHTOWN CODE § 245-22
1:632
§ 245-23. Completion of work; inspections.
§ 245-24. Penalties for offenses.
periods when only one-way traffic can be maintained or when
equipment is operated back and forth across the pavement area.
(2) No construction materials or equipment shall be left on the
pavement after working hours, nor shall any construction
equipment or materials be placed in any manner or location that
will obstruct highway or railroad signs.
(3) Barricades, whether in a sidewalk or roadway area, shall have
prominently displayed, for police convenience, the address and
telephone number of twenty-four-hour availability of someone who
will reestablish the same in an emergency.
(4) Access to adjacent properties shall be maintained.
I. Notification. The applicant will be responsible to notify the Highway
Department 24 hours prior to street opening and closing.
J. Preconstruction meeting. The Superintendent of Highways may, at his
discretion, require a meeting with the applicant and other involved
parties before construction may begin.
A. Applicants shall notify the Superintendent of Highways when work has
been completed, after which an inspection will be made by the
Superintendent of Highways or his duly authorized agent, and, upon
approval of the work, a release will be granted to the applicant. The
Superintendent of Highways may require as part of the release
inspection that standard tests be performed by an independent testing
agency. The costs of such tests will be the responsibility of the
applicant. Until the granting of such release, the applicant shall remain
liable for proper guarding and protection as provided in § 235-21.
Public utility companies and/or municipal districts shall be responsible
for the maintenance of their trenches for a period of five years after the
release date for completion of the work.
B. Upon receipt of notice of completion of applicants, other than public
utility companies or municipal districts, and approval of the backfill, the
Highway Department will resurface the excavation at the expense of
the applicant.
C. When the project has been completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent of Highways, a release will be provided to the
applicant.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Article
shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or
both; however, for the purpose of confirming jurisdiction upon courts
and judicial officers, such violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and
§ 245-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-24
1:633
for such purposes only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors
shall apply to such violations. In lieu of the foregoing, any person
violating any provisions of this Article shall be subject to a penalty in
the sum of not more than $500 for the first violation and $1,000 for
subsequent violations, such penalties to be recovered in a civil action in
the name of the Town of Smithtown.
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of the prohibited conditions.
§ 245-24 SMITHTOWN CODE § 245-24
1:634
ARTICLE V
Adopt-A-Road or Adopt-A-Spot Program
[Adopted 11-8-1994]
§ 245-25. Application to participate.
Any individual, group, business or association may apply to the Smithtown
Traffic Safety Department to participate in the Adopt-A-Road or Adopt-ASpot
Program.
§ 245-26. Requirements.
Such applicant shall complete a form setting forth the name of the road or
spot for which it desires to become responsible and setting forth the names
and addresses of all participants, either on an individual, group, business or
association basis. Such application may be obtained from the Department
of Traffic Safety or the Office of the Town Clerk. The fee for the adoption
permit is $25, payable to the Town of Smithtown, and must be accompanied
by the completed application.
§ 245-27. Review.
The application shall be submitted to the Smithtown Traffic Safety
Department, which may forward the application to any other appropriate
departments or divisions of this Town for review and comment as to the
feasibility and compatibility of the individual, group, business or association
participating in the cleanup and care program.
§ 245-28. Additional requirements.
The application for participation in this program shall set forth what steps
and what actions the particular individual, group, business or association is
going to take to provide the continuous care and maintenance of the road
or spot to keep that area free from debris, trash and refuse. At a minimum,
the applicant shall agree to pick up litter; plant flowers, shrubs or ground
cover, if applicable; maintain the same; and report any defects in its area,
such as knocked down or missing traffic signs, etc.
§ 245-29. Authorization by Town.
The Town Director of Traffic Safety, after receipt and review of the
application of the individual, group, business or association, will authorize
the individual, group, business or association to begin a program of care
and maintenance of said road or spot. Thereafter, and before any work
is undertaken by the individual, group, business or association, a duly
authorized representative of the group, business or association shall sign an
adopt-a-road or adopt-a-spot agreement, that shall run for a period of two
years, on a form furnished by the Town Attorney and shall furnish all other
documentation called for in that agreement. Only after such agreement has
§ 245-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-29
1:635
been executed by the Director of Traffic Safety of the Town of Smithtown
shall any work begin.
§ 245-30. Installation of signs.
If a road or spot is adopted after the procedures have been followed as set
forth herein, an appropriate sign or signs shall be installed in a prominent
place displaying the fact that this road or spot has been adopted under this
program and has qualified as a road or spot appropriately cared for and
maintained by the adoptive party.
§ 245-31. Participants not deemed Town employees; Town held
harmless.
No organization or group which performs any work or services under this
program shall be deemed to be an employee of the Town of Smithtown,
but merely volunteers, and the Town shall be held harmless from any
negligent or careless acts of the organization or group in the performance
of any functions under the program. In this connection the organization
shall furnish the Town with a hold harmless agreement covering the group's
proposed activities. The applicant further agrees that the supervision of an
adult, 21 years of age or older, is required for participants in the program
under 16 years of age.
§ 245-32. Responsibilities of program participants.
All individuals participating in the Adopt-A-Road or Adopt-A-Spot Program
are subject to each of the following requirements and responsibilities:
A. Appointing or selecting an authorized representative to act on behalf of
the group, business or association to act as a contact with the Town of
Smithtown.
B. Obey and abide by the programs, guidelines, safety requirements and
other terms and conditions as set forth in the agreement.
C. Pick up litter, at a minimum of four times a year, as often as necessary to
maintain the adopted road or spot free of debris.
D. Each individual program participant must wear clothing and apparatus
that will not impair vision, hearing or movement during the cleanup of
the adopted road or spot.
E. Refrain from wearing attire during the cleanup of the adopted road or
spot that might divert the attention of motorists.
F. Refrain from bringing signs, posters or other display material to the
adopted road or spot that might distract motorists during the cleanup of
the adopted road or spot.
G. In the event that program participants are under 16 years of age,
supervision of an adult, 21 years of age or older, is required.
§ 245-29 SMITHTOWN CODE § 245-32
1:636
§ 245-33. Equipment not supplied by Town.
The Town shall not supply any tools, equipment or supplies for this program
except leaf bags which shall be made available by the Smithtown Highway
Department. Any and all tools, equipment or supplies (except leaf bags)
shall be furnished by the volunteers.
§ 245-34. Program modification and/or termination.
The Adopt-A-Road or Adopt-A-Spot Program may be modified or terminated
in any manner at any time at the discretion of the Town Board of the
Town of Smithtown. Program participants will have the option of renewing
their agreement, subject to the approval of the Town of Smithtown. The
Town of Smithtown may terminate the adoption agreement and/or remove
the Adopt-A-Road or Adopt-A-Spot signs bearing the program participant's
name or acronym if the Town Board after recommendation from the
Director of Traffic Safety of the Town of Smithtown finds and determines
that the program participant(s) is not meeting the terms and conditions
of the agreement. Specifically, in the event that one or more members of
the participating group, business or association is not acting responsible
or that the program participant(s) is acting contrary to the guidelines of
the program or that the adoption is proving to be counterproductive to the
program's purpose or that thefts or acts of vandalism are resulting from
the adoption or that program participants have engaged in irresponsible
conduct at the adopted road or spot, the agreement will be terminated by
the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown.
H. All program participants must not possess or consume alcoholic
beverages or other drugs during the cleanup of the adopted road or
spot.
I. Notify the Traffic Safety Department at (516) 360-7635 at least one
week in advance of any activity at the adopted road or spot.
J. Ensure that all provisions of the agreement are fully performed and
adhered to.
§ 245-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-34
1:637

ARTICLE VI
Utility Poles on Town Road Rights-of-Way
[Adopted 7-14-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
§ 245-35. Legislative intent.
This Town Board hereby finds and determines that public utility companies
place poles on Town of Smithtown roads and rights-of-way to facilitate the
delivery of electric, telephone, and cable television services to the residents
of the Town of Smithtown. This Board also finds that utility poles are
frequently damaged by traffic accidents and adverse weather conditions.
This Town Board determines that public safety can be compromised when
utility lines and equipment remain affixed to weathered/damaged/old poles
for unreasonably long periods of time. This Town further determines that
a utility's delay in removing lines and equipment also delays the removal
of the pole itself, which causes a proliferation of aesthetically unpleasant
"double woods" or "double poles" along roadways. This Town Board also
finds and determines that local governments have the authority to regulate
their roads and rights-of-way to protect the public. Therefore, the purpose
of this article is to require utilities that use Town roads and rights-of-way to
promptly remove their plants, cables, lines, equipment and terminals from
old and damaged poles and to further require the prompt removal of double
poles once all plants, cables, lines, terminals and other fixtures have been
removed.
§ 245-36. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DANGEROUS/DAMAGED POLE — Any utility pole that is structurally
compromised due to weather, a traffic incident, and/or age, and poses a
potential threat to public safety.
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Smithtown Highway Department.
DOUBLE POLE — Any damaged utility pole or old utility pole from which
the plant has been removed, in whole or in part, which is attached or in
close proximity to a new utility pole.
PLANT — The cables, terminals, conductors, and other fixtures necessary
for transmitting electric, telephone, cable television or other
telecommunications service.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any corporation, authority or other entity that provides
electric, telephone, cable television, or other telecommunications service to
the residents of the Town of Smithtown.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Town of Smithtown Highway Superintendent.
§ 245-37. Permit requirements.
§ 245-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-37
1:639
§ 245-38. Department notification; time frame for removal.
A. No person, corporation, or entity shall do, or cause to be done, any act
or thing which shall cause or contribute to a condition in, within, or
upon any highway, street, road, sidewalk, sidepath, passway, or other
public way of the Town of Smithtown, or maintained by it, which shall
be dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of persons using same, or
impair the public use thereof, or obstruct or tend to obstruct or render
the same dangerous for passage. No person, firm, or corporation shall
change or alter the grade of any Town highway, street, road or any
sidewalk upon or in a Town highway, street, or road of the Town of
Smithtown, or in any manner alter or change the line or height of any
curb in any Town highway, street, or road in Town, or open the surface
of any Town highway, street, or road of the Town of Smithtown or make
any excavation under the surface thereof for any purpose, or place or
erect any pole for any purpose in or upon any Town highway, street, or
road of said Town, or alter or change the location of any existing pole in
any Town highway, street, road, or right-of-way of said Town without
first having obtained a permit from the Supervisor of the Smithtown
Highway Department.
B. Application for a permit under this section shall be made upon a form to
be provided by the Superintendent of the Smithtown Highway
Department and upon payment of a permit fee to be determined by the
Superintendent.
C. The Town of Smithtown Highway Department shall include the
following provision in all permits for the installation of utility poles on
Town highways: The permit applicant shall have 90 days to remove a
double pole following the installation of a new utility pole.
A. When the Superintendent issues a permit for the installation of a utility
pole which is directly next to or in close proximity to another utility pole
in a Town highway or right-of-way, the applicant shall have 90 days to
remove the damaged or double pole following the installation of the
new utility pole. Failure to do so may result in penalties as provided for
in § 245-40A of this article.
B. When the Department determines that a utility pole in a Town road or
right-of-way is damaged and poses a potential threat to public safety,
the Department shall notify any public utility with a plant on the
damaged pole that it must remove its plant from the pole and remove
the damaged pole or be subject to a penalty as provided in § 245-40A of
this article. A public utility must remove its plant from the damaged
pole, any other plants affixed to the damaged pole, and the damaged
pole itself within 15 days of receiving such notification from the
Department.
C. When the Department or its duly authorized agent determines that a
double pole is in a Town road or right-of-way, the Department or its duly
authorized agent will notify the public utility which has its plant on the
§ 245-37 SMITHTOWN CODE § 245-38
1:640
§ 245-39. Indemnity or performance bond.
No person, corporation, or entity shall disturb, break, mar, injure, remove,
deface, or cause to be disturbed, broken, marred, injured, removed or
defaced, the surface of any part of any highway, street, road, sidewalk,
sidepath, passway, or other public way of the Town of Smithtown or
maintained by it and the Superintendent shall not give a permit authorizing
any act or acts as set forth in § 245-37 unless there shall have been
furnished by the applicant sufficient indemnity or performance bond as
determined by the Superintendent as a condition precedent to the issuance
of the permit and the acts specified in § 245-37 of this article, and said
bond or indemnity may cover any period of time necessary to include the
accomplishment of one or more of the aforesaid, all as shall be determined
by the Superintendent. The approval of the Superintendent as to amount,
form, manner of execution, and sufficient of surety or sureties shall be
entered on said bond before it shall be filed in the Town Clerk's office, and
said bond shall be so filed before said permit shall be effective.
§ 245-40. Penalties for offenses.
double pole that such plant must be removed within 30 days or be
subject to a penalty pursuant to § 245-40A of this article. Upon removal,
each subsequent public utility with plant on a double pole will have 30
days to remove such plant from the date it receives notification from
the Department or its duly authorized agent.
D. After all plants have been removed from the double pole, the public
utility which owns the double pole shall remove said pole within 30
days, or be subject to a penalty pursuant to § 245-40A of this article.
This provision shall not nullify or limit any private agreement between
and among public utilities that assign responsibility for pole removal.
E. In addition to the reinstallation of plants, any underground utility lines
which have been removed from the double pole shall be properly
reaffixed to the new utility pole, leaving no loose wires or gaps.
F. Copies of all notifications issued from the Department and/or its duly
authorized agent shall be filed with the Town Attorney's office.
G. Any and all complaints regarding the existence of double poles and/or
dangerous/damaged poles shall be reduced to writing and filed with the
Town Clerk's office.
A. Any public utility that violates this article shall be subject to a civil
penalty not to exceed $250 for each such violation. Each day that the
violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation.
B. If a public utility violates the provisions of this article and fails to
remove its plant from a damaged pole in accordance with the provisions
of this article, the Town Attorney, upon the request of the Department,
may commence an action in the name of the Town, in a court of
§ 245-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-40
1:641
§ 245-41. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all utility poles located on Town roads or rights-ofway
as of the effective date of this article.
§ 245-42. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing in the office of the
Secretary of State, pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Law.
competent jurisdiction, for necessary relief, which may include the
imposition of civil penalties as authorized by this article, an order to
remove the plant from a damaged utility pole, and/or to remove the
damaged pole, the recovery of costs of the action, and such other
remedies as may be necessary to prevent or enjoin a dangerous
condition from existing in a Town road or right-of-way.
§ 245-40 SMITHTOWN CODE § 245-42
1:642
Chapter 248
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental and coastal quality
review — See Ch. 151.
Excavations and regrading — See Ch. 154.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 170.
Historic districts — See Ch. 185.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 245.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 252.
Trees — See Ch. 285.
Zoning — See Ch. 322.
§ 245-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-42
1:643

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 248-1.1. Establishment of Planning Board; training requirements;
retention of experts. [Added 3-29-200763 ]
§ 248-1.2. Statement of policy; guiding considerations.
The Planning Board of the Town of Smithtown declares that these
regulations for the subdivision of land for various purposes have been
promulgated to provide for the orderly growth and coordinated
development of the Town of Smithtown and to assure the comfort,
convenience, safety, health and welfare of its people and, further, that
the approval of such subdivisions shall be based on the following
considerations:
A. The Town Board has established a Planning Board consisting of five
members, pursuant to Town Board resolution on January 22, 1931, in
accordance with and under the authority of Town Law. The Planning
Board was thereby vested with all the powers and duties provided
thereunder and as herein more particularly described.
B. Each member of the Planning Board shall, in accordance with Town
Law § 271, complete, at a minimum, four hours of training each year
designed to enable such members to more effectively carry out their
duties.
C. The Town Board shall have the sole power and authority to appoint and
retain the services of legal counsel and other experts for the purpose of
advising the Planning Board. This subsection is adopted pursuant to
Municipal Home Rule Law § 10 and is specifically intended to supersede
the provision of Town Law § 271(2) that grants such authority to the
Planning Board. All local laws, ordinances, or parts thereof that are in
conflict with any part of this subsection are hereby repealed. This
subsection shall take effect immediately upon its filing in the office of
the Secretary of State. [Added 6-12-2018 by L.L. No. 3-201864]
A. Conformance with the various parts of the Comprehensive Plan and the
Building Zone Ordinance.65
B. The recognition of a desirable relationship to the general land form and
its topographic and geologic character, to natural drainage and surface
water runoff and to the groundwater table.
63.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 248-1 as § 248-1.2.
64.Editor's Note: This local law also changed the name of this section from "Establishment of
Planning Board; training requirements" to "Establishment of Planning Board; training
requirements; retention of experts."
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Zoning.
§ 248-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-1.2
1:645
§ 248-2. Notice of public hearings. [Added 3-23-1976]
C. The recognition of desirable standards of subdivision design, including
adequate provisions for pedestrian and vehicle traffic, for surface water
runoff and for suitable building sites for the land use contemplated.
D. Provisions for such facilities as are desirable adjuncts to the
contemplated use, such as parks, recreation areas, school sites,
firehouses and off-street parking.
E. The preservation of such natural assets as ponds, streams, shrubs and
trees.
F. The provision of adequate utility services.
A. All public hearings before the Planning Board shall have the subject
property posted in accordance with the following, being in addition to
the legal advertisement in the designated official newspaper of the
Town:
(1) The applicant shall erect a sign or signs which shall be white with
blue lettering, shall measure not less than 30 inches high and 40
inches wide and shall be prominently displayed on the premises
facing each public street on which the property abuts.
(2) Said sign shall give notice that an application for the development
of the land or a related matter, pursuant to Article 16 of the Town
Law of New York State, is pending and the date, time and place
where the public hearing will be held.
(3) The sign shall not be set back more than 10 feet from the property
line and shall be not less than two nor more than six feet above the
grade at the property line.
(4) The sign shall be obtained from the Planning Department.
(5) The sign shall be displayed for a period of not less than five days
immediately preceding the public hearing date.
B. The filing of an affidavit by the applicant that this section has been
complied with shall be deemed sufficient proof of compliance herewith.
§ 248-1.2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-2
1:646
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 248-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A master plan for the future growth, protection
and development for the Town of Smithtown, affording adequate facilities
for housing, transportation, comfort, convenience, public health, safety and
general welfare for its population.
CROSSWALK or WALKWAY — A right-of-way dedicated to public use to
facilitate pedestrian access through a subdivision.
CUL-DE-SAC — A short dead-end street terminating in a vehicular
turnaround area.
EASEMENT — A restriction established in a real estate deed to permit the
use of land by the public, a corporation or particular persons for specified
uses.66
LIMITED ACCESS AND PLANTING AREA — An area designed to control
access to public rights-of-way or other public areas and also to suitably
screen private properties abutting them.
LOT — The unit or units into which land is divided with the intention
of offering such units for sale, either as undeveloped or developed sites,
regardless of how they are conveyed. "Lot" shall also mean parcel, plot, site
or any similar term.
MAJOR STREET — A street within a subdivision or subdivisions designed to
have considerable continuity and traffic capacity that, serving as an artery,
collects traffic from the minor streets and guides it to the primary and
secondary highways.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A street located on a separate right-of-way
parallel to and in the vicinity of a primary or secondary highway, designed to
provide access to abutting properties without interrupting highway traffic
except at recognized intersections and access points.
MINOR STREET — A street designed to provide access to abutting
properties within a limited area such as a neighborhood.
OPEN SPACE — A parcel of land which does not contain any residential,
business or industrial land uses and which is essentially left in a natural
vegetated state and is set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for
environmental protection, passive recreation or similar uses as determined
by the Planning Board.[Added 7-25-1989]
OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISION — A subdivision in which lots are smaller
than the minimum lot area or frontage required by the Zoning Ordinance
66.Editor's Note: The original definition of "land partition," which immediately followed this
definition in the 1964 Code, was repealed 11-21-1972.
§ 248-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-3
1:647
(Chapter 322 of the Town Code), where at least 10% of the land is preserved
as open space and the number of lots is not greater than would be permitted
if all of the lots fully complied with the Zoning Ordinance.[Added
6-2-2015]
PRIMARY HIGHWAY — A highway, generally under the jurisdiction of the
state or county, designed principally to provide for high-speed through
traffic between centers of development such as commercial centers,
industrial areas and concentrated residential communities both within and
outside the Town of Smithtown.
SECONDARY HIGHWAY — A highway similar to a primary highway,
generally under the jurisdiction of the Town, but designed for traffic
between important centers of development within the Town of Smithtown
and as a highway link to the primary highway system.
SUBDIVISION — A division of land into two or more lots with or without
streets.[Amended 2-23-1971]
TOWN ENGINEER — The official engineer of the Town of Smithtown.
§ 248-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-3
1:648
ARTICLE III
Preapplication Sketch
§ 248-4. Purpose.
The preapplication sketch is suggested to prospective subdividers, their
agents or engineers so that they may obtain the advice of the Planning
Board and other Town officials in the formative stages of the design and to
assure coordination with the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 248-5. Procedure.
Four paper prints of the preapplication sketch shall be submitted to the
Planning Board office for informal review.
§ 248-6. Sketch requirements.
A rough, scaled sketch drawn on a map shall be prepared by a licensed
engineer or land surveyor, indicating the following:
A. Boundary survey data.
B. Topographic survey contours.
C. Existing drainage features (e.g., culverts, marshes, ponds and streams).
D. Special site conditions (e.g., easements, power lines and structures).
E. The building zone district boundaries.
F. The relationship to the Comprehensive Plan for the area.
G. The proposed street and block layout with reference to surrounding
properties and street pattern.
§ 248-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-6
1:649

ARTICLE IV
Preliminary Layout
§ 248-7. Purpose. [Amended 11-21-1972]
The preliminary layout and the supporting documents for a proposed
subdivision constitute the material to be officially submitted to the Town
Planning Board. They shall show the general design of the subdivision
and its public improvements so that the Planning Board can indicate its
approval or disapproval of the subdivision prior to the time that the final
plat, including the design and detailing of the public improvements and
utilities, is completed. After the statutory public hearing and approval by
the Planning Board, this complete submission becomes the basis for the
preparation of the final plat. Approval of the preliminary layout does not
constitute an approval of the final plat, nor should it be considered a valid
basis for the construction of site improvements or for other commitments
which depend upon its design characteristics.
§ 248-8. Procedure.
A. The submission of a preliminary layout shall consist of the following
items:
(1) An application for the subdivision of land, F-601, one copy.
[Amended 12-20-1966]
(2) An acknowledgment of requirements: preliminary layout, Form
602, one copy. [Amended 12-20-1966]
(3) The preliminary layout, nine paper prints.
B. The subdivider shall file his complete submission for the preliminary
layout and his filing fee at the Planning Board office. A proposed
submission which does not include all the required drawings and
documents will not be accepted for filing. A submission shall be filed 15
days prior to a meeting date, to be heard at that particular meeting.
C. The Planning Board will distribute copies of the submission, as
necessary, to the Town offices concerned.
D. The Planning Board staff shall prepare a report of findings for Planning
Board consideration and action after receiving the recommendations of
the Superintendent of Highways and the Town Engineer.
E. The Planning Board staff will determine if the General Regrading and
Excavation Ordinance67 shall apply to the subdivision or whether the
owner shall file a certification that he does not propose to do any
general regrading or excavation as defined in that ordinance.
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 154, Excavations and Regrading.
§ 248-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-8
1:651
§ 248-9. Filing fee. [Amended 11-21-1972; 11-24-1981; 8-23-1983;
9-10-1985; 1-10-1989; 7-9-1991; 2-22-1999; 6-2-2015; 12-11-2018]
The filing fee shall be $1,000 plus $1,000 for each lot or dwelling as shown
on the preliminary map of a residential subdivision and $2,000 per acre for
industrial zoned lands.
§ 248-10. Expiration of approval. [Amended 9-10-1985; 1-10-1989;
7-9-1991; 2-22-1999; 6-2-2015; 12-11-2018]
Planning Board approval of a preliminary layout submission shall expire six
months after the date of such formal action. No Planning Board action will
be taken after such expiration until a new application and filing fee are
submitted. If a request for an extension of preliminary approval is submitted
before the six-month period, a fee of $500 shall be submitted. A waiver for a
reasonable period of time may be given in cases of hardship, upon petition
to the Planning Board.
§ 248-11. Preliminary layout requirements.
F. The Planning Board shall take formal action either approving or
disapproving the preliminary layout submission, and a copy of such
action will be forwarded to the subdivider or his representative who
appeared for him, the Superintendent of Highways and the Town
Engineer. [Amended 11-21-1972]
A. The preliminary layout shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer or land surveyor and shall provide the information noted in
this section, except that all drainage design shall be prepared by a
licensed engineer.
B. Drawing.
(1) The drawing sheet size shall be either:
(a) Eighteen inches by 20 inches;
(b) Thirty-six inches by 20 inches; or
(c) Thirty-six inches by 40 inches.
(2) If more than one sheet is required, a clearly drawn cutline shall be
shown on both sheets and on the key map.
C. Title block. This shall indicate:
(1) The name of the subdivision.
(2) The post office address of the subdivision.
(3) The school district and fire district.
(4) The name and address of the subdivider.
§ 248-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-11
1:652
(5) The name, address, license number and seal of the professional
engineer or land surveyor who prepared the drawings.
(6) The total acreage for the entire tract, for each building zone district
within the tract and for each section.
(7) The total number of proposed lots for the entire tract and for each
section.
D. Other notations. Other notations are as follows:
(1) The date of original submission and of each subsequent revised
submission.
(2) A graphic scale of 100 feet equal one inch.
(3) A true or magnetic North point and the date taken.
(4) Certification by the licensed professional engineer or land surveyor
that the topography shown resulted from an actual survey, and the
date of that survey.
(5) Offers of dedication, statements establishing easements and similar
statements should follow the standard forms.
E. Key map. The key map shall have the following features:
(1) Scale: one inch equals 600 feet.
(2) Information:
(a) The relationship to the primary and secondary highway system
and main intersections.
(b) Boundary lines: building zone districts, special districts and
municipal areas.
(c) Subdivision streets, blocks and recharge basins, in scale.
(d) Cutlines, as needed, when there are two or more drawings to
show the complete subdivision.
F. Subdivision boundary line and survey data (heavy solid line) shall be
required.
G. The boundaries of adjacent properties and the property owners' names.
Adjacent properties which are a part of a recorded subdivision plat may
be identified by the subdivision name.
H. Other boundary lines. Other boundary lines shall be as follows:
(1) Building zone districts.
(2) Special districts.
(3) Municipal areas.
§ 248-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-11
1:653
(4) School districts.
I. Topographic contours at two-foot intervals in the United States Coastal
Geodetic Survey datum of mean sea level.
(1) Smaller or larger intervals when advisable due to the terrain shall
be used after approval by the Planning Board.
(2) Contours shall extend 200 feet beyond the subdivision boundary
line.
J. Existing site conditions. The following information shall be shown:
(1) For street rights-of-way on the subdivision and within 200 feet of its
boundaries:
(a) The name.
(b) The location and width.
(c) The center-line elevations at intersections and other critical
points.
(d) A typical cross section.
(2) For other rights-of-way and easements on the subdivision and
within 200 feet of its boundaries:
(a) The identification.
(b) The location and width.
(c) Restrictions of use, if any.
(3) For drainage structures on the subdivision and within 200 feet of
its boundaries:
(a) The type of structure.
(b) The location, invert elevations, gradients and sizes of all pipe
and of all other structures where applicable.
(4) For waterlines, including fire hydrants, within 200 feet of its
boundaries: [Amended 11-21-1972]
(a) The location and size or capacity.
(5) For marshes, ponds, streams or similar conditions on the
subdivision and within 200 feet of its boundaries:
(a) The location and area covered, indicating apparent high-water
level.
(b) The waterline on the date of survey and the survey date.
(c) The maximum depth of water at critical points.
§ 248-11 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-11
1:654
(6) For test hole data:
(a) The date, location and graphic representation of findings for all
test holes, including the groundwater level.
(b) Locations shall include critical conditions and areas where
drainage structures requiring seepage are to be constructed.
(7) The Town or other public lands, lands designated as parks, open
spaces or for some other public use.
(8) The buildings and other structures located on the subdivision and
within 200 feet of its boundaries.
K. For proposed site conditions (see Article VIII, Design Standards):
(1) Streets (see Article XIII). The following information shall be
provided:
(a) The name (to be checked prior to submission at the Planning
Board office).
(b) The right-of-way width.
(c) The tentative center-line elevations at intersections and at
principal changes in gradient.
(d) The tentative center-line gradient shown in percent of slope.
(2) Lot layout. The following information shall be provided:
(a) The lot lines and dimensions to the nearest foot.
(b) The building setback line (dashed) and dimension.
(c) Easements and restricted areas with a notation as to purpose
of restriction.
(d) The identification of lots or parcels for special uses, whether
they are to be offered for dedication or not.
(e) The layout for all reserved parcels in conformance with
existing zoning regulations,68 shown in a broken line.
(3) The preliminary stormwater drainage system plan (see Article XIV):
(a) The drainage structures and the required capacity for each
storage structure shall be shown on the preliminary layout.
(b) The watershed outlines and their approximate area in acres,
including those which extend beyond the boundaries of the
subdivision, shall be shown with red pencil on only two copies
of the preliminary layout.
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Zoning.
§ 248-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-11
1:655
(4) Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). A stormwater
pollution prevention plan consistent with Chapter 153 of the Code
of the Town of Smithtown shall be submitted as part of the
preliminary layout. The SWPPP shall meet the performance and
design criteria and standards in Chapter 153. [Added 5-17-2012]
§ 248-11 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-11
1:656
ARTICLE V
Final Plat
§ 248-12. General provisions.
§ 248-13. Procedure; bond.
A. The final plat and supporting drawings and documents for a proposed
subdivision constitute the complete development of the subdivision
proposal and include the recommendations resulting from the Planning
Board review of the preliminary layout as well as the detailed layout
drawings for the public improvements and utilities. After public hearing
and approval by the Planning Board, this complete submission, along
with the performance bond and the provision of the liability insurance
policy, as approved by the Town Board, becomes the basis for the
construction of the subdivision and the inspection service by the Town
Engineer and Planning Board. The plat itself must be recorded at the
County Clerk's office to have legal status. An unrecorded plat is not a
valid basis for site improvements or other commitments which depend
on its design characteristics.
B. The plat itself shall be an accurate survey record of the properties
resulting from the subdivision.
A. The submission of a final plat (before the Planning Board review) shall
consist of the following items:
(1) A letter of application for final plat approval, Form F-603, one copy.
[Amended 12-20-1966]
(2) An acknowledgment of requirements: final plat, Form 604, one
copy. [Amended 12-20-1966]
(3) The final plat, 13 paper prints. [Amended 6-10-1975]
(4) The public improvement and utilities plan and profile drawings,
nine paper prints. [Amended 6-10-1975]
(5) Letters directed to the Chairman of the Planning Board and signed
by a responsible official of the lighting agency, water company or
any utility company or governmental authority or district which
provides necessary utility service and has jurisdiction in the area,
approving each proposed utility installation design, and a
statement as to who will construct the facility so that service will be
available when required in conformity with the provision of the
filed rate schedule.
(6) A letter directed to the Chairman of the Planning Board, signed by
a responsible official of the school district in which the subdivision
is to be located, acknowledging the number of residential lots and
indicating the availability of school facilities for the new pupils and
§ 248-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-13
1:657
any needed new school sites and facilities which relate to the
subdivision area.
(7) Letters, in appropriate cases, directed to the Chairman of the
Planning Board, signed by a responsible official of the State
Department of Public Works or the Suffolk County Superintendent
of Highways, approving proposed construction on state or county
rights-of-way and indicating that the necessary permits have been
issued by their office.
(8) A certification of compliance stating that the subdivider will not do
any general regrading or excavation, as defined in the General
Regrading and Excavation Ordinance,69 without obtaining a permit,
Form F-605, one copy. [Amended 12-20-1966]
(9) At the time of the dedication of streets, recharge basins, drainage
easements, screen planting easements and parks, the subdivider
shall submit, in triplicate, to the Town Attorney a certification to
the Town of Smithtown, by an attorney and counselor-at-law of the
State of New York, a title company duly incorporated and
authorized to transact business in the State of New York or a
competent searcher of titles, to the effect that the individual,
partnership or corporation offering the dedication of said streets,
recharge basins, easements and all other dedications required by
the Planning Board is vested with an unencumbered fee simple title
to the land concerning which the dedications are made.
(10) An irrevocable offer of dedication, etc., Form G-702, three copies
for all property and other public improvements, including streets,
drainage easements, drainage basins, public parks and screen
planting easements. [Amended 11-21-197270]
(11) The filing fee shall be $1,000, plus $1,000 for each lot shown on the
final map, for each residential final plat or section of a final plat and
$2,000 per acre for each industrial final plat or section of a final
plat. A new fee shall be required for each approval. If a subdivision
plat currently before the Town Planning Board must be
readvertised for an additional inclusion, a fee of $150 shall be paid
for readvertising. [Amended 11-18-1969; 11-21-1972;
11-24-1981; 8-23-1983; 9-10-1985; 1-10-1989; 7-9-1991;
2-22-1999; 6-2-2015; 12-11-2018]
(12) A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with
Chapter 153 of the Code of the Town of Smithtown and with the
terms of the preliminary layout approval shall be submitted as part
of the final plan approval. The SWPPP shall meet the performance
and design criteria and standards in Chapter 153. [Added
5-17-2012]
69.Editor's Note: See Ch. 154, Excavations and Regrading.
70.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Subsection A(10) of the 1964 Code,
regarding the schedule of lot areas.
§ 248-13 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-13
1:658
B. The subdivider or his agent shall submit the final plat and supporting
drawings and documents at the Planning Board office at least 15 days
prior to the meeting date on which the plat is to be acted upon.
C. The Planning Board staff shall prepare a report of findings for Planning
Board consideration and action, which shall include the
recommendations of the Superintendent of Highways and the Town
Engineer.
D. The Town Engineer shall prepare a performance bond estimate, on a
form developed by the Town Engineer, 10 copies, to be submitted along
with his recommendations on the final plat, with the exception of street
signs and streetlighting traffic signals and such other traffic control
appurtenances which shall be prepared by the Traffic Engineer of the
Traffic Safety Department of the Town of Smithtown. The amount of the
performance bond will be based on the Town Engineer's estimate of
quantities required for the construction of the proposed improvements,
including but not limited to roads, clearing and drainage, and the
estimated construction cost for said improvements. [Amended
6-25-1974; 6-10-1975; 12-9-1975; 3-9-1976; 11-24-1981;
4-2-1985; 3-13-2007]
E. The Planning Board will advertise a public hearing at least five days
prior to the hearing date.
F. After the public hearing, the Planning Board will take formal action. If
the plat is approved, the subdivider shall carry out the following steps
prior to obtaining the Chairman's signature of approval:
(1) Make all required corrections to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board.
(2) Obtain a performance bond in the amount of the bond estimate and
a general liability insurance policy and submit them to the Town
Attorney for approval by the Town Board and submit a cash deposit
certified check to the Planning Department. See Article VI,
Performance Bond and Cash Deposit, and Article VII, General
Liability Insurance. [Amended 7-12-1966; 12-22-1981;
1-25-1983]
(3) Prepare prints of the corrected final plat drawing as follows:
[Amended 8-14-1973; 6-10-1975; 11-24-1981]
(a) One opaque cloth lithoprint.
(b) Two reproducible Mylar prints.
(c) The original final plat.
(4) Pay the required inspection fee at the Planning Board office and
such payment as required in lieu of parkland. (See § 248-24E.)
§ 248-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-13
1:659
§ 248-14. Expiration of approval; extension fee.
§ 248-15. Final plat requirements.
G. If authorized by the Planning Board, the Chairman will sign the original
final plat, the two reproducible Mylar prints and the one opaque cloth
lithoprint upon notification that the required bond and insurance has
Town Board approval and that all required fees have been paid.
[Amended 8-14-1973; 11-24-1981]
H. The subdivider shall file the original, the two reproducible Mylar and
the opaque cloth of the final plat in the Suffolk County Clerk's office.
After the plat is filed, the subdivider will have prepared, from a Mylar
transparency of the stamped filed plat, 18 paper prints which will be
submitted to the Planning Department before building permits are
issued. [Amended 8-14-1973; 6-10-1975; 11-24-1981]
I. Planning Board approval of a final plat shall not be deemed an
acceptance by the Town of any street or other land shown as offered for
dedication to public use.
J. Prior to the signature of the Planning Department Chairman and the
approval of the performance bond and general liability insurance policy
by the Town Board, the developer will submit to the Planning
Department all deeds of dedication and any drainage easements, screen
planting easements or other related documents. All such instruments
will be held in escrow until the time of dedication and/or the acceptance
by the Town of the public improvements. [Added 3-9-1976; amended
12-22-1981; 1-25-1983]
A. Planning Board approval of a final plat shall expire 180 days after the
date of the Planning Board's resolution authorizing the Chairman to
sign the final plat. [Amended 11-24-1981]
B. Upon application by the subdivider, the Planning Board may make a
reasonable extension of the approval; provided, however, that the plat
be revised according to any change in regulations or ordinances
applicable to the plat subsequent to the first resolution. If a request for
an extension of final approval is submitted before the approval expires,
a fee of $500 shall be submitted. [Amended 9-10-1985; 1-10-1989;
7-9-1991; 6-2-2015; 12-11-2018]
C. Expiration of an approval shall mean that any further action will require
a new filing fee as well as a review of all previous findings.
A. The final plat shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer or
land surveyor and shall provide the information noted in this section.
B. Drawing.
(1) The drawing sheet size shall be either:
§ 248-13 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-15
1:660
(a) Eighteen inches by 20 inches; or
(b) Thirty-six inches by 20 inches.
(2) If more than one sheet is required, a clearly drawn cutline shall be
shown on both sheets and on the key map.
C. The title block shall be the same as that required for the preliminary
layout [see § 248-11C(1) through (7)].
D. Other notations shall be the same as those required for the preliminary
layout, except that:
(1) The certification that the topography shown resulted from an
actual field survey shall be omitted [see § 248-11D(1), (2), (3) and
(5)].
(2) When applicable, all streets shown on this subdivision are subject
to future extension and interconnection with other streets in
adjoining properties, at the discretion of the Town of Smithtown
Planning Board. This provides for a temporary turnaround
easement for highway purposes. Such easement shall remain in full
force and effect as long as the Town deems it necessary for the
proper ingress, egress and maintenance of the adjoining street(s).
[Added 6-5-1968; amended 6-10-1975]
E. The key map of the entire subdivision shall be the same as that required
on the preliminary layout (see § 248-11E), with the following additions:
(1) The final plat area being submitted for approval shall be shaded if it
is only one section of the entire subdivision.
F. Boundary lines. The following boundary lines shall be shown:
(1) Building zone districts.
(2) Special districts.
(3) Municipal areas.
(4) School district.
G. General information required. The following information shall be
included:
(1) For street rights-of-way and the widening of street rights-of-way:
(a) The name.
(b) The location.
(c) The width.
(d) A notation on widenings where an offer of dedication is being
made.
§ 248-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-15
1:661
(2) Other rights-of-way and easements:
(a) An identification and description.
(b) The location.
(c) The width and other dimensions necessary for the description.
(3) For lot layout:
(a) A number identification by a suitable system of consecutive
numbers; numbers shall be circled.
(b) The lot lines, with accurate dimensions to the nearest
hundredth of a foot.
(c) The building setback lines, with dimensions.
(d) The lot area, to be shown in square feet, and the lot widths at
the building setback line to be shown. [Added 3-7-1967]
(4) Special parcels.
(a) Special parcels shall show the following:
[1] A description of the proposed action and use, including a
note where an offer of dedication is being made.
[2] The boundary lines, with accurate dimensions to the
nearest hundredth of a foot.
(b) All other parcels, including recharge basins, shall have the
area shown in square feet. [Added 3-7-1967]
H. For the water supply system:
(1) The water main location and pipe size.
(2) The location of all shutoff valves.
(3) The location of all fire hydrants.
(4) The location of well sites, if any, on the subdivision or within 200
feet of its boundaries.
I. For the sanitary waste disposal system:
(1) A typical lot layout, indicating the location of the system with
reference to the house and the water supply.
(2) A detail drawing of the proposed sanitary waste disposal unit.
J. For survey data:
(1) An accurate traverse of the subdivision boundary, with true angles
and distances.
§ 248-15 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-15
1:662
§ 248-16. Public improvement plan and profiles. [Amended
2-23-1971; 11-21-1972]
(2) A survey tie-in, with true angles and distances to the three nearest
established street monuments or official monuments.
(3) Municipal, Town, county and special district boundaries,
referenced to the subdivision survey by true angles and distances.
(4) Radii, internal angles, points of curvature, tangent bearings and
lengths of all arcs.
(5) Accurate dimensions, to the nearest hundredth of a foot.
(6) Monuments.
(a) The accurate locations of all monuments shall be shown.
(b) Existing monuments shall be shown with this symbol: .
(c) Proposed new monuments or monuments to be reset shall be
shown with this symbol: .
(d) One monument shall be located at each corner and at each
general change in direction of the boundary.
(e) Two monuments shall be located at each street intersection.
(f) Monuments shall be located at the beginning and end of each
curve along one side of the street right-of-way.71
A. This plan and profile are declared to be an integral part of the final plat
submission.
B. The performance bond and the inspection service shall be based on this
drawing, the final plat itself, this subdivision regulation and the Town
specifications for such public improvements.
C. Unless a specific waiver is requested, in writing, the proposed public
improvements and utilities shall be considered to comply specifically
with this subdivision regulation and the Town specifications.
D. Basic plan requirements.
(1) The sheet size shall be:
(a) Eighteen inches by twenty inches;
(b) Thirty-six inches by twenty inches; or
(c) Thirty-six inches by forty inches.
71.Editor's Note: Original Subsection J(7) of the 1964 Code, New York State grid information,
which immediately followed this subsection and which was added 2-3-1976, was repealed
1-17-1979.
§ 248-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-16
1:663
(2) The area covered, the scale and the title block shall be the same as
the preliminary layout (see § 248-11).
(3) The plan shall show the outline of all rights-of-way, easements and
similar conditions.
(4) Street center-line gradients, in percent, indicated with arrows to
establish the direction of flow shall be shown.
(5) Critical street center-line grade elevations shall be shown.
E. Drainage system requirements (see Article XIV). The following
information shall be provided:
(1) The complete drainage system for the entire subdivision, with
appropriate development stages for each of the final plat sections,
shall be shown graphically, with all existing drainage features
which are to be incorporated properly identified as "existing."
(2) The boundaries of stormwater runoff watersheds for each drainage
structure and their area in acres.
(3) All proposed surface drainage structures (e.g., valley gutters).
(4) The identification of structures by Town specification-type
numbers.
(5) All appropriate details and dimensions necessary to clearly explain
the proposed construction, including the type of construction,
material, size, pitch and invert elevations, among other things, in
accordance with good engineering practice.
(6) The location of all test pits and a description of soil conditions and
the water table.
(7) Notations and calculations for stormwater recharge basins shall
include bottom and high-water elevations, the cubic feet of water
capacity, the cubic feet of excavation (net) and elevations along the
top of the berm.
(8) All significant physical and vegetative features of the land within
200 feet of the subject site shall be shown on the grading plan.
[Added 12-9-1975]
F. Utility systems requirements. The following information shall be
provided:
(1) For water supply and distribution:
(a) The location of water mains and the size of such mains.
(b) The location of fire hydrants.
(2) For sanitary waste disposal system; sewers:
§ 248-16 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-16
1:664
(a) The location of all piping (horizontal and vertical).
(b) The size of all pipes with invert elevations.
(c) The location of all control valves.
(d) The location of treatment plants.
(3) For street signs: [Added 6-10-1975; amended 11-24-1981]
(a) The location and type of all street name signs.
(4) For streetlighting: [Added 6-10-1975]
(a) The location of all electrical conduits and other appurtenances.
(b) The location of all light standards.
(5) For traffic signals: [Added 11-24-1981]
(a) The location and type of all traffic signals and related
equipment.
(b) The location of all electrical conduits and other appurtenances.
(6) For pavement markings: [Added 11-24-1981]
(a) The location and type of pavement markings.
G. Profile drawing requirements.
(1) Drawings shall be made on standard profile paper with the
following scales:
(a) Horizontal scale: one inch equals 40 feet.
(b) Vertical scale: one inch equals four feet.
(2) All profiles shall show the existing natural grades, the typical cross
section of existing or proposed roads, the center lines of
intersecting roads and a system of survey stations.
(3) The center-line profiles of all proposed roads with dimensioning on
vertical curves and notations as to gradient and critical elevations
shall be shown.
(4) The invert profile and location of all drainage structures in street
rights-of-way and in drainage easements shall be shown.
§ 248-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-16
1:665

ARTICLE VI
Performance Bond and Cash Deposit
[Amended 7-12-1966]
§ 248-17. Purpose.
A performance bond and cash deposit are posted by the subdivider to
guarantee to the Town that he will faithfully construct or cause to be
constructed the required public improvements and utilities which were an
integral part of his approved final plat and, further, that the construction
shall be completed within a reasonable period of time.
§ 248-18. Procedure.
A. A performance bond estimate, on a form developed by the Town
Engineer, will be prepared by the Town Engineer and by the Director of
the Traffic Safety Department for street signs, streetlights, traffic
signals, pavement markings and such other related traffic control
devices. [Amended 6-10-1975; 11-24-1981; 3-13-2007]
B. The Planning Board will pass a resolution either approving or adjusting
the performance bond estimate and shall provide three copies signed
by the Chairman for the use of the subdivider in obtaining and posting a
bond.
C. The subdivider shall present a performance bond executed on the
standard performance bond, Form F-609, three copies, with signed
copies of the performance bond estimate attached, to the Town
Attorney, at least one week prior to any Town Board meeting, for
approval as to form and sufficiency by the Town Board at such meeting.
A certified check in the amount of the cash deposit and payable to the
Town of Smithtown shall be submitted to the Planning Department. The
amount of the certified check shall be determined as follows: $500 per
building lot. The performance bond is to be in the same amount as the
performance bond estimate, less the amount of the certified check as
stated aforesaid. [Amended 12-22-1981; 1-25-1983; 3-13-2007]
D. The Town Attorney shall notify the Town Clerk prior to the Town Board
meeting that the performance bond and cash deposit can be added to
the agenda.
E. The Town Board shall approve or disapprove the performance bond and
cash deposit as presented by the Town Attorney. If approved, the cash
deposit is to be forwarded to the Town Comptroller, to be deposited in a
Town of Smithtown trust account set up for this purpose, and one copy
of the performance bond is to be forwarded to the Town Clerk for his
records, and one copy will be forwarded, along with the Town Board
resolution of approval, to the Planning Board.
§ 248-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-18
1:667
F. The Chairman of the Planning Board shall receive the Town Board
resolution approving the performance bond and cash deposit prior to
signing any final plat.
G. After completing the construction of the public improvements covered
by the performance bond and cash deposit and prior to the termination
of the bond and cash deposit period, the subdivider shall prepare a set
of the approved public improvement plans, drainage plans and profiles
(lithoprints on vellum), amended to indicate as-constructed
information, and forward it to the Town Engineer. Further, the
developer shall forward to the Town Attorney an original and two copies
of papers dedicating the public improvements, granting of easements,
etc., [§ 248-13A(9)] for his subdivision. Upon the Town Attorney's
approval of the form of the dedication papers and easements, the Town
Engineer and the Town Highway Superintendent shall, within 90 days
after such approval, jointly prepare a report to the Town Board, with a
copy of it to the Planning Board, on the condition of the work and
recommend whether the performance bond and cash deposit shall be
released or not. If winter weather conditions prohibited the inspection
and the written report, the ninety-day period may be extended for an
additional 60 days by the Town Board. When, in the Town Engineer's
and Town Highway Superintendent's opinion, an extension of the bond
is warranted, they shall make a recommendation to that effect to the
Planning Board, with a copy thereof to the Town Board. [Amended
4-23-1968]
H. Completion of public improvements; cost. [Amended 4-23-1968]
(1) In the event that the public improvements covered by the
performance bond and cash deposit have not been constructed to
the satisfaction of the Town Engineer and Town Highway
Superintendent, they shall forward, within 30 days of the
inspection, a written report jointly signed by representatives of
their departments to the subdivider, giving him a period of six
months or less within which time he has to complete said public
improvements to their satisfaction. If, upon the expiration of this
period, the public improvements have still not been completed to
the satisfaction of said Town Engineer and Town Highway
Superintendent, or additional items are uncovered which are
incomplete, a second written report will be sent to the subdivider
wherein he will be given 45 days or less to complete the
enumerated items. If, at the expiration of the second period, the
public improvements still have not been completed to the
satisfaction of the Town Engineer and Town Highway
Superintendent as stated aforesaid, then the Town Board may
declare the performance bond and cash deposit in default.
(2) If the cost of completing the public improvements is less than that
of the cash deposit, the Town Board may utilize the moneys
deposited by the subdivider in the Town of Smithtown trust account
set up for this purpose. At the Town Board's discretion, the actual
§ 248-18 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-18
1:668
§ 248-19. Term of bonds and deposits.
§ 248-20. Growth and life maintenance bond. [Amended 8-8-1972]
work completing the public improvements may be performed by
one of the Town's departments or by an outsider selected by public
bid. Should the cost of completion be less than that of the cash
deposit, then the remaining balance is to be returned to the
subdivider upon the Town Board's final acceptance of dedication of
the public improvements in the subdivision and the release of the
performance bond.
(3) In the event that the cost of completion of the public improvements
is equal to or in excess of that of the cash deposit, the Town Board
may utilize the moneys deposited in the trust account set up for this
purpose, as well as declare the performance bond in default.
Further, should plans and specifications be required to ascertain
the cost of placing the completion of the public improvements out
for bid, the cost of preparing said plans and specifications may be
made out of the cash deposit.
I. The Planning Board can act to extend the term of the performance bond
and cash deposit in appropriate cases where such action would not be
contrary to the intent of this regulation.
J. The Town Board shall act on the release of, on the effectuation of
Subsection H above or on the declaration of default of the performance
bond and cash deposit, provided that neither of the latter two
eventualities are brought into effect prior to the expiration date, or any
extension thereof, of said performance bond and cash deposit.
A. The cash deposit shall run concurrently with the performance bond,
and neither can be released without a Town Board resolution to this
effect.
B. Performance bonds and cash deposits shall have a minimum term of two
years.
C. Upon petition to the Planning Board and after a duly advertised public
hearing upon said petition, said Board may consider the extension of
the performance period of a performance bond upon the petitioner's
proof of necessity or unusual or extenuating circumstances. [Amended
6-13-1967]
D. Each petition shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $500 along with
whatever supporting papers, documents, maps or other material may
be needed to support the petition. [Added 6-13-1967; amended
11-24-1981; 1-10-1989; 7-9-1991; 12-11-2018]
A. Prior to the release of a performance bond and related cash deposit, the
subdivider shall offer the Town a growth and life bond and/or cash
§ 248-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-20
1:669
deposit to guarantee the life and growth of all street tree plantings and
recharge basin plantings installed within the subdivision section.
B. The amount of the growth and life bond and/or cash deposit shall be
determined by the Engineering Department. Amounts up to $1,500
shall be presented to the Town in the form of cash or certified check, for
deposit into an escrow account bearing the name of the filed map.
Where the amount of the growth-and-life bond and/or cash deposit
exceeds $1,500, the first $1,000 shall be in the form of cash or certified
check for deposit in the aforementioned escrow account, and the
balance may be offered either as part of the required cash deposit or
certified check or as a growth-and-life bond in a form which is
acceptable to the Town Attorney.
C. The term of the cash deposit and/or growth and life bond shall be a
minimum of 10 months and shall bear the expiration date of October 31
of the year following the year in which the cash deposit and/or growth
and life bond are posted.
D. The Engineering Department shall conduct an inspection 30 to 60 days
prior to the expiration date of the growth and life bond and/or cash
deposit. In the event that any of the street tree recharge basin plantings
covered by the growth and life bond and/or cash deposit require
replacement, the Engineering Department shall forward a report to the
developer. The subdivider shall have 45 days from the expiration date of
the growth and life bond and/or cash deposit to replace all dead or
missing plantings required by the report. If, at the expiration of the
forty-five-day planting period, the plantings have still not been
satisfactorily completed, the Town Board shall declare the growth and
life bond and/or cash deposit to be in default.
E. If the cost of completing the required plantings is equal to or less than
the amount of the cash deposit, the Town Board may utilize the moneys
deposited by the subdivider in the Town of Smithtown trust account set
up for this purpose to obtain the necessary replacements. At the Town
Board's discretion, the actual work of completing the street tree and/or
recharge basin plantings may be performed by one of the Town's
departments or by an outside contractor selected by public bid. Should
the cost of completion be less than the cash deposit, then the remaining
balance is to be returned to the subdivider upon the Town Board's final
acceptance of the required plantings. The growth and life bond, if any,
will also be released.
F. In the event that the cost of completion of the required plantings is in
excess of the cash deposit, the Town Board may utilize the moneys
deposited in the trust account set up for this purpose to obtain the
necessary replacements, as well as declare the growth and life bond in
default. Further, should plans and specifications be required in order to
put the work out to public bid, the cost of preparing said plans and
specifications will be charged to the cash deposit.
§ 248-20 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-20
1:670
G. The Town Board can act to extend the term of the growth and life bond
and/or cash deposit in appropriate cases where such action would not
be contrary to the intent of this regulation.
H. The Town Board shall act on the release of, on the effectuation of
Subsections D, E and F above, or on the declaration of default of, the
growth and life bond and/or cash deposit, provided that neither of the
latter two eventualities are brought into effect prior to the expiration
date or any extension thereof of said growth and life bond and/or cash
deposit.
I. A cash deposit shall run concurrently with the growth and life bond, and
neither can be released without a Town Board resolution to that effect.
J. Where required by the Superintendent of Highways or the Town
Engineer, the subdivider shall provide a maintenance bond to
guarantee the cleanliness, for a period of one year, of the recharge
basin required to be installed by the original performance bond
estimate. This bond shall be presented prior to the release of the
performance bond and cash deposit.
§ 248-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-20
1:671

ARTICLE VII
General Liability Insurance
§ 248-21. Procedure.
The subdivider shall file with the Town Attorney a general liability insurance
policy at the same time he files his performance bond. The Town Board shall
approve the policy for form. The policy shall be of the same term as the
performance bond and shall be extended in conformance with any extension
of the performance bond.
§ 248-22. Coverage.
The policy shall insure the Town of Smithtown and the subdivider and
shall cover all operations in the development involving the existence and
maintenance of property and buildings and contracting operations of every
nature, including all public improvements. Said policy shall have limits of
liability of $100,000 for bodily injury to each person and $300,000 liability
on the aggregate for each accident and property damage liability of $5,000
for each accident and $25,000 aggregate property damage liability.
§ 248-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-22
1:673

ARTICLE VIII
Design Standards
§ 248-23. Purpose.
These design standards are a guide to development so that Smithtown will,
in the future, be a coordinated, well-planned community of good quality,
with provisions for desirable services and facilities.
§ 248-24. Land use standards.
§ 248-25. Street and highway standards.
A. Proposed land uses shall conform to the Building Zone Ordinance of the
Town of Smithtown,72 the Comprehensive Plan and the provisions of
this regulation.
B. Land reserved from subdivision shall be of a useful dimension for
development in the future, in accordance with current zoning.
C. Subdivision designs shall indicate consideration for the suitable
protection of the different types of land uses and the segregation of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic incompatible with particular uses.
D. Desirable sites shall be provided for public and semipublic land uses,
such as recharge basins, schools, firehouses and churches.
E. Natural areas, parks and playgrounds are vital to a well-balanced
community. Each subdivision plat will be required to show an area of at
least two acres per 100 building lots for such purposes. In cases where
the Planning Board determines that a suitable park of adequate size
cannot be properly located in any such plat or is otherwise not
practical, the subdivider will be required to pay a cash equivalent. Such
payment shall be a condition precedent to the filing of the subdivision
plat and shall be deposited to the account of the Smithtown Park Fund
and shall be used for park, playground or other recreational purposes,
including the acquisition of property. The location of parkland
purchased with these funds shall be in accordance with a
Comprehensive Plan for Town parks. The dollar amount of the required
cash equivalent shall be determined by multiplying the number of lots
in the subdivision plat by the average value of land per acre at that
location, as established by the Town Assessor, and dividing by 50.
[Amended 3-26-2002; 4-27-2004; 5-22-2014]
A. The street and highway layout shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan
for streets and highways.
B. Parcels and lots of a subdivision shall back on primary and secondary
highways. Further, a limited access and planting area shall be provided
to protect such rights-of-way from diminished traffic flow capacity and
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Zoning.
§ 248-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-25
1:675
additional hazards. Limited access and planting areas shall have the
following characteristics:
(1) They shall be 15 feet wide and provide additional area in lots where
they are required.
(2) The deed easement shall prohibit the construction of any building
on this area and also prohibit ingress or egress from the lot or
parcel over the easement area.
(3) They shall be provided with appropriate fencing and planting
according to Town specifications.
C. The street pattern within a subdivision shall be orderly. Where
appropriate, a major street shall be indicated for more direct access to
minor streets.
D. Subdivisions abutting Long Island state parkways or state parks shall
be designed so that parcels or lots face these areas and a marginal
access street is provided along the boundary line.
E. Minor streets shall be laid out so that their use for through traffic will
be discouraged. Particular attention should be given to eliminating
possible bypasses around traffic signals and major intersections.
F. Block dimensions.
(1) The maximum length shall be 1,200 feet. The minimum length shall
be 400 feet.
(2) The minimum width shall relate to the zoning district requirements
for yards and generally shall provide for two tiers of lots.
(3) Special attention shall be given to blocks in industrial and business
zones to provide for access to the lots and areas for parking and
truck delivery.
G. Culs-de-sac.
(1) The maximum length shall be 500 feet. The minimum length shall
be 200 feet. The length shall be measured on the center line of the
street, from the center line of the intersecting street to the center
of the turnaround. Streets longer than 500 feet may be extended
and connected to other Town roads. [Amended 3-26-2002]
(2) The minimum radius for the right-of-way at the turnaround shall be
60 feet, and the outside curb radius shall be 50 feet.
H. Intersections.
(1) No more than two streets shall intersect or meet at any one point.
(2) No street shall intersect or meet at an angle of less than 60° nor
more than 120°.
§ 248-25 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-25
1:676
§ 248-26. Preservation of natural environment.
§ 248-27. Property near railroads.
Where the property to be subdivided is next to or includes a railroad rightof-
way, suitable provisions shall be made for such things as road crossings,
screening and freight access in recognition of the relationship between the
railroad and the subdivision.
§ 248-28. Regrading.
(3) The center line of all streets entering an intersection shall pass
through a single point.
(4) Intersections of minor and major streets shall be spaced a
minimum of 150 feet apart, measured from the points of
intersection of the center lines.
(5) Intersections on a highway shall be spaced a minimum of 800 feet
apart, measured from the points of intersection of the center lines.
A. Subdivision designs shall preserve, insofar as is possible, the natural
terrain and natural drainage lines.
B. A conscious effort shall be made to preserve all worthwhile trees and
shrubs which exist on a site. Such features may well be suggested for
park or playgrounds areas. On individual lots or parcels, care shall be
taken to preserve selected trees to enhance the landscape treatment of
the development.
C. The natural fertility of the soil shall be preserved by disturbing it as
little as possible.
D. Open watercourses shall be recognized as community assets.
Subdivision designs may well be enhanced by featuring streams and
brooks.
A. The term "regrading" shall, for the purpose of this chapter, be defined
as said term is defined in An Ordinance to Regulate and Control General
Regrading of Land, Extraction and Removal of Earth Products and
Other Excavations, as adopted by and amended by the Town Board of
the Town of Smithtown.73
B. It is the policy of the Town of Smithtown to discourage massive
regrading of subdivision sites where such earthmoving would cause
extreme cut or fill for streets or house locations, the stripping of natural
ground cover and the destruction of worthwhile topographic features.
C. To this end, subdivision layouts should be designed to fit existing
natural conditions of the site insofar as such designs are consistent with
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 154, Excavations and Grading.
§ 248-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-28
1:677
the other standards for street and lot grades and drainage set forth in
these regulations.
D. Subdivision lots shall provide minimum yard areas having slopes not
steeper than 5% in grade, as follows: extending 25 feet in front, 25 feet
at the rear and 10 feet on each side of the proposed house.
E. Subdivision lots shall provide driveway access from the street to the
garage, carport or parking place at a slope not exceeding 8% in grade.
F. No artificial slope steeper than 5% in grade resulting from the
regrading of the natural land shall be permitted to encroach on any
front, rear or side yard required in the Building Zone Ordinance,74
except as approved by the Planning Board.
G. No artificial slope steeper than 33 1/3% resulting from this regrading of
the natural land shall be permitted at any location.
H. All regrading areas shall be covered with topsoil to a depth of six inches
and seeded according to the specifications set forth in § 248-40F(4) of
the construction specifications for public improvements, and a
performance bond to guarantee the installation of said topsoil and
seeding thereof shall be filed by the subdivider as generally required for
public improvements.
I. A general regrading plan shall be submitted by the developer as
required by § 248-8E of these regulations and by § 302 of the General
Regrading and Excavating Ordinance.75
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Zoning.
75.Editor's Note: Included as § 154-3B of Ch. 154, Excavations and Grading.
§ 248-28 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-28
1:678
ARTICLE IX
Required Public Improvements
§ 248-29. Improvements required; fee.
A. Outline design and construction requirements for public improvements
will be found in Article XIII et seq. of these regulations.
B. The following improvements will be required except where this
regulation specifically waives the requirement or when the Planning
Board waives the requirement by specific resolution:
(1) Paved streets.
(2) Curbs or gutters.
(3) Sidewalks.
(4) Water mains and fire hydrants.
(5) Sanitary waste disposal.
(6) Storm drainage.
(7) Street signs.
(8) Streetlighting.
(9) Street trees.
(10) Planting screen and/or fence. [Added 6-13-1967]
(11) Traffic controlling signs, signals, markings and restraining devices.
[Added 8-14-1973]
C. Upon petition to the Planning Board or upon motion of the Planning
Board and after a duly advertised public hearing upon said matter, said
Board may establish, amend or waive any requirement as specified
herein or any approving resolution of said Board of a filed plat or final
plat to be filed in the Suffolk County Clerk's office, upon the proof of
necessity or unusual and/or extenuating circumstances which do or do
not now merit the requirement. [Added 6-13-1967; amended
9-26-1967]
D. Each petition shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $1,000 with
whatever supporting papers, documents, maps or other material may
be needed to support the petition. [Added 6-13-1967; amended
11-24-1981; 7-9-1991; 2-22-1999; 6-2-2015; 12-11-2018]
§ 248-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-29
1:679

ARTICLE X
Variance of Zoning Requirements
§ 248-30. Authority.
The Planning Board was authorized to vary the Building Zone Ordinance76
requirements by Town Board resolution on June 22, 1954.
§ 248-31. Authorized powers.
A. The Planning Board is authorized to make any reasonable change in the
building zone regulations which apply to the land platted in order to
permit desirable flexibility in subdivision plat planning consistent with
the general character of the community and the general welfare,
provided that:
(1) Planning Board approval shall be simultaneous with final plat
approval and after public hearing preceded by the same public
notice required for the approval of the plat itself.
(2) There is no change in permitted or special exception uses.
(3) The resulting average population density and land coverage shall
not be greater than was permitted in the zone districts shown on
the Zoning Map.
(4) Any change in the building zone regulations by the Planning Board
shall be made in accordance with the conditions and standards
enumerated under § 322-30.4 of the Town Code. [Added
9-11-2007]
B. Criteria for review and approval of residential subdivision plats by the
Planning Board pursuant to the provisions of § 278 of the Town Law of
New York State. [Added 7-12-1983; amended 7-17-2018]
(1) Findings.
(a) The Town of Smithtown has grown into a mature suburban
Town. There is relatively little vacant land left for new
residential subdivision development. Much of this land has
remained undeveloped until now because of certain sitespecific
obstacles to construction, e.g., steep slopes or lowlying
wetlands. However, the increasing demand for new
housing, coupled with favorable market conditions, has made
these remaining properties more attractive for development.
(b) The Town Planning Board recognizes that these properties
should be developed according to sound planning, engineering
and environmental principles. More specifically, they should be
developed with the following goals in mind:
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Zoning.
§ 248-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-31
1:681
[1] To preserve open space and, subsequently, to provide
opportunities for passive or active recreational uses.
[2] To design environmentally compatible layout and
construction so as to prevent the destruction of or
minimize the adverse impacts to significant natural
resources such as natural landforms, steep slopes,
groundwater, floodplains, tidal and freshwater wetlands,
ponds, streams, prime agricultural soils, vegetation,
wildlife, scenic corridors and vistas, clean air and solar or
wind energy sources.
[3] To reduce the long-term municipal maintenance costs that
must be borne by the Town.
[4] To preserve and enhance the character of established
neighborhoods.
[5] To prevent or minimize adverse impacts to or the
destruction of significant cultural resources such as
historic sites and structures and archaeological sites.
(c) The preservation and protection of these and other natural and
cultural resources will benefit the general health, safety and
welfare of the present and future residents of the Town.
Clustering of residential development is a proven means of
protecting natural and cultural resources. When the physical
nature of the land or its location within the community is such
that a standard subdivision does not attain these goals or
would be inappropriate, whether for environmental or safety
reasons, then a cluster design shall be required.
(d) In addition to these benefits, good cluster design helps reduce
street construction and maintenance costs, reduce vehicular
trip miles, conserve fuel and other energy and minimize school
tax burdens. Good cluster design can also help preserve the
established character of an area, enhance social interaction
within the community, strengthen community identity and,
finally, provide the variety of living environments necessary to
meet the needs and desires of the Town.
(2) Criteria for review and approval.
(a) A proposed residential subdivision shall be clustered if it will
impact on any of the following natural resources or
phenomena:
[1] Slopes exceeding 15%, areas with erosion problems and
areas where the mass movement of soil can occur, e.g.,
escarpments.
[2] (Reserved)
§ 248-31 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-31
1:682
[3] (Reserved)
[4] Flood hazard areas, including natural drainage swales and
flood zones, as defined by the National Flood Insurance
Program.
[5] Shallow depth to groundwater (less than 20 feet).
[6] Surface water resources such as bays, estuaries, lakes,
ponds and streams, whether continuous or intermittent.
[7] Saltwater and freshwater wetlands.
[8] Land within the coastal zone, as defined by the New York
State Department of State.
[9] Woodlands having a median trunk diamter of more than 12
inches and an area of more than three acres.
[10] Habitat for rare, unique, threatened, endangered or
protected species of plants and animals, such as bogs, pine
barrens and ecotones.
[11] Significant local topographic phenomena such as
kettleholes, kames and high points; also, scenic views and
corridors.
[12] Land adjacent to state or county lands, state parkways,
state and county highways, railroads, large Town parks
and the Nissequogue River Greenbelt.
[13] Known or suspected archaeological sites.
[14] Historic resources listed in the Historic Sites Inventory of
the Town of Smithtown.
(b) (Reserved)
C. Local Waterfront Revitalization Program (LWRP). [Added 7-25-1989]
(1) Findings.
(a) No subdivision, including those which have not yet received
preliminary approval as of the effective date of this provision,
shall be approved until the Town Board has determined,
pursuant to Chapter 151, Article II, of the Town Code, that the
subdivision is consistent with the LWRP policies, standards and
conditions or until the Town Board determines with respect to
the proposed action that:
[1] No reasonable alternatives exist which would permit the
action to be undertaken in a manner which will not
substantially hinder the achievement of such LWRP
policies, standards and conditions.
§ 248-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-31
1:683
[2] The action would be undertaken in a manner which will
minimize all adverse effects on such LWRP policies,
standards and conditions to the maximum extent
practicable.
[3] The action will advance one or more of the other LWRP
policies, standards and conditions.
[4] The action will result in an overriding Town, regional or
statewide public benefit.
(b) Such a finding shall constitute a determination that the action
is consistent with the LWRP policy standards and conditions.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter of the Town
Code, all subdivisions within the Local Waterfront Area shall
conform to the following requirements: [Amended 4-5-1990]
(a) All subdivisions shall be clustered pursuant to § 281 of the
Town Law of the State of New York such that:
[1] The combined areas of clearing of the existing vegetation
and regrading shall not exceed a total of 25% of the plat
area. All limits of clearing shall be shown on the final map,
and restrictive covenants shall be filed on all portions of
the property plat area which constitutes the 75% of said
area to remain undisturbed.
[2] The subdivision conforms to the LWRP's adopted land use
plan.
[3] After determining the yield of a property pursuant to
§ 322-19, all environmentally sensitive lands of two or
more contiguous acres shall be preserved and protected
from disturbance by deed covenants to run with the land,
prohibiting the construction or placement of buildings
and/or accessory structures, the removal of existing
vegetation, the alteration of topography, the disturbance of
existing soils, the removal or placement of soils or fill and/
or the use of synthetic fertilizers, pesticides or herbicides.
Subject to the approval of the Planning Board and the
Town Board, such environmentally sensitive lands may be
dedicated to the Town of Smithtown.
[4] All scenic vistas and historic elements shall be preserved
and protected through the use of suitable permanent
easements or deed covenants to run with the land.
(b) The open space shall be adjacent to existing or proposed
conservation, recreation and/or agricultural uses as shown on
the LWRP proposed land use plan.
§ 248-31 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-31
1:684
§ 248-32. Variance resolution; fee. [Amended 1-10-1989; 7-9-1991;
2-22-1999; 6-2-2015]
A description of variances granted shall become part of the Planning Board
resolution approving each final plat. A fee of $500 for each variance request
per lot shall be required except for variances necessary for open space
subdivisions.
(c) Development rights may be transferred to land outside the
coastal area as authorized by the Town Code.
(d) The Planning Board shall modify to the maximum extent
practical the requirements of §§ 248-25D, F and G, 248-28D, E
and F, 248-35A(1), (2), (4) and (5), and 248-37A(1) and B (Table
I) to achieve the following objectives:
[1] Reduce ground- and surface water pollution.
[2] Increase groundwater recharge.
[3] Decrease the volume of stormwater runoff.
[4] Minimize impermeable surface area.
[5] Minimize regrading.
[6] Reduce soil erosion.
[7] Minimize the loss of natural vegetation and wildlife
habitat.
[8] Preserve the natural scenic quality of the coastal area and
its environs.
(e) The area of tree clearing and regrading shall not exceed 25%
of the plat area.
§ 248-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-32
1:685

ARTICLE XI
Building on Unimproved Filed Plat Street
[Added 6-13-1967]
§ 248-33. Petition; hearing; bond or deposit; fee.
A. Upon petition to the Planning Board and after a duly advertised public
hearing upon said petition, the Planning Board may consider the extent
of public improvements that will be necessary and the amount of said
performance bond or cash deposit that may be required to cover the full
cost of such improvement.
B. Each petition shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $10 per linear foot
of unimproved street, with whatever supporting papers, documents,
maps or other material may be needed to support the petition.
[Amended 11-24-1981; 9-10-1985; 1-10-1989; 7-9-1991;
2-22-1999; 6-2-2015]
§ 248-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-33
1:687

ARTICLE XII
Amending Filed Plat Lot Lines
[Added 9-26-1967]
§ 248-34. Petition; hearing; fee.
A. Upon petition to the Planning Board, after a duly advertised public
hearing upon such petition, to amend the filed plat lot lines, the
Planning Board may approve, modify and approve or disapprove such
lot line change based upon the necessity or circumstances presented,
along with the overall development, neighborhood character,
topographic and natural features of the land and other factors stated
herein for subdivision design.
B. Each petition shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $500, along with
supporting maps or drawings that shall be required by the Planning
Department. [Amended 11-24-1981; 12-22-1981; 1-25-1983;
9-10-1985; 1-10-1989; 2-22-1999;6-2-2015]
§ 248-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-34
1:689

ARTICLE XIII
Street Improvements
§ 248-35. Street design standards.
A. The following minimum standards shall be required for all major, minor
and marginal access streets:
(1) Horizontal alignment shall have:
(a) A minimum radius between intersections of 150 feet.
(b) A minimum tangent between reverse curves of 50 feet.
(c) A minimum radius of 10 feet at the property line at the
intersection of street rights-of-way, except that intersections of
any highway with a major street shall have a minimum radius
of 20 feet, and those with a minor street shall have a radius of
15 feet. [Amended 6-20-1989; 7-25-1989]
(2) Vertical alignment.
(a) Vertical alignment shall have:
[1] A minimum grade of 0.5%.
[2] A maximum grade of 6% (8% on minor streets); or a
maximum grade for less than 200 feet of 10%.
[3] A maximum grade within 100 feet of a right-of-way
intersection of 3%.
(b) All changes in grade of more than 0.8% shall be connected by
vertical curves.
(c) The length "L" in feet of a vertical curve shall be related to the
algebraic difference in the percent of grade "A" and a constant
(K=28 for minor streets and K=65 for secondary streets)
according to the following formula: L=KA.
(3) Sight distances shall be at least:
(a) One thousand feet for primary highways.
(b) Five hundred feet for secondary highways.
(c) Three hundred feet for all streets.
(4) Right-of-way widths and dimensions for improvements shall be in
accordance with Table I, Minimum Required Construction Types
and Right-of-Way Widths.77
77.Editor's Note: This table follows § 248-37B(3)(b).
§ 248-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-35
1:691
§ 248-36. Required construction types.
(5) Street pattern shall conform to the provisions of § 248-25, Street
and highway standards, of this Chapter 248, Subdivision of Land, of
the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
B. In regulating subdivisions, these provisions shall be considered the
minimum requirements generally consistent with the public welfare,
and the Planning Board, in consultation with the Town Engineer, shall
modify or extend these provisions in appropriate cases as may be
deemed necessary for the public good.
C. Standards for all highways shall be determined by the Town Engineer
and the Superintendent of Highways in consultation with the
appropriate authorities.
D. Completion of public improvements. In the event that the public
improvements covered by the performance bond and cash deposit have
not been constructed to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer, Town
Highway Superintendent and the Traffic Engineer of the Traffic Safety
Department, they shall forward, within 30 days of the inspection, a
written report jointly signed by representatives of their departments to
the subdivider, giving him a period of six months or less within which
time he has to complete said public improvements to their satisfaction.
If, upon the expiration of this period, the public improvements have still
not been completed to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer, Town
Highway Superintendent and the Traffic Engineer of the Traffic Safety
Department or additional items are uncovered which are incomplete, a
second written report will be sent to the subdivider wherein he will be
given 45 days or less to complete the enumerated items. If, at the
expiration of the second period, the public improvements still have not
been completed to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer, Town Highway
Superintendent and the Traffic Engineer of the Traffic Safety
Department as stated aforesaid, then the Town Board may declare the
performance bond and cash deposit in default. [Added 6-10-1975;
amended 11-24-1981]
A. Construction types for street improvements shall be in accordance with
the requirements of Table I, Minimum Required Construction Types and
Right-of-Way Widths. Specification references are found in § 248-37 of
this article, Brief specifications for street improvements.
B. These provisions shall be considered minimum requirements generally
consistent with the public welfare, and the Town Engineer shall modify
or extend these provisions in appropriate cases as may be deemed
necessary for the public good. In the case of subdivisions, this shall be
done as provided in § 248-35B of this article.
C. Standards for all highways shall be determined by the Town Engineer
and the Superintendent of Highways in consultation with the
appropriate authorities.
§ 248-35 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-37
1:692
§ 248-37. Brief specifications for street improvements.
Detailed specifications for materials and construction shall be provided by
the office of the Town Engineer.
A. Subgrade.
(1) The entire right-of-way shall be cleared of brush and trees except
those which will be an asset to the subdivision landscape.
(2) All boulders, organic material, soft clay, spongy soil and other
objectionable material shall be removed and replaced by material
approved by the Town Engineer.
(3) The subgrade shall be properly stabilized, shaped, rolled and
uniformly compacted with a ten-ton roller to conform to the lines,
grades and typical cross sections of this specification and the
approved final plat profile drawings. The process of shaping, rolling
and filling shall be repeated until no depressions develop.
(4) All rutting, displacement or soft spots after the subgrade has been
completed shall be properly repaired with new material, regarded
and compacted.
(5) When existing materials in the road are to be used for road base
material, that material shall be removed to the surface of the
subgrade so that the subgrade may be properly prepared before
the base is constructed.
(6) Cuts and fills shall have a maximum slope of one on three from the
edge of the right-of-way, except when specifically waived by the
Planning Board and the Town Engineer for the purpose of saving
trees or some particular terrain feature at the given place.
B. Paving. (See Table I, Minimum Required Construction Types and Rightof-
Way Widths, for application of paving types.) Paving requirements
shall be as follows:
(1) Type A paving:
(a) Subgrade: as indicated in Subsection A above.
(b) Base course: six-inch stabilized soil base.
(c) Leveling course: one-and-one-half-inch bituminous concrete
(run-of-bank aggregate).
(d) Surfacing course: one-and-one-half-inch bituminous concrete
(crushed stone aggregate).
(e) Refer to § 248-37B(1) of "Construction Specifications for Public
Improvements."
(2) Type B paving:
§ 248-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-37
1:693
(a) Subgrade: as indicated in Subsection A above.
(b) Subbase course: six-inch stabilized soil base.
(c) Base course: four-inch penetration macadam.
(d) Surfacing course: one-and-one-half-inch bituminous concrete
(crushed stone aggregate).
(e) Refer to § 248-37B(2) of "Construction Specifications for Public
Improvements."
(3) Type D paving: [Amended 9-26-1967; 3-12-197478]
(a) Base course: four-inch asphalt concrete plant mix.
(b) Surfacing course: one-and-one-half-inch bituminous concrete
(crushed stone aggregate).
Table I
Minimum Required Construction Types and Right-of-Way Widths [Amended
9-26-1967; 6-5-1968; 9-2-1969]
Location of Street
by Zoning District
Right-of-Way
Width
(feet)
Paving Type
and Width
(feet)
Sidewalk
Width
(feet) Curbs
R-43 and R-21
Major streets 60 B - 36 4 Yes
Minor streets 50 B - 30 None Yes
R-15, R-10 and R-10S
Major streets 60 B - 36 4 Yes
Minor streets,
R-15
50 B - 30 None Yes
Minor streets,
R-10 and R-10S
50 B - 30 4 Yes
RM-7
Major streets 60 B - 36 4 Yes
Minor streets 50 B - 30 4 Yes
PRD
Major streets 60 B - 36 4 Yes
Minor streets 50 B - 30 4 Yes
SCB, NB, OB and CB 80 D - 40 6 Yes
LI and HI 60 D - 40 4 Yes
78.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for the repeal of original Subsection B(3) of the
1964 Code, Type C paving.
§ 248-37 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-37
1:694
C. Curbs and gutters (see Drawing I, Curb and Gutter Cross Sections, for
dimensions).79
(1) The following curbs shall be used:
(a) Battered concrete curb.
(b) Battered reveal concrete curb.
(c) Cobblestone curb.
(2) Integral concrete curb and gutter shall be used wherever the
gradient exceeds 4%.
D. Pavement crown: 0.3 inch per foot.
E. Driveway aprons.
(1) All driveways or other parking areas shall have driveway aprons
extending from the curbline to the property line.
(2) Driveway aprons shall be of the same construction specification as
the street paving or equal.
(3) Driveway aprons shall be at least 10 feet wide at the curb face and
at least seven feet wide at the property line, with a step at the curb
cut face of one inch.
F. Sidewalks.
(1) All sidewalks shall be four inches thick and at least four feet wide,
constructed of one-course concrete or equal, except that a sidewalk
laid across driveway aprons shall be six inches thick.
(2) All sidewalks shall be located within the street right-of-way, the
outside edge to be contiguous with the right-of-way boundary.
G. Street signs, streetlights, traffic controlling signs, signals, markings
and restraining devices, including street name signs, shall be
designated as to location and type by the Traffic Safety Department and
in accordance with the construction specifications for public
improvements as adopted and amended by the Planning Board, New
York State Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and the Suffolk
County Department of Public Works latest specifications for the
installation of traffic signals. [Amended 6-10-1975; 11-24-1981]
H. Street trees.
(1) Street trees shall be provided in all subdivisions.
(2) Trees shall be of nursery stock of an approved species grown under
the same climatic conditions as at the location of the development.
They shall be of symmetrical growth, free of insect pests and
79.Editor's Note: Drawing I is on file in the Town offices.
§ 248-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-37
1:695
disease, suitable for street use and durable under the maintenance
contemplated.
(3) The average trunk diameter measured at a height of six feet above
the finished ground level shall be a minimum of two to three inches,
depending on good practice with references to the particular
species to be planted.
(4) Trees shall be planted at intervals of from 40 to 60 feet apart,
depending upon the species, along both sides of the street and shall
be located within the street right-of-way three feet six inches from
the edge of the street pavement. The Planning Board may waive
this specification in favor of planting an equivalent number of trees
in landscaped groups.
(5) All planting shall be done in conformance with good nursery and
landscape practice.
I. Planting strips. All planting strips within the road rights-of-way shall be
finish graded, properly prepared and seeded or sodded with lawn grass
in conformance with good nursery and landscape practice.
J. Monuments. Monuments shall be of reinforced concrete or stone, shall
be four inches square with a length of at least 36 inches and shall be
embedded the full depth.
K. Planting: limited access and planting areas. All limited access and
planting areas shall be planted in conformance with the detailed
specifications for materials and construction noted above, provided
that:
(1) Suitable plant materials already in place may be used when
approved by the Town Engineer.
(2) Where incompatible land uses are located adjacent to such limited
access and planting area, the Planning Board may require a screen
fence (wire fabric vinyl-coated redwood slat) in accordance with
Town specifications. [Amended 12-20-1966]
L. The Town Engineer and the Town Superintendent of Highways, upon a
joint determination by them, may accept equal or better specifications
in lieu of any of the specifications set forth herein in Subsections A
through K above when, in their judgment, such alternates accrue to the
public benefit.
§ 248-37 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-37
1:696
ARTICLE XIV
Drainage System
§ 248-38. Grading and drainage system plan.
§ 248-39. Design standards.
A. A preliminary grading and drainage system plan shall be a part of the
preliminary layout. It shall indicate in general terms a proposal for an
adequate system of drainage structures to carry off and store or
discharge the stormwater runoff and natural drainage water which
originates not only within the property boundaries, but also that which
originates beyond the property boundaries.
B. The public improvement and utilities plan and profiles shall show the
final drainage plan and street profiles. They shall be prepared and
submitted with the final plat after the approval of the preliminary layout
and drainage plan. (See § 248-16, Public improvement plan and
profiles, of these subdivision regulations of the Town of Smithtown.)
C. No stormwater runoff or natural drainage water shall be so diverted as
to overload existing drainage systems or create flooding or the need for
additional drainage structures on other private properties or public
lands, without proper and approved provisions being made for taking
care of these conditions.
A. Collection system.
(1) The collection system shall be designed in accordance with the
rational method of design using the following formula:
Q = AiR
Where
Q = The required capacity in cubic feet per second for the
collection system at the point of design.
A = The tributary drainage area in acres, and shall
include areas tributary from outside sources as well
as from within the subdivision itself.
i = The coefficient of runoff applicable to the drainage
area, and shall be based on consideration of the soil
conditions, the average slope of the drainage area
and the degree of ultimate development of the area,
but in no case shall be less than the following
coefficients:
Type of Development Coefficient
Undeveloped land 0.10
2-acre lot, residential development 0.15
§ 248-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-39
1:697
Type of Development Coefficient
1-acre lot, residential development 0.17
1/2-acre lot, residential
development
0.20
10,000-square-foot lot, residential
development
0.32
Business area 0.90
R = The rainfall intensity in inches per hour, and shall be
determined by the following formula:
Where
t = The time of concentration in minutes at the
point of design.
(2) Pipes or conduits shall be designed using Manning's formula for
velocity:
Where
R = The hydraulic radius of the conduit flowing full.
n = The coefficient of friction (n = 0.015 for pipes 18
inches or smaller in diameter; n = 0.013 for pipes
over 18 inches in diameter or for concrete culverts).
s = The slope of the pipe in feet per foot; "s" shall
generally be considered as being the same as the
slope of the invert of the pipe; however, such slope
shall be checked against the available hydraulic
gradient wherever the system discharges into a
stormwater recharge basin, pond or other body of
water.
(3) Wherever possible, design velocities in pipes shall be three feet per
second or over. Where steep grades are encountered, velocities
over 15 feet per second shall be avoided by the use of drop
manholes in the line.
§ 248-39 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-39
1:698
(4) Manholes shall be provided in drain lines not more than 350 feet
apart and wherever branches are connected or sizes are changed
and wherever there is a change in alignment or grade.
(5) The alignment of pipes shall be in a straight line between
manholes.
(6) Drain lines shall be placed between the center line of the road and
the curbline and shall, as far as practical, parallel the center line of
the road.
(7) Not more than two catch basins shall be interconnected before
being connected to a manhole.
B. Stormwater recharge basins. Stormwater recharge basins shall be
provided wherever there is no available outlet for stormwater or where
the available outlets are inadequate, provided that test pits indicate
that the earth materials encountered have desirable seepage qualities.
(1) Recharge basins shall provide a storage capacity for five inches'
rainfall on the tributary area where suitable means for overflow are
provided.
(2) Recharge basins without suitable means for overflow shall provide
storage capacity for an eight-inch rainfall on the tributary area.
(3) The coefficient of runoff for recharge basin design shall be based
on the soil characteristics and average slope of the drainage area,
but in no case shall the coefficient be less than 0.30.
C. Brooks or ditches. Where brooks or ditches are used as outlets, they
shall be designed by the use of Manning's formula as indicated for
collection systems in Subsection A(2) above, with the following
considerations:
(1) The friction factor shall be:
(a) For earth ditches: 0.025.
(b) For paved ditches: 0.013.
(2) Slopes for ditch banks shall not be steeper than one on two.
(3) Design velocities in earth ditches shall not exceed three feet per
second.
(4) A ditch or brook right-of-way of sufficient minimum width to
include a ten-foot access strip, in addition to the width of the ditch
or brook from bank top to bank top, shall be offered for dedication
to the Town for drainage purposes. Such right-of-way shall be
shown on the drainage plan and on the final plan.
D. General design standards.
§ 248-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-39
1:699
§ 248-40. Brief specifications for drainage system structures.
Detailed specifications for materials and construction shall be provided by
the office of the Town Engineer.
(1) Valley gutters will be permitted at T-intersections where they are
parallel to the center line of the through road and shall be
constructed to the specifications and design to be furnished by the
Town Engineer. This is to be accomplished by gradually taking out
the crown of the intersecting street, starting from a point about 30
feet back from the flow line of the through street. At other than Tintersections,
valley gutters will be permitted only when warranted
by limited traffic use and never across heavily trafficked roads.
(2) Surface drainage in gutters shall be limited to the equivalent of
that flowing from 1.5 impervious acres; however, where the
tributary impervious area exceeds the runoff from 1.0 impervious
acres, a double-inlet catch basin shall be used.
(3) Drainage structures which are located on county or state highway
rights-of-way shall be approved by the appropriate highway
engineer's office, and a letter from that office indicating such
approval shall be directed to the Smithtown Planning Board.
A. Catch basins. All catch basins shall be one of the approved designs
presented in Drawings 2 and 3. They shall be indicated on the drainage
plan by their identifying number. Standard inlet and manhole cover and
frame designs are presented in Drawings 4 through 7.80
B. Seepage basins. In unusual conditions where small areas are not
adaptable to other presented means of drainage, seepage basins may
be used if approved by the Planning Board.
(1) The construction of seepage basins shall be similar to that of catch
basins, except that the sidewalls shall be constructed entirely of
eight-inch seepage blocks.
(2) If additional storage volume is needed, additional basins or cells
may be constructed next to the first with a common wall of eightinch
seepage block. The additional basins or cells may not need
inlets but they shall each have a manhole.
(3) Such seepage basins shall be connected, by slotted pipe
surrounded by minimum of six inches of gravel, to an overflow
basin or area. The overflow from such basin or area shall not
overload any other drainage system.
C. Culverts:
80.Editor's Note: These drawings are on file in the Town offices.
§ 248-39 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-40
1:700
(1) All culverts shall be constructed of reinforced concrete pipe or shall
be reinforced concrete box culverts and shall have reinforced
concrete headwalls similar to that shown on Drawing 17, unless
another detail is approved for a specific installation.81
(2) A chain link fence four feet high, similar in quality to that for
recharge basins, shall be provided along the right-of-way line at the
headwall on each end of the culvert and extending at least four feet
beyond the top of the ditch or brook bank on each side of the
headwall.
D. Manholes. All manholes shall be one of the approved designs presented
in Drawings 9 through 16. They shall be indicated on the final drainage
plan by their identifying number. Standard manhole cover and frame
designs are presented in Drawings 4 through 6. All manholes located in
the street paving shall be located on the center line unless this
specification is waived.82
E. Storm drainpipe. All storm drainpipe shall be reinforced concrete pipe
laid on undisturbed subgrade with full, firm and even bearing. Backfill
and compaction shall be in accordance with good engineering practice.
They shall be indicated on the final drainage plan with notation as to
size, slope and invert elevations. Necessary easements shall be shown
on the drainage plan and the final plat and shall be not less than 10 feet
wide.
(1) Pipe 18 inches or less in diameter shall be of the bell-and-spigot
type.
(2) Pipe over 18 inches in diameter shall be of the internal bell type or
slip joint type.
F. Stormwater recharge basins. Stormwater recharge basins shall be
constructed in accordance with the requirements of this regulation and
the detail drawing of the basin as approved with the final drainage plan
by the Planning Board.
(1) Test hole. At least one test hole shall be dug on the site of each
proposed recharge basin before the preparation of the final
drainage plan.
(a) The test hole shall be dug to a depth at least five feet below the
proposed bottom elevation of the basin or groundwater level, if
it is encountered at a lesser depth.
(b) A representative of the Town Engineer shall be notified when
the test hole is open and shall inspect it.
81.Editor's Note: Drawing 17 is on file in the Town offices.
82.Editor's Note: The drawings are on file in the Town offices.
§ 248-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-40
1:701
(c) Upon approval of the site for a recharge basin by such
representatives, the final drainage plan shall be prepared.
(2) Detailed drawing. A detailed plan of the stormwater recharge basin
shall be submitted for approval as a part of the public improvement
and utilities plan and profiles and shall be prepared in accordance
with the following requirements:
(a) The plan shall show to scale the property line and planting
screen, fence and gate location, the top and bottom of the
slope, the outline of the maximum design water level, the
access ramp, the location of inlet pipes and headwalls and
sluices, the elevations on the bottom of the basin of the
maximum design water level and the control elevations on the
curb and the top of slope.
(b) Where the planting screen is placed outside of the fence, a
berm width of 10 feet shall be provided between the fence and
the top of slope. Where the planting strip is located inside the
fence, a fifteen-foot berm width shall be provided between the
top of slope and the fence. The berm width shall be increased
at corners to provide sufficient area for a service truck to
negotiate the turn. The top of slope shall be not less than one
foot higher than the curb.
(c) The maximum slope for the sides of the recharge basin shall be
one on two and shall be so indicated on the plan.
(d) Dikes shall be avoided, but where they are necessary they shall
be constructed in accordance with specifications furnished by
the Town Engineer.
(e) Rights-of-way providing access to recharge basins shall have a
minimum width of 20 feet.
(f) The access ramp shall be so designed that it starts at the
elevation and location of the top of the basin side and provides
easy access to the higher of the two levels of the basin bottom.
It shall be 12 feet wide with a stabilized surface and have a
gradient not to exceed 5%.
(g) Headwalls shall be shown in their proper locations and shall be
constructed in accordance with Drawing 17. Inlets into the
recharge basin shall lead into the lower area of the basin
bottom.83
(h) The perimeter, or berm, of the recharge basin shall be so
graded that no water will drain across it into the basin except
in sluices properly designed for that purpose. Wherever
possible, the perimeter area shall be so graded that the
83.Editor's Note: Drawing 17 is on file in the Town offices.
§ 248-40 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-40
1:702
adjacent land will slope away from the recharge basin. The
proposed grading shall not adversely affect adjacent property.
(i) The recharge basin bottom shall be designed with two
elevations, one a minimum of two feet higher than the other.
The lower elevation shall not be more than 10 feet below the
overflow elevation. The lower elevation shall be at least two
feet above the potential high groundwater level.
(j) The recharge basin design shall include an overflow so that the
stored water shall not exceed a depth of 10 feet. Such overflow
shall flow directly onto a street surface or by means of an
adequate pipe system flow to some other point of disposal.
(k) The following information shall be noted on the stormwater
recharge basin detail drawing:
[1] The total area for which the recharge basin has been
designed.
[2] The coefficient of runoff used.
[3] The required capacity in cubic feet.
[4] The capacity provided in cubic feet.
[5] The total excavation in cubic yards.
(3) Fence and gate. A fence and gate shall be constructed in
accordance with the requirements of this regulation and the
following specifications:
(a) A concrete curb six inches wide (minimum) by 24 inches deep
shall be constructed under the entire length of the fence and
gate, and unless otherwise approved the top of the curb shall
be flush with the established grade. The curb shall be centered
under the fence and shall be made of one part cement to five
parts mineral aggregate, free from silt or clay, using not more
than seven and one-half (7 1/2) gallons of water per bag of
cement. Wood forms shall be used along the top of the curb to
provide straight, parallel sides six inches apart, at least 3 1/2
inches deep.
(b) Posts.
[1] Line posts shall be two-inch O.D. pipe, 2.72 pounds per
foot, hot galvanized or equivalent H-section, set not more
than 10 feet o.c. Corner posts shall be 2 1/2 inches O.D.
pipe, 3.65 pounds per foot, hot galvanized. Gate posts shall
be four-inch O.D. pipe, 9.11 pounds per foot, hot
galvanized.
§ 248-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-40
1:703
[2] All posts shall be nine feet long and shall extend three feet
below the top of the concrete curb, which shall be
thickened and deepened at the posts to provide three
inches of concrete cover on the posts. Corner and gate
posts shall be properly braced with 1 5/8 inches O.D. pipe,
2.27 pounds per foot, hot galvanized with rod and
turnbuckle attachment.
[3] A 1 5/8 inches O.D. toprail, of a weight not less than 2.27
pounds per linear foot, shall be installed along the entire
length of the fence. The fence fabric shall be tied to the
toprail every two feet with No. 9-gauge aluminum or
galvanized tie wires.
(c) Fabric.
[1] Fabric shall be two-inch mesh No. 9 steel wire, hot dipped
galvanized, six feet high with barbed edges, top and
bottom, attached to the posts so that the bottom of the
wire is not more than one inch above the curb. The wire
shall be fastened to each post by means of six hook-andhook
type clips.
[2] The fabric shall be anchored to the curb by means of fivesixteenths-
inch galvanized steel rods, 12 inches long,
anchored in the curb and clinched to the fabric. These tierods
shall be spaced two feet apart.
(d) Barbed wire. All posts shall be fitted with barbed wire arms at
the top to support three strands of four-point hot dipped
galvanized or bethanized barbed wire, the top wire being one
foot above the top of the fabric. The arms shall make an angle
of 45° with the post and shall extend inward toward the basin.
Barbed wire shall be tightly stretched and shall be securely
tied to the arms.
(e) Gates. Gate openings shall be 16 feet, with double gates having
a one-hundred-eighty-degree swing. Gate frames shall be made
of two-inch O.D. pipe or two-inch square tubing weighing not
less than 2.72 pounds per foot, hot galvanized, with malleable
iron corner castings or welded at all corners and properly
braced against sagging. Hinges shall be of malleable iron
securely fastened to the gate and post. All gates shall be
double gates equipped with a drop bar locking device. The
bottom of the gates shall be not more than two inches above
the curb. Gates shall be fitted with three strands of barbed
wire to the same height as that on the fence. The center block
shall be of a design to be easily cleaned. A pipe center block
shall not be used.
(4) Planting screen. A planting screen shall be established on the
perimeter of the stormwater recharge basin. The screen area shall
§ 248-40 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-40
1:704
be five feet wide, except as set forth in Subsection F(4)(c) hereof,
and shall conform to the following:
(a) When the adjacent property is a part of the lot pattern of the
same subdivision, the planting shall be placed on the outside of
the fence on the adjacent plot, the dimension of which shall be
increased five feet beyond that required by the Building Zone
Ordinance84 for this purpose. Such planting shall become a
part of that plot and shall be maintained by its owner. In this
location the fence shall be set one foot inside the property line
on the storage basin site.
(b) When the adjacent property is not owned by the subdivider, the
planting screen shall be placed inside the fence which shall be
set one foot inside the property line on the stormwater
recharge basin site.
(c) When the stormwater recharge basin abuts a street, the fence
shall be set 40 feet inside the property line on the recharge
basin site, and the area between the property line and fence
shall be landscaped with plant materials native to this area, as
directed by the Planning Board, upon approval of the final plat.
(d) The berm area between the property line and the top of slope
shall be covered with six inches of topsoil and satisfactorily
grass-seeded.
(e) The planting screen shall be planted in accordance with the
requirements set forth in § 248-40F(4) of the construction
specifications for public improvements, except as described in
Subsection F(4)(c) above.
(5) Safety requirements. During the period after the excavation has
been started and before the fence and gate have been completely
installed, the contractor shall provide at all times such guard or
guards as shall be necessary to keep unauthorized persons off the
construction site, provided that if the fence and gate have been
completely installed, no guard or guards will be required during
the time when the gate is closed and securely locked. It is hereby
declared the policy of the Planning Board that recharge basins,
once started, shall be completed in as short a time as possible
consistent with good practice and, further, that the public safety be
safeguarded until such time as the recharge basins are completed.
(6) Upon final approval and acceptance of the stormwater recharge
basin by the Town Engineer, the developer's key to the lock shall be
turned over to the Superintendent of Highways.
G. The Town Engineer and the Town Superintendent of Highways, upon a
joint determination by them, may accept equal or better specifications
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Zoning.
§ 248-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-40
1:705
in lieu of any of the specifications set forth herein in Subsections A
through F when, in their judgment, such alternates accrue to the public
benefit.
§ 248-40 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-40
1:706
ARTICLE XV
Public Utilities
§ 248-41. Standards and procedures.
A. All gas and water mains and telephone lines and television cables and
appurtenances shall be installed in accordance with the construction
specifications of the respective agency or district. Streetlights and
lighting standards shall be in accordance with the construction
specifications for public improvements as adopted by the Planning
Board. [Amended 2-23-1971; 6-10-1975; 9-6-1988]
B. Electric, telephone, water, gas, television cable or any other public
utility shall only be installed underground within the street or highway
right-of-way, unless waived by the Town Board. On the application for
waiver of the requirements of this section, as provided hereinbefore,
the Town Board may, in its discretion, refer the application to the
Planning Board of the Town of Smithtown for its study and
recommendation. [Amended 2-23-1971; 9-6-1988]
C. A letter approving such a proposed installation and a statement as to
who will carry out the construction, signed by a responsible official of
the lighting agency, utility company or governmental authority or
district which has jurisdiction in the area, shall be directed to the
Chairman of the Planning Board and shall be received prior to the final
plat approval.
D. 85 The general installation and location of streetlights shall be at every
street intersection, on every cul-de-sac and in general at every other
property line, with a minimum distance of approximately 150 feet to a
maximum of 200 feet. [Added 6-10-1975]
85.Editor's Note: Original Subsection D of the 1964 Code was repealed 2-23-1971.
§ 248-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-41
1:707

ARTICLE XVI
Inspections
§ 248-42. Routine inspections.
A. All improvements and utilities will be inspected by the Town Engineer's
office to ensure satisfactory completion.
B. In no case shall any paving work, including prime and seal coats, be
done without permission from the Town Engineer's office. At least three
days' notice shall be given to the Town Engineer's office prior to any
such construction so that a representative of the Town may be present
at the time the work is to be done.
C. The Town Engineer's office shall be notified after each of the following
phases of the work has been completed so that he or his representative
may inspect the work:
(1) Road subgrade.
(2) Curb and gutter forms.
(3) Road paving, after each coat in the case of priming and sealing.
(4) Sidewalk forms.
(5) Drainage pipe and other drainage structures, before backfilling.
D. Streetlights, installation inspection procedure. The builder and/or
electrical contractor shall be responsible for notifying the Smithtown
Traffic Safety Department during construction as described below:
[Added 11-24-1981]
(1) Phase I: Installation of underground cable supply.
(2) Phase II: The builder and/or electrical contractor shall notify the
Smithtown Traffic Safety Department, in writing, after the
installation of the splice boxes, fuses, poles and luminaires. The
Smithtown Traffic Safety Department will notify the Long Island
Lighting Company to energize the circuits if satisfactorily installed.
(3) Phase III: After energy is supplied by the Long Island Lighting
Company, the Smithtown Traffic Safety Department shall conduct a
nighttime inspection.
E. Street name signs and traffic control devices installation inspection
procedure. The builder shall be responsible for notifying the Smithtown
Traffic Safety Department after the street name signs and traffic
control devices have been installed in accordance with the approved
plan. [Added 11-24-1981]
F. Traffic signal installation procedure. [Added 11-24-1981]
§ 248-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-42
1:709
§ 248-43. Final inspections.
A final inspection of all improvements and utilities will be made to
determine whether the work is satisfactory and in substantial agreement
with the approved final plat drawings and the Town specifications. The
general condition of the site shall also be considered. Upon a satisfactory
final inspection report, action will be taken to release the performance bond
covering such improvements and utilities.
§ 248-44. Inspection fee. [Amended 3-13-2007]
An inspection fee of 8% of the amount of the performance bond shall be paid
to the Planning Board prior to the time that the Chairman of the Planning
Board signs the final plat.
(1) Phase I: The builder shall notify the Smithtown Traffic Safety
Department approximately five working days in advance of the
start of construction.
G. Maintenance procedure. The builder shall be responsible to maintain
the above-named streetlights, street name signs, traffic control devices
and traffic signals (Subsections D, E and F above) until the roads have
been dedicated to the Town of Smithtown. [Added 11-24-1981]
§ 248-42 SMITHTOWN CODE § 248-44
1:710
ARTICLE XVII
Street Names
§ 248-45. General rules.
§ 248-46. Historic or traditional names.
Such names shall be preserved even though the actual street alignment has
been changed or the name does not agree with the provisions of this article.
§ 248-47. Duplication of names.
There shall be no duplicate street names within the township and, insofar
as possible, in any school district or fire district which is partially in other
towns.
A. The following names shall have the significance indicated:
(1) Place: a street one block long, a connecting link between two
longer streets or a cul-de-sac.
(2) Court, Crescent or Terrace: a loop street which begins and ends on
the same street and is not otherwise connected with other streets,
or a cul-de-sac.
(3) Lane, Path, Street or Way: a short residential street which does not
serve as a secondary or feeder street.
(4) Avenue, Boulevard, Drive or Road: a secondary or feeder street.
B. Continuation of street names. All existing street names shall be
extended where proposed streets follow along their alignment.
§ 248-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-47
1:711
Chapter 252
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
Excavations and regrading — See Ch. 154.
Zoning — See Ch. 322.
§ 252-1. Compliance required. [Amended 5-5-2009]
It shall be unlawful to construct, install, enlarge or maintain any outdoor
swimming pool in the Town of Smithtown except in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code in its entirety.
§ 252-2. Definitions. [Amended 7-22-1969; 5-5-2009]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SWIMMING POOL — A receptacle for water or an artificial pool capable
of holding water to a depth at any point of more than 24 inches deep at
any point, designed or intended for the purpose of immersion or partial
immersion therein and including all appurtenant equipment. The word
"pool" shall be construed to mean in-ground, above-ground and on-ground
outdoor water pools, hot tubs and spas that are installed or constructed
indoors or outdoors.
§ 252-3. Permit required. [Amended 9-16-1969; 5-8-2007]
No person, firm or corporation shall commence the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, removal or improvement of any pool, or cause the
same to be done, without first obtaining a separate permit from the Building
Director for each said pool, except that no building permit shall be required
for the performance of ordinary repairs which are not structural in nature.
§ 252-4. Construction materials.
Pool walls and floors shall be constructed of any impervious material which
shall provide a tight tank and shall be of sufficient strength to contain the
water therein.
§ 252-5. Drawings and plans.
A. All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement
or alteration of any pool shall be submitted to the Building Director for
examination and approval as to proper location and construction.
[Amended 5-8-2007]
§ 248-47 SMITHTOWN CODE § 252-5
1:712
§ 252-6. Water disposal.
All water either overflowing or emptying from the pool shall be disposed of
on the owner's land, and plans submitted shall show provisions made for
such water from flowing on the land of any adjoining property owner or into
any abutting street.
§ 252-7. Fences. [Amended 9-21-1965; 4-20-1982; 9-24-1985;
5-8-2007; 1-19-2012]
All pools shall be completely and continuously surrounded and enclosed by
a permanent durable wall, barrier or fence in accordance with the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code requirements.
§ 252-8. Temporary fences. [Added 7-26-1983; amended 5-5-2009]
During the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any
swimming pool, the swimming pool shall be enclosed by a temporary
enclosure in accordance with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code.
§ 252-9. Size and location.
All pools shall comply with the requirements of the Building Zone
Ordinance86 of the Town of Smithtown relating to accessory buildings,
except that the lot area occupied by such pools shall not be included in
computing the percentage of lot area which may be built upon.
§ 252-10. Lights.
All lights used to illuminate the pool or pool area shall be shielded so as to
prevent their shining upon the property of any adjacent property owner.
§ 252-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of any ordinances of the Town of Smithtown shall be guilty of an offense
punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both. However, for the purpose of
confirming jurisdiction upon the courts and judicial officers, such violations
shall be deemed to be misdemeanors, and for such purposes only all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations.
B. Plans and drawings shall show lot lines and shall include information
pertinent to the pool, fence construction, water supply system,
drainage, water disposal system and all appurtenances as well as
detailed plans and vertical elevations.
C. Pools, appurtenances, water supply and drainage systems and fences
shall be constructed in conformity with the approved plans.
86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Zoning.
§ 252-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-11
1:713
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm, association or corporation
violating any provisions of any ordinance of the Town of Smithtown shall
be subject to a penalty in a sum not exceeding $50 for the first such
violation and in a sum not exceeding $100 for any subsequent violation,
said penalties to be recoverable in a civil action in the name of the Town of
Smithtown as damages.
Chapter 256
TAXATION
§ 252-11 SMITHTOWN CODE § 252-11
1:714
ARTICLE I
Partial Exemption for Senior Citizens With Limited Income
[Adopted 6-12-1990 by L.L. No. 7-1990]
§ 256-1. Exemption granted.
A. Real property owned by one or more persons, each of whom is 65 years
of age or over, shall be exempt from taxation by the Town of Smithtown
to the extent of 50% based upon an annual combined income not
exceeding the following limits in each of the following periods: [Last
amended 2-22-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
(1) No more than:
Beginning July 1, 2006: $26,000;
Beginning July 1, 2007: $27,000;
Beginning July 1, 2008: $28,000;
Beginning July 1, 2009: $29,000; and
(2) Thereafter at the percentage of assessed valuation thereof as
determined by the following schedule, with the amount for each
year represented as (M), pursuant to the provisions of § 467 of the
Real Property Tax Law and Chapter 198 of the Laws of 1990,
Chapter 262 of the Laws of 1994, Chapter 402 of the Laws of 1995,
Chapter 139 of the Laws of 1996, Chapter 298 of the Laws of 1998,
Chapter 198 of the Laws of 2000, Chapter 202 of the Laws of 2002,
Chapter 512 of the Laws of 2003 and Chapter 186 of the Laws of
2006.
Annual Income
Percentage of
Assessed Valuation
Exempt From Taxation
More than (M) but less than (M)
+$1,000
45%
(M) +$1,000 or more but less than (M)
+$2,000
40%
(M) +$2,000 or more but less than (M)
+$3,000
35%
(M) +$3,000 or more but less than (M)
+$3,900
30%
(M) +$3,900 or more but less than (M)
+$4,800
25%
(M) +$4,800 or more but less than (M)
+$5,700
20%
(M) +$5,700 or more but less than (M)
+$6,600
15%
§ 256-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-1
1:715
§ 256-2. School purposes.
Exemption from taxation for school purposes shall not be granted in the
case of real property where a child resides if such child attends a public
school within the school district.
§ 256-3. Exceptions.
Annual Income
Percentage of
Assessed Valuation
Exempt From Taxation
(M) +$6,600 or more but less than (M)
+$7,500
10%
(M) +$7,500 or more but less than (M)
+$8,400
5%
B. Any exemption provided by this section shall be computed after all
partial exemptions allowed by law have been substituted from the total
amount assessed.
C. The real property tax exemption or real property owned by husband and
wife, one of whom is 65 years of age or over, once granted, shall not be
rescinded solely because of the death of the older spouse, so long as the
surviving spouse is at least 62 years of age.
D. The Town hereby ratifies and reaffirms all previous resolutions, rules,
regulations and/or ordinances adopted in accordance with the Real
Property Tax Law § 467 with respect to the income limitations for
qualification for the exemption.
E. For the purposes of this article, title to that portion of real property
built as a cooperative apartment and owned by a cooperative apartment
corporation in which a tenant-stockholder of such corporation resides
and which is represented by his share or shares of stock in such
corporation as determined by its or their proportional relationship to
the total outstanding stock of the corporation, including that owned by
the corporation, shall be deemed to be vested in such tenantstockholder.
That proportion of the assessment of such real property
built as a cooperative apartment and owned by such cooperative
apartment corporation determined by the relationship of such real
property vested in such tenant-stockholder to such entire parcel and
the buildings thereon owned by such cooperative apartment
corporation in which such tenant-stockholder resides shall be subject to
exemption from taxation pursuant to this section, and any exemption so
granted shall be credited against the assessed valuation of such real
property; the reduction in real property taxes realized thereby shall be
credited by the cooperative apartment corporation against the amount
of such taxes otherwise payable by or chargeable to such tenantstockholder.
[Added 12-12-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
§ 256-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § 256-3
1:716
A. No exemptions shall be granted if the income of the owner or the
combined income of the owners of the property for the income tax year
immediately preceding the date of making application for exemption
exceeds the maximum income as may be provided by § 256-1A of this
article. "Income tax year" shall mean the twelve-month period for which
the owner or owners filed a federal personal income tax return or, if no
such return is filed, the calendar year. Where title is vested in either the
husband or the wife, their combined income may not exceed such sum.
Such income shall include social security and retirement benefits,
interest dividends, total gain from the sale or exchange of a capital
asset which may be offset by a loss from the sale of or exchange of a
capital asset in the same income tax year, net rental income, salary or
earnings and net income from self-employment but shall not include a
return of capital, gifts or inheritances, or moneys earned through
employment in the federal foster grandparent program, and any such
income shall be offset by all medical and prescription drug expenses
actually paid which were not reimbursed or paid for by insurance. The
provisions of this subsection notwithstanding, such income shall not
include veterans disability compensation as defined in Title 38 of the
United States Code. In computing net rental income and net income
from self-employment, no depreciation deduction shall be allowed for
the exhaustion or wear and tear of real or personal property held for the
production of income. [Last amended 2-22-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007]
B. No exemption shall be granted unless the title of the property shall have
been vested in the owner or one of the owners of the property for at
least 24 consecutive months prior to the date of making application for
exemption; provided, however, that in the event of the death of either a
husband or wife in whose name title of the property shall have been
vested at the time of death and which then becomes vested solely in the
survivor by virtue of devise by or descent from the deceased husband or
wife, the time of ownership of the property by the deceased husband or
wife shall be deemed also a time of ownership by the survivor, and such
ownership shall be deemed continuous for the purposes of computing
such period of 24 consecutive months. In the event of a transfer by
either a husband or wife to the other spouse of all or part of the title to
the property, the time of ownership of the property by the transferor
spouse shall be deemed also a time of ownership by the transferee
spouse, and such ownership shall be deemed continuous for the
purposes of computing such period of 24 consecutive months. Where
property of the owner or owners has been acquired to replace property
formerly owned by such owner or owners and taken by eminent domain
or other involuntary proceeding, except a tax sale, the period of
ownership of the former property shall be combined with the period of
ownership of the property for which application is made for exemption,
and such periods of ownership shall be deemed to be consecutive for
purposes of this section. Where a residence is sold and replaced with
another within one year and both residences are within the state, the
period of ownership of both properties shall be deemed consecutive for
§ 256-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-3
1:717
§ 256-4. Application for exemption. [Amended 2-25-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
purposes of the exemption from taxation by a municipality within the
state granting such exemption. Where the owner or owners transfer
title to property which, as of the date of transfer, was exempt from
taxation under the provisions of this section, the reacquisition of title
by such owner or owners within nine months of the date of transfer
shall be deemed to satisfy the requirement of this subsection that the
title of the property shall have been vested in the owner or one of
the owners for such period of 24 consecutive months. Where, upon
or subsequent to the death of an owner or owners, title to property
which, as of the date of such death, was exempt from taxation under
such provisions becomes vested, by virtue of devise or descent from the
deceased owner or owners or by transfer by any other means within
nine months after such death, solely in a person or persons who, at the
time of such death, maintained such property as a primary residence,
the requirement of this subsection that the title of the property shall
have been vested in the owner or one of the owners for such period of
24 consecutive months shall be deemed satisfied.
C. No exemption shall be granted unless the property is used exclusively
for residential purposes; provided, however, that in the event that any
portion of such property is not so used exclusively for residential
purposes but is used for other purposes, such portion shall be subject to
taxation and the remaining portion only shall be entitled to the
exemption provided by this section.
D. No exemption shall be granted unless the real property is the legal
residence of and is occupied in whole or in part by the owner or by all of
the owners of the property, provided that an owner who is absent while
receiving health-related care as an inpatient of a residential health care
facility, as defined in § 2801 of the Public Health Law, shall be deemed
to remain a legal resident and an occupant of the property while so
confined, and income accruing to that person shall be income only to
the extent that it exceeds the amount paid by such owner, spouse or coowner
for care in the facility and provided, further, that during such
confinement such property is not occupied by other than the spouse or
co-owner of such owner.
A. Application for such exemption must be made by the owner or all of the
owners of the property on forms prescribed by the State Board, to be
furnished by the appropriate assessing authority, and shall furnish the
information and be executed in the manner required or prescribed in
such forms and shall be filed in such Assessor's office on or before the
taxable status date (March 1). Any person otherwise qualifying under
this section shall not be denied the exemption under this section if he
becomes 65 years of age after the appropriate taxable status date and
before December 31 of the same year.
§ 256-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 256-4
1:718
§ 256-5. Renewal.
B. In the event that the owner or all of the owners of the property fail to
file the application required on or before taxable status day (March 1),
such owners may file the application, executed as if such application
had been filed on or before the taxable status day (March 1) with the
Assessor on or before the date for hearing of complaints (the third
Tuesday in May), where failure to file a timely application resulted
from: (a) a death of the applicant's spouse, child, parent, brother or
sister; or (b) an illness of the applicant or of the applicant's spouse,
child, parent, brother or sister, which actually prevents the applicant
from filing on a timely basis, as certified by a licensed physician. The
assessor shall approve or deny such application as if it had been filed on
or before the taxable status date. [Added 11-3-2015 by L.L. No.
5-2015]
C. In the event the owner, or all of the owners, of property which has
received an exemption pursuant to this section on the preceding
assessment roll fail to file the application required pursuant to this
section on or before the taxable status date such owner or owners may
file the application, executed as if such application had been filed on or
before the taxable status date, with the assessor on or before the date
for the hearing of complaints. [Added 11-3-2015 by L.L. No. 5-2015]
A. At least 60 days prior to the appropriate taxable status date, the
assessing authority shall mail to each person who was granted
exemption pursuant to this section on the latest completed assessment
roll an application form and a notice that such application must be filed
on or before the taxable status date and be approved in order for the
exemption to be granted. The assessing authority shall, within three
days of the completion and filing of the tentative assessment roll, notify
by mail any applicant who has included with his application at least one
self-addressed, prepaid envelope of the approval or denial of the
application; provided, however, that the assessing authority shall, upon
the receipt and filing of the application, send by mail notification of
receipt to any applicant who has included two of such envelopes with
the application. Where an applicant is entitled to a notice of denial
pursuant to this section, such notice shall be on a form prescribed by
the State Board and shall state the reasons for such denial and shall
further state that the applicant may have such determination reviewed
in the manner provided by law. Failure to mail any such application
form or notices or the failure of such person to receive any of the same
shall not prevent the levy, collection and enforcement of the payments
of the taxes on property owned by such person.
B. In the event that the owner or all of the owners of the property which
has received an exemption pursuant to this chapter on the preceding
assessment roll fail to file the application required on or before taxable
status day (March 1), such owners may file the application, executed as
if such application had been filed on or before the taxable status day
§ 256-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-5
1:719
§ 256-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any conviction of having made any willful false statement in the application
for such exemption shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100
and shall disqualify the applicant or applicants from further exemption for
a period of five years.
(March 1) with the Assessor on or before the date for hearing of
complaints (the third Tuesday in May). [Amended 12-25-1992 by L.L.
No. 2-1992]
C. Any person who has been granted an exemption pursuant to this section
on five consecutive completed assessment rolls shall not be subject to
the requirements set forth in Subsection A of this section. However,
said person shall be mailed an application form and a notice informing
him of his rights. Such exemption shall be automatically granted on
each subsequent assessment roll; provided, however, that when tax
payment is made by such person, a sworn affidavit must be included
with such payment, which shall state that such person continues to be
eligible for such exemption. Such affidavit shall be on a form prescribed
by the State Board. If such affidavit is not included with the tax
payment, the collecting officer shall proceed pursuant to § 551-a of the
Real Property Tax Law.
§ 256-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 256-6
1:720
ARTICLE II
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 2-25-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997; amended in its entirety
10-28-1997 by L.L. No. 7-1997]
§ 256-7. Exemption granted. [Amended 2-27-2001 by L.L. No.
1-2001; 2-28-2006 by L.L. No. 1-2006]
A. Pursuant to the provisions of § 458-a, Subdivision (2)(d)(ii), of the Real
Property Tax Law, as amended by Chapter 417 of the Laws of 1997, and
Chapter 256 of the Laws of 2005, qualifying residential real property
shall be exempt from taxation for Town purposes to the extent of 15% of
the assessed value of such property based upon a full market value of
$360,000; and provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed
the following amounts multiplied by the latest state equalization rate
for the assessing unit:
(1) Wartime: $54,000.
(2) Combat: $90,000 ($36,000).
(3) Disabled: $180,000.
B. Gold Star Parents.
(1) Pursuant to the provisions of § 458-a, Subdivision (1)(c), of the Real
Property Tax Law as amended by Chapter 326 of the Laws of 2000,
a Gold Star Parent is hereby included within the definition of
"qualified owner" for the veteran's alternative exemption, and any
property owned by a Gold Star Parent is included within the
definition of "qualifying residential real property" as provided in
Paragraph (d) of Subdivision 1 of Real Property Tax Law § 458-a,
provided that such property shall be the primary residence of the
Gold Star Parent.
(2) The additional exemption provided for by Real Property Tax Law
§ 458-a, Subdivision 2, shall not apply to real property owned by a
Gold Star Parent.
C. Where a veteran, the spouse of the veteran or unremarried surviving
spouse already receiving an exemption pursuant to this section sells the
property receiving the exemption and purchases property within the
Town, the assessor shall transfer and prorate, for the remainder of the
fiscal year, the exemption received. The prorated exemption shall be
based upon the date the veteran, the spouse of the veteran or
unremarried surviving spouse obtains title to the new property and
shall be calculated by multiplying the tax rate or rates for each
municipal corporation which levied taxes, or for which taxes were
levied, on the appropriate tax roll used for the fiscal year or years
during which the transfer occurred times the previously granted
exempt amount times the fraction of each fiscal year or years remaining
§ 256-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-7
1:721
§ 256-8. Real property owned by cooperative apartment
corporations. [Added 2-24-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998]
Pursuant to the provisions of §§ 458 (so far as still applicable) and 458-a of
the Real Property Tax Law as amended by Chapter 171 of the Laws of 1997,
qualifying property shall be exempt from taxation as set forth therein and
as further defined as follows:
subsequent to the transfer of title. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to remove the requirement that any such veteran, the spouse
of the veteran or unremarried surviving spouse transferring an
exemption pursuant to this subdivision shall reapply for the exemption
authorized pursuant to this section on or before the following taxable
status date, in the event such veteran, the spouse of the veteran or
unremarried surviving spouse wishes to receive the exemption in future
fiscal years. [Added 11-3-2015 by L.L. No. 5-2015]
D. Operation Graphic Hand. Pursuant to the provisions of § 458-a,
Subdivision (10), of the Real Property Tax Law, individuals who served
as military personnel in the Reserve component of the United States
Armed Forces and deemed on active duty under Executive Order
11519, signed March 23, 1970, 35 Federal Register 5003, dated March
24, 1970 and later designated by the United States Department of
Defense as "Operation Graphic Hand," and who were discharged or
released therefrom under honorable conditions, are hereby included
within the definition of "qualified owner" for the veterans alternative
exemption, provided that such veteran meets all other qualifications.
[Added 2-5-2019]
A. For the purposes of this article, title to that portion of real property
owned by a cooperative apartment corporation in which a tenantstockholder
of such corporation resides and which is represented by his
share or shares of stock in such corporation as determined by its or
their proportional relationship to the total outstanding stock of the
corporation, including that owned by the corporation, shall be deemed
to be vested in such tenant-stockholder.
B. Provided that all other eligibility criteria are met, that proportion of the
assessment of such real property owned by a cooperative apartment
corporation determined by the relationship of such real property vested
in such tenant-stockholder to such real property owned by such
cooperative apartment corporation in which such tenant-stockholder
resides shall be subject to exemption from taxation pursuant to this
article and any exemption so granted shall be credited by the Town
against the assessed valuation of such real property; the reduction in
real property taxes realized thereby shall be credited by the
cooperative apartment corporation against the amount of such taxes
otherwise payable by or chargeable to such tenant-stockholder.
C. Notwithstanding Subsection B of this section, a tenant-stockholder who
resides in a dwelling that is subject to the provisions of either Article 2,
§ 256-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 256-8
1:722
4, 5 or 11 of the Private Housing Finance Law shall not be eligible for
an exemption pursuant to this section.
§ 256-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-8
1:723

ARTICLE III
Partial Exemption for Disabled Persons With Limited Income
[Adopted 2-24-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
§ 256-9. Purpose. [Amended 2-15-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000;
2-27-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001; 2-25-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003;
2-24-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004; 2-22-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority of Real Property Tax Law
§ 459-c as amended by Chapter 222 of the Laws of 2000, Chapter 201 of the
Laws of 2002, Chapter 462 of the Laws of 2003 and Chapters 187 and 252
of the Laws of 2006. All definitions, terms and conditions of such statute
shall apply to this article.
§ 256-10. Exemption granted.
Real property owned by a person with disabilities whose income is limited
by such disabilities and used as the legal residence of such person shall
be entitled to a partial exemption from taxation to the extent of 50% of
assessed valuation.
§ 256-11. Eligibility. [Last amended 2-22-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
A. To be eligible for the exemption authorized by such § 459-c and
implemented by this article, the maximum income of such person shall
not exceed the following limits in each of the following periods. No
more than:
(1) Beginning July 1, 2006: $26,000.
(2) Beginning July 1, 2007: $27,000.
(3) Beginning July 1, 2008: $28,000.
(4) Beginning July 1, 2009: $29,000.
B. Any such person having a higher income shall be eligible for exemption
in accordance with the following schedule with the amount for each tax
year represented as (M):
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt From
Taxation
More than (M) but less than (M)
+$1,000
45%
(M) +$1,000 or more but less than (M)
+$2,000
40%
(M) +$2,000 or more but less than (M)
+$3,000
35%
§ 256-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-11
1:725
§ 256-12. Exceptions.
Such income shall be offset by medical and prescription drug expenses
actually paid which were not reimbursed or paid for by insurance.
§ 256-13. Cooperatives.
This exemption shall be extended to a legal residence owned as a
cooperative apartment as provided in such § 459-c.
§ 256-14. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon its filing in the office of the
Secretary of State.
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed
Valuation Exempt From
Taxation
(M) +$3,000 or more but less than (M)
+$3,900
30%
(M) +$3,900 or more but less than (M)
+$4,800
25%
(M) +$4,800 or more but less than (M)
+$5,700
20%
(M) +$5,700 or more but less than (M)
+$6,600
15%
(M) +$6,600 or more but less than (M)
+$7,500
10%
(M) +$7,500 or more but less than (M)
+$8,400
5%
§ 256-11 SMITHTOWN CODE § 256-14
1:726
ARTICLE IV
Business Investment Exemption
[Adopted 4-28-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998; amended in its entirety
10-25-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
§ 256-15. Purpose.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority of the Real Property Tax
Law § 485-b, Subdivision 7. All definitions, terms and conditions of such
statute shall apply to this article.
§ 256-16. Exemption granted; conditions for exemption.
A. Real property constructed, altered, installed or improved subsequent to
the effective date of this article for the purpose of commercial, business
or industrial activity shall be eligible for partial exemption from
taxation and special ad valorem levies for the increase in assessed value
attributable thereto to the extent provided in § 485-b of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York, and as hereinafter provided.
For purposes of this article the terms "construction," "alteration,"
"installation," and "improvement" shall not include ordinary
maintenance and repairs.
B. In any year in which a change in level of assessment of 15% or more is
certified for a final assessment roll pursuant to the rules of the New
York State Board of Real Property Services, the exemption base shall be
multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the total
assessed value of the parcel on such final assessment roll (after
accounting for any physical or quantity changes to the parcel since the
immediately preceding assessment roll) and the denominator of which
shall be the total assessed value of the parcel on the immediately
preceding final assessment roll. The result shall be the new exemption
base. The exemption shall thereupon be recomputed to take into
account the new exemption base, notwithstanding the fact that the
Assessor receives the certification of the change in level of assessment
after the completion, verification and filing of the final assessment roll.
In the event that the Assessor does not have custody of the roll when
such certification is received, the Assessor shall certify the recomputed
exemption to the local officers having custody and control of the roll,
and such local officers are hereby directed and authorized to enter the
recomputed exemption certified by the Assessor on the roll. The
Assessor shall give written notice of such recomputed exemption to the
property owner, who may, if he or she believes that the exemption was
recomputed incorrectly, apply for a correction in the manner provided
by Title 3 of Article 5 of the New York State Real Property Tax Law for
the correction of clerical errors.
C. The following table shall illustrate the computation of the tax
exemption, if any:
§ 256-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-16
1:727
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 50%
2 45%
3 40%
4 35%
5 30%
6 25%
7 20%
8 15%
9 10%
10 5%
D. No exemption pursuant to this article shall be granted unless:
(1) The construction, alteration, installation or improvement was
commenced subsequent to the effective date of this article.
(2) The cost of construction, alteration, installation or improvement
exceeds the sum of $50,000.
(3) The construction, alteration, installation or improvement is
completed as may be evidenced by a certificate of occupancy or
other appropriate documentation as provided by the owner.
E. No exemption shall be granted concurrent with or subsequent to any
other real property tax exemption granted to the same improvements to
real property except where, during the period of such previous
exemption, payments in lieu of taxes or other payments were made to
the local government in an amount that would have been paid on such
improvements had such property been granted an exemption pursuant
to this section. In such case, an exemption shall be granted for a
number of years equal to the ten-year exemption granted pursuant to
this section less the number of years the property would have been
previously exempt from real property taxes.
F. Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of
such real property on a form prescribed by the State Board of Real
Property Services. Such application shall be filed with the Assessor of
the Town having the power to assess property for taxation on or before
the appropriate taxable status date of the Town or county and within
one year from the date of completion of such construction, alteration,
installation or improvement.
G. If the Assessor is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to this article, he or she shall approve the application and
such real property shall thereafter be exempt from taxation and special
ad valorem levies as herein provided, commencing with the assessment
roll prepared after the taxable status date of March 1 of each year. The
§ 256-16 SMITHTOWN CODE § 256-16
1:728
§ 256-17. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon its filing with the office of
the Secretary of State of the State of New York and the State Board of Real
Property Services.
assessed value of any exemption granted pursuant to this section shall
be entered by the Assessor on the assessment roll with the taxable
property, with the amount of the exemption shown in a separate
column.
H. This article shall not apply to property used primarily for the furnishing
of dwelling space or accommodations to either residents or transients
other than hotels or motels.
I. In the event that real property granted an exemption pursuant to this
section ceases to be used primarily for eligible purposes, the exemption
granted pursuant to this section shall cease.
§ 256-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-17
1:729

ARTICLE V
Historic Property Exemption
[Adopted 2-26-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
§ 256-18. Purpose; applicability to historic property.
Real property altered or rehabilitated subsequent to the effective date of
this article shall be exempt from taxation and special ad valorem levies
as herein provided pursuant to Real Property Tax Law (RPTL) § 444-a and
Chapter 183 of the Laws of 1997.
§ 256-19. Exemption granted; conditions for exemption.
A. Historic property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of any
increase in value attributable to such alteration pursuant to the
following schedule:
Year of
Exemption
Percent of Exemption
1 100%
2 100%
3 100%
4 100%
5 100%
6 80%
7 60%
8 40%
9 20%
10 0%
B. No such exemption shall be granted for such alterations or
rehabilitation unless:
(1) Such property has been designated as a landmark, or is a property
that contributes to the character of an historic district, created by a
local law passed pursuant to § 96-a or 119-dd of the General
Municipal Law;
(2) Alterations or rehabilitation must be made for means of historic
preservation;
(3) Such alterations or rehabilitation of historic property meet
guidelines and review standards in the local preservation law;
(4) Such alterations or rehabilitation of historic property are approved
by the local preservation commission prior to commencement of
work;
§ 256-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-19
1:731
§ 256-20. Application; filing date.
Such exemption shall be granted only by application of the owner or owners
of such historic real property on a form prescribed by the State Board of
Real Property Services. The application shall be filed with the Assessor on
or before the taxable status date (March 1).
§ 256-21. Approval.
Such exemption shall be granted where the Assessor is satisfied that the
applicant is entitled to an exemption pursuant to this article. The Assessor
shall approve such application and such property shall thereafter be exempt
from taxation and special ad valorem levies as herein provided commencing
with the assessment roll prepared on the basis of the taxable status date
referred to in § 256-20 of this article. The assessed value of any exemption
granted pursuant to this article shall be entered by the Assessor on the
assessment roll with the taxable property, with the amount of the exemption
shown in a separate column.
§ 256-22. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon its filing with the office of
the Secretary of State of the State of New York and the State Board of Real
Property Services.
(5) Alterations or rehabilitation are commenced subsequent to the
effective date of this article.
§ 256-19 SMITHTOWN CODE § 256-22
1:732
ARTICLE VI
Converted Condominium Units
[Adopted 2-15-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
§ 256-23. Purpose.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority of Real Property Tax Law
§ 581, Subdivision 1, Paragraph (c), and Chapter 293 of the Laws of 1997.
All definitions, terms and conditions of such statute shall apply to this
article.
§ 256-24. Assessment restriction removed.
The provisions and restrictions of Real Property Tax Law § 581, Subdivision
1, Paragraph (a), and Real Property Law § 339-y, Subdivision 1, Paragraph
(f), shall not apply to converted condominium units within the Town of
Smithtown.
§ 256-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONVERTED CONDOMINIUM UNIT — A dwelling unit held in
condominium form of ownership that has previously been on an assessment
roll as a dwelling unit in other than condominium form of ownership.
§ 256-26. When effective; filing requirements.
This article shall take effect immediately upon its filing with the office of
the Secretary of State of the State of New York and the State Board of Real
Property Services.
§ 256-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-26
1:733

ARTICLE VII
Assessment Exemption for Living Quarters for Parent or
Grandparent
[Adopted 2-27-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
§ 256-27. Purpose.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority of Real Property Tax Law
§ 469 and Chapter 3277 of the Laws of 2000. All definitions, terms and
conditions of such statute shall apply to this article.
§ 256-28. Exemption granted; amount.
§ 256-29. Eligibility.
A. Residential real property constructed, or reconstructed, for the purpose
of providing living quarters for a parent or grandparent, who is 62 years
of age or older, shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of any
increase in assessed value of said residential property resulting from
the aforesaid construction or reconstruction.
B. Such exemption shall not exceed:
(1) The increase in assessed value resulting from construction or
reconstruction of such property; or
(2) Twenty percent of the total assessed value of such property as
improved; or
(3) Twenty percent of the median sale price of residential property as
reported in the most recent sales statistical summary published by
the state board for the county in which the property is located,
whichever is less.
A. No such exemption shall be granted unless:
(1) The property is within the geographical area in which such
construction or reconstruction is permitted; and
(2) The residential property so constructed or reconstructed is the
principal place of residence of the owner.
B. Such exemption shall be applicable only to construction or
reconstruction which occurred subsequent to the effective date of this
section and shall only apply during taxable years during which at least
one such parent or grandparent maintains a primary place of residence
in such living quarters.
C. Such exemption from taxation shall be granted upon an application
made annually, upon a form to be promulgated by the state board, by
the owner of such property to the Assessor of the city, Town, village or
county having the power to assess property for taxation on or before the
§ 256-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-29
1:735
§ 256-30. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon its filing with the office of
the Secretary of State of the State of New York and the State Board of Real
Property Services.
appropriate taxable status date of such city, Town, village or county. If
the assessor is satisfied that the property is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to this section, he shall approve the application and such
residential improvements shall be exempt from taxation and special ad
valorem levies as provided in this section.
D. For the purposes of this article, the term "parent or grandparent" shall
be deemed to include the natural or adopted grandparents and parents
of the owner or the spouse of the owner.
E. Any conviction of having made any willful false statement in the
application for such exemption shall result in the revocation thereof, be
punishable by a civil penalty of not more than $100 and shall disqualify
the applicant or applicants from further exemption for a period of five
years.
§ 256-29 SMITHTOWN CODE § 256-30
1:736
ARTICLE VIII
Assessment Exemption for Volunteer Fire Fighters and Ambulance
Workers
[Adopted 2-25-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003; amended in its entirety
2-28-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006]
§ 256-31. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority of Real Property Tax Law
§ 466-c and Chapter 450 of the Laws of 2002, as amended by Chapters 9
and 648 of the Laws of 2004 as well as Real Property Tax Law § 466-f, and
Chapter 324 of the Laws of 2005. All definitions, terms and conditions of
such statute shall apply to this article.
§ 256-32. Exemption granted.
There shall be exempt from taxation, to the extent provided in this article,
residential real property owned by volunteer fire fighters and ambulance
workers.
§ 256-33. Applicability of exemption; amount.
A. Such exemption from taxation shall be:
(1) Granted upon an application made annually by the owner or the
owner and spouse of such property on forms prescribed by the New
York State Board of Real Property Services, which shall be filed
with the Assessor on or before the applicable taxable status dates.
If the Assessor is satisfied that the property is entitled to an
exemption pursuant to this article, such application shall be
approved and such residential real property shall then be exempt
from Town taxation, and special ad valorem levies, exclusive of
special assessments as provided in this article.
(2) Applicable only to real property used exclusively for residential
purposes, including cooperatives; provided, however, that in the
event any portion of such real property is not used exclusively for
the applicant's residence but is used for other purposes, such
portion shall be subject to taxation, and the remaining portion only
shall be entitled to the exemption provided by this article.
B. Such exemption shall not exceed 10% of the assessed value of such real
property.
C. No such exemption shall be granted to an enrolled member of an
incorporated volunteer fire company, fire department or incorporated
voluntary ambulance service unless:
(1) The applicant resides in the Town of Smithtown which is served by
such incorporated volunteer fire company, fire department or
incorporated voluntary ambulance service;
§ 256-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-33
1:737
§ 256-34. Certification of enrolled members; filing of eligibility
lists.
(2) The property is the primary residence of the applicant; and
(3) The applicant has been certified by the authority having
jurisdiction for the incorporated volunteer fire company or fire
department as an enrolled member of such incorporated volunteer
fire company or fire department for at least five years or the
applicant has been certified by the authority having jurisdiction for
the incorporated voluntary ambulance service as an enrolled
member of such incorporated voluntary ambulance service for at
least five years.
D. Any enrolled member of an incorporated volunteer fire company, fire
department or incorporated voluntary ambulance service who accrues
more than 20 years of active service, and is so certified by the authority
having jurisdiction for the incorporated volunteer fire company, fire
department or incorporated voluntary ambulance service, shall be
granted the exemption as authorized by this article for the remainder of
his or her life as long as his or her primary residence is located within
Suffolk County.
E. No applicant who is a volunteer fire fighter or volunteer ambulance
worker who, by reason of such status, is receiving any benefit under the
provisions of Article 4 of the New York Real Property Tax Law on the
effective date of this article shall suffer any diminution of such benefit
because of the provisions of this article.
F. Any exemption claimed hereunder by an enrolled member of an
incorporated volunteer fire company, fire department or incorporated
voluntary ambulance service may continue to such deceased enrolled
member's unremarried spouse if such member is killed in the line of
duty; provided, however, that:
(1) Such un-remarried spouse is certified by the authority having
jurisdiction for the incorporated volunteer fire company, fire
department or incorporated voluntary ambulance service as an unremarried
spouse of an enrolled member of such incorporated
volunteer fire company, fire department or incorporated voluntary
ambulance service who was killed in the line of duty; and
(2) Such deceased volunteer had been an enrolled member for at least
five years; and
(3) Such deceased volunteer had been receiving the exemption prior to
his or her death.
A. Certification by enrolled members of an incorporated volunteer fire
company, fire department or incorporated voluntary ambulance service
shall be pursuant to rules and regulations promulgated by the
§ 256-33 SMITHTOWN CODE § 256-34
1:738
§ 256-35. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing in the Office of the
Secretary of State and the State Office of Real Property Services.
Commissioner of the Department of Fire, Rescue and Emergency
Services in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Incorporated volunteer fire companies, fire departments and
incorporated voluntary ambulance services shall annually file lists of
their enrolled members eligible for the exemption provided by this
article with the Assessor on or before the appropriate taxable status
dates on a form as prescribed by the New York State Board of Real
Property Services.
§ 256-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-35
1:739

ARTICLE IX
Exemption for Improvements to Residential Property of Physically
Disabled Persons
[Adopted 2-24-2004 by L.L. No. 4-2004]
§ 256-36. Purpose.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority of Real Property Tax Law
§ 459 and Chapter 200 of the Laws of 1983. All definitions, terms and
conditions of such statute shall apply to this article.
§ 256-37. Exemption granted.
There shall be exempt from taxation, to the extent provided in this article,
such improvements made to residential real property to facilitate
accessibility and accommodate the use of such real property for certain
physically disabled persons as defined hereinafter.
§ 256-38. Applicability of exemption.
An improvement to any real property used solely for residential purposes
as a one-, two- or three-family residence shall be exempt from taxation to
the extent of any increase in value attributable to such improvement if such
improvement is used for the purpose of facilitating and accommodating the
use and accessibility of such real property by a resident owner of the real
property who is physically disabled, or a member of the resident owner's
household who is physically disabled, if such member resides in the real
property.
§ 256-39. Eligibility.
To qualify as physically disabled for the purposes of this article, an
individual shall submit to the Assessor a certified statement from a
physician licensed to practice in the state, on a form prescribed and made
available by the State Board of Real Property Services, which states that
the individual has a permanent physical impairment which substantially
limits one or more of such individual's major life activities, except that an
individual who has obtained a certificate from the State Commission for the
Blind and Visually Handicapped stating that such individual is legally blind
may submit such certificate in lieu of a physician's certified statement.
§ 256-40. Application; filing date.
A. Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner or
all of the owners of the real property on a form prescribed and made
available by the State Board of Real Property Services. The applicant
shall furnish such information as the Board shall require. The
application shall be filed together with the appropriate certified
statement of physical disability or certificate of blindness with the
Assessor on or before taxable status date (March 1).
§ 256-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-40
1:741
§ 256-41. Date of construction.
The exemption granted hereunder shall apply to improvements constructed
prior to the effective date of this article.
§ 256-42. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon its filing with the office of
the Secretary of State of the State of New York and the State Board of Real
Property Services.
B. If the Assessor is satisfied that the improvement is necessary to
facilitate and accommodate the use and accessibility by a resident who
is physically disabled and that the applicant is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to this article, the Assessor shall approve the application and
enter the taxable assessed value of the parcel for which an exemption
has been granted pursuant to this article on the assessment roll with
the taxable property, with the amount of the exemption as determined
pursuant to § 256-38 in a separate column. Once granted, the
exemption shall continue on the real property until the improvement
ceases to be necessary to facilitate and accommodate the use and
accessibility of the property by the resident who is physically disabled.
§ 256-40 SMITHTOWN CODE § 256-42
1:742
ARTICLE X
Exemption for Cold War Veterans
[Adopted 1-24-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
§ 256-43. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority of Real Property Tax Law
§ 458-b and Chapter 655 of the Laws of 2007. All definitions, terms and
conditions of such statute shall apply to this article.
§ 256-44. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARMED FORCES — The United States Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force,
and Coast Guard.
ACTIVE DUTY — Full-time duty in the United States Armed Forces, other
than active duty for training.
COLD WAR VETERAN — A person, male or female, who served on active
duty for the period of more than 365 days in the United States Armed
Forces, during the time period from September 2, 1945, to December 26,
1991, was discharged or released therefrom under honorable conditions
and has been awarded the Cold War Recognition Certificate as authorized
under Public Law 105-85, the 1998 National Defense Authorization Act.
LATEST CLASS RATIO — The latest final class ratio established by the State
Board pursuant to Title 1 of Article 12 of the Real Property Tax Law for use
in a special assessing unit as defined in Real Property Tax Law § 1801.
LATEST STATE EQUALIZATION RATE — The latest final equalization rate
established by the State Board pursuant to Article 12 of the Real Property
Tax Law.
QUALIFIED OWNER — A Cold War veteran, the spouse of a Cold War
veteran, or the unremarried surviving spouse of a deceased Cold War
veteran. Where property is owned by more than one qualified owner, the
exemption to which each is entitled may be combined. Where a veteran is
also the unremarried surviving spouse of a veteran, such person may also
receive any exemption to which the deceased spouse was entitled.
QUALIFIED RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY — Property owned by a
qualified owner which is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided,
however, that in the event that any portion of such property is not used
exclusively for residential purposes, but is used for other purposes, such
portion shall be subject to taxation and only the remaining portion used
exclusively for residential purposes shall be subject to the exemption
provided by this article. Such property shall be the primary residence of
the Cold War veteran or the unremarried surviving spouse of a Cold War
veteran; unless the Cold War veteran or unremarried surviving spouse is
§ 256-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-44
1:743
absent from the property due to medical reasons or institutionalization for
up to five years.
SERVICE-CONNECTED — With respect to disability or death, that such
disability was incurred or aggravated, or that the death resulted from a
disability incurred or aggravated in the line of duty on active military, naval
or air service.
§ 256-45. Exemption granted; amount; limitations.
§ 256-46. Application; filing date.
Application for exemption shall be made by the owner, or all of the owners,
of the property on a form prescribed by the State Board. The owner or
owners shall file the completed form in the Assessor's Office on or before
the first appropriate taxable status date. The owner or owners of the
property shall be required to refile each year. Applicants shall refile on
or before the appropriate taxable status date. Any applicant convicted of
A. Qualifying residential real property of a Cold War veteran, as defined
above, shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of 15% of the
assessed value of such property; provided, however, that such
exemption shall not exceed $12,000 or the product of $12,000
multiplied by the latest state equalization rate of the assessing unit.
B. In addition to the exemption provided by Subsection A of this section,
where the Cold War veteran received a compensation rating from the
United States Veterans Affairs or from the United States Department of
Defense because of a service-connected disability, qualifying residential
real property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of the product
of the assessed value of such property, multiplied by 50% of the Cold
War veteran disability rating; provided, however, that such exemption
shall not exceed $40,000 or the product of $40,000 multiplied by the
latest state equalization rate for the assessing unit.
C. Limitations. [Amended 2-6-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
(1) The exemption from taxation provided by this section shall be
applicable to county, city, Town, school and village taxation, if
separately authorized thereby.
(2) If a Cold War veteran receives the exemption under § 458 or 458-a
of the Real Property Tax Law, the Cold War veteran shall not be
eligible to receive the exemption under this article.
(3) The state enabling legislation and § 256-45C(3) previously limited
the exemption to a period of 10 years. This may be altered pursuant
to Chapter 290 of the Laws of 2017, by eliminating the ten-year
limitation period at local option. It is the intent and purpose of this
local law amendment to remove the aforesaid limitation period for
Town tax levy purposes.
§ 256-44 SMITHTOWN CODE § 256-46
1:744
willfully making any false statement in the application for such exemption
shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in the Penal Law.
§ 256-47. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon its filing with the office of
the Secretary of State of New York and the State Board of Real Property
Services.
§ 256-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-47
1:745

ARTICLE XI
Superstorm Sandy Assessment Relief
[Adopted 11-21-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 256-48. Legislative purpose and findings.
The purpose and intent of this article is to grant assessment relief for the
2012/2013 tax year for real property located in the Town of Smithtown
impacted by Superstorm Sandy.
§ 256-49. Adoption of Superstorm Sandy Assessment Relief Act of
New York State.
The Town of Smithtown hereby adopts the provisions of the Superstorm
Sandy Assessment Relief Act of New York State in its entirety.87
§ 256-50. Election of assessment relief.
The Town of Smithtown hereby elects to provide assessment relief for real
property that lost the following specified percentages of its improved value
due to Superstorm Sandy, as classified by the Assessor, pursuant to § 4
of the Superstorm Sandy Assessment Relief Act, by reducing the assessed
value attributable to the improvements on the 2012/2013 tax roll, provided
that any exemptions which the property may be receiving shall be adjusted
as necessary to account for such reduction in the total assessed value, by
the following percentages:
Percentage Loss of Improved Value
Percentage Reduction of
Improved Assessed Value
At least 10% but less than 20% 15%
At least 20% but less than 30% 25%
At least 30% but less than 40% 35%
At least 40% but less than 50% 45%
At least 50% but less than 60% 55%
At least 60% but less than 70% 65%
At least 70% but less than 80% 75%
At least 80% but less than 90% 85%
At least 90% but less than 100% 95%
At least 100% 100%
§ 256-51. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of this
article shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
87.Editor's Note: See L. 2013, Ch. 424, approved 10-22-2013.
§ 256-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-51
1:747
thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 256-52. When effective.
This article shall become effective immediately upon filing with the New
York State Secretary of State.
§ 256-51 SMITHTOWN CODE § 256-52
1:748
Chapter 259
TAXICABS
§ 259-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Taxicab Ordinance of
the Town of Smithtown."
§ 259-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall govern the interpretation of this chapter
unless otherwise expressly defined herein:
LICENSE — Due authorization, in writing, as provided herein which permits
a person to operate a business for the transporting of persons for hire, using
therefor only vehicles actually owned by him.
PERMIT — Due authorization, in writing, as provided herein which permits
a natural person to operate a motor vehicle for hire.
PERSON — Includes natural persons, corporations, limited liability
corporations, close corporations, holding companies, copartnerships,
unincorporated associations or any other organizations of two or more
persons.[Amended 2-29-2000]
TOWN — Includes all areas within the Town of Smithtown, exclusive of
areas wholly within any incorporated village.
§ 259-3. License required.
A. Each and every person engaging in or carrying on the business of
transporting persons for hire by motor vehicle from point to point
within the Town, whether independent or affiliated in any way, form or
manner with any other person engaging in or carrying on the business
of transporting persons for hire by motor vehicle from point to point
within the Town, shall possess a valid license therefor that has been
duly issued or reissued by the Town Clerk as hereinafter provided.
[Amended 2-29-2000]
B. No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle in the business of
transporting persons for hire within the Town unless a permit therefor
shall have been duly issued or reissued by the Town Clerk as
hereinafter provided.
C. Any license holder under Subsection A above who wishes to act as a
driver or operator under Subsection B above shall be required to also
obtain a permit under Subsection B. [Added 8-23-1983; amended
2-29-2000]
§ 256-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-4
1:749
§ 259-4. Application for license or permit. [Amended 7-10-1979;
12-7-1982; 8-23-1983; 7-24-1990; 5-12-1992; 4-5-1994; 2-29-2000;
7-22-2003; 6-10-2008]
A. To procure a license required by § 259-3A, or any renewal thereof, a
verified application shall be made to the Department of Public Safety
setting forth the following information:
(1) The name and residence address of the applicant. If the applicant is
a corporation, partnership or other business entity, the applicant
shall also provide the name and address thereof and the names and
residence addresses for all principals, officers, directors, partners
and members.
(2) The residence and business addresses of the applicant during the
past five years. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or
other business entity, the applicant shall also provide the business
and residence addresses for all principals, officers, directors,
partners and members.
(3) The applicant's business(es) for the past five years. If the applicant
is a corporation, partnership or other business entity, the applicant
shall also provide the business(es) for all principals, officers,
directors, partners and members for the past five years.
(4) The place of business and the telephone number to be maintained
by the applicant, if the application is granted.
(5) Proof that all operator-owners shall be subject to call during the
hours of the day and night so that the public convenience and
necessity shall be served.
(6) The make, type, seating capacity and registration number of each
vehicle to be employed in the business, together with the full name
and address of the owners of said vehicle. All vehicles must have a
valid New York State taxicab registration.
(7) The names and addresses of all drivers who will be operating
vehicles for the license applicant, as well as copies of their permits
to operate such vehicles, as issued pursuant to § 259-3B and
§ 259-4B herein.
(8) Proof that each vehicle in § 259-4A(6) is insured against liability in
at least the minimum limits required by the laws of State of New
York for personal injury and property damage, which insurance
shall be maintained in force during the period covered by the
license. [Amended 11-30-2017]
(a) Proof of insurance shall provide that the Town of Smithtown
receive 30 days' prior written notice of cancellation.
(b) Proof of insurance shall set forth the name, local address and
telephone number of the insurance agent.
§ 259-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 259-4
1:750
(c) Cancellation. If the insurance coverage required under this
subsection is suspended or cancelled for any reason
whatsoever, any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be suspended until such time as proof of reinstatement or
replacement of an acceptable, current and valid policy is filed
with the Town Clerk.
(9) Proof of workers compensation insurance; or workers
compensation insurance waiver if the applicant is a sole proprietor.
(10) Individual photographs (three of each principal, each two inches by
two inches).
(11) The applicant shall furnish the Department of Public Safety with a
full set of the applicant's fingerprints. [Amended 2-26-2009]
(a) The applicant shall be charged a fee of $140, which fee shall
include the cost for a full search and retain from the Division of
Criminal Justice Service. Said fee shall be collected by the
Town of Smithtown. [Amended 12-17-2009]
(b) The Department of Public Safety shall take the applicant's
fingerprints and forward said prints to the Division of Criminal
Justice Service for a complete criminal background and
investigation upon receipt of the appropriate fee.
(c) The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall review all
information provided by the Division of Criminal Justice
Service in connection with the applicant's criminal background
and investigation.
(12) If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other business
entity, the applicant shall furnish the name, address, and date of
birth of each and every principal, officer, director, partner, and
member, as well as the percent of ownership interest of each such
person, and an affidavit from each such person describing his or
her duties and responsibilities.
(13) The applicant shall provide a record of a prior conviction or
convictions of any crime for which the applicant plead or was found
guilty. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other
business entity, it shall also provide a record of a prior conviction or
convictions of any crime for which it plead or was found guilty.
(14) The applicant shall provide a list of any and all pending lawsuits to
which it is a party and an explanation of each pending lawsuit,
including any civil, criminal or administrative proceeding.
(15) The applicant shall provide proof of a valid New York State
Department of Motor Vehicle Inspection for each vehicle listed
under § 259-4A(6).
§ 259-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-4
1:751
(16) The applicant shall provide a statement of the location of the
storage area of the listed vehicles.
(17) The applicant shall provide a statement affirming that any premises
utilized for the storage or repair of any vehicle is in full compliance
with all applicable law, rules or regulations and has full site plan
approval. No license or permit shall be issued unless the applicant
demonstrates that any storage is permissible in the zoning district
in which said vehicles or equipment is located and all permits have
been obtained.
(18) The applicant shall provide any other information or
documentation required by the Town Clerk and/or Department of
Public Safety for the purpose of implementing the intent of this
chapter.
B. To procure a permit required by § 259-3B, or a renewal thereof, a
verified application shall be made to the Department of Public Safety,
which application shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The applicant's places of residence for the past five years.
(3) The applicant's business for the past five years.
(4) The applicant's age, height, weight, color of eyes, color of hair and
place of birth.
(5) Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or
a misdemeanor and, if so, in what court, when, upon what charge,
and the sentence of the court.
(6) Whether the applicant has ever plead been found guilty of a traffic
violation or infraction and, if so, in what court, and when.
(7) Whether the applicant has been previously licensed in such
occupation and, if so, when, where and for what period; if such
license has ever been revoked, the date of revocation and the
reason therefor.
(8) The applicant's chauffeur's license number issued by the New York
State Department of Motor Vehicles.
(9) Whether or not the applicant is of sound health or suffers from
vertigo, epilepsy, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or
mind which might render him unfit to drive or operate a motor
vehicle in such occupation.
(10) Whether the applicant can read and write English.
(11) Whether the applicant is addicted to alcohol or drugs.
§ 259-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 259-4
1:752
§ 259-5. Issuance of permits and licenses; transferability. [Amended
8-23-1983; 6-10-2008]
(12) Applications shall be accompanied by three photographs, each two
inches by two inches, taken within 30 days of the date of the
application.
(13) The applicant shall furnish the Department of Public Safety with a
full set of the applicant's fingerprints. [Amended 2-26-2009]
(a) The applicant shall be charged a fee of $125, which fee shall
include the cost for a full search and retain from the Division of
Criminal Justice Service. Said fee shall be collected by the
Town of Smithtown.
(b) The Department of Public Safety shall take the applicant's
fingerprints and forward said prints to the Division of Criminal
Justice Service for a complete criminal background and
investigation upon receipt of the appropriate fee.
(c) The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall review all
information provided by the Division of Criminal Justice
Service in connection with the applicant's criminal background
and investigation.
(14) The applicant shall provide any other information or
documentation required by the Town Clerk and/or the Department
of Public Safety for the purpose of implementing the intent of this
chapter.
A. The Department of Public Safety shall ascertain whether the
applications referred to in § 259-4 are complete, in due form and/or not
responsive.
B. A permit under § 259-4B shall not be issued to any person whose motor
vehicle abstract indicates a total of 10 penalty points within the
previous two-year period.
C. All applications and documentation shall be submitted to the
Department of Public Safety by December 30 of the year preceding the
year for which the applicant seeks a license or permit. Upon receipt of
any such application and documentation, the Department of Public
Safety shall review same and shall verify the truth and accuracy of said
application and documentation. The Department of Public Safety, in
order to establish the truth or accuracy of the information contained in
the application, may request any information pertinent to the
processing of said application and may, as necessary, request any
additional information during the application process and for the entire
term of said license or permit. If the Department of Public Safety cannot
confirm the truth or accuracy of said material contained in the
application; or if it determines that a material misrepresentation is
contained therein; or if the applicant shall have been convicted of a
§ 259-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-5
1:753
§ 259-6. Duties.
misdemeanor or felony which is determined to render the applicant
unfit to carry on the aforesaid operation; provided, however, that
proper consideration is given to New York State Correction Law §§ 701
through 703-b and §§ 751 through 753 in making any such
determination; or if it determines that applicant to be unfit or incapable
of properly conducting the aforesaid operation, it shall issue a report
to the Town Clerk, who shall deny said application. The Town Clerk
shall notify the applicant within 30 days after receipt of a completed
application as to whether the application shall be approved or denied.
If the application is denied and the applicant has been operating within
the Town prior to the denial, then the applicant shall discontinue all
operations within the Town of Smithtown within 30 days of such
notification. An applicant who is denied a license or a permit hereunder
may request a review by the Town Board, which shall, upon such
request, review the basis for such denial and shall determine whether
such denial shall be affirmed or reversed. [Amended 2-26-2009]
D. A license or permit issued as provided herein shall not be transferable.
A. Operator's duties. Every person who operates a motor vehicle to be
licensed hereunder shall:
(1) Transport persons upon request, unless then under hire or
prohibited from doing so by other provisions of this chapter.
[Amended 6-10-2008]
(2) Search thoroughly the interior of the motor vehicle after the
discharge of each passenger, and any lost or mislaid property found
therein shall be turned over immediately to the local police
department. [Amended 2-29-2000]
(3) Report to the Town Clerk, within 48 hours, any change of his
residence.
(4) Keep the interior and exterior of his motor vehicle clean at all
times.
(5) Display his permit, motor vehicle certificate and rate card
conspicuously at all times as required herein. [Amended
8-23-1983]
(6) Not operate any motor vehicle required to be licensed herein while
his chauffeur's license, permit or the license is suspended or
revoked.
(7) Not allow any other person to use his permit or badge.
(8) Not charge more than the fixed rates hereunder or as amended.
(9) Report to the Town Clerk, within 24 hours, the loss or theft of any
certificate, license, permit or badge.
§ 259-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 259-6
1:754
§ 259-7. Duration of licenses and permits.
§ 259-8. Fees. [Amended 1-10-1984]
The following fees shall be collected by the Town Clerk at the time
applications are presented:
(10) Not transport persons without the payment of a fare, except such
person who is the owner thereof, his agent or employee.
(11) Report to the Town Clerk, within 24 hours, any conviction for any
misdemeanor, felony or traffic infraction. [Added 8-23-1983]
B. Owner's duties. Every person who owns a motor vehicle required to be
licensed hereunder shall:
(1) Be subject to all the duties in Subsection A hereof which apply to
operators.
(2) Inspect the motor vehicle and its equipment at least once during
each week, and if said vehicle does not meet the standards required
for § 259-4A(15) and 259-6A(4), the motor vehicle shall not be used
in the business until it meets said standards. [Amended
8-23-1983; 6-10-2008]
(3) 88Not permit an unauthorized person to operate a motor vehicle for
the transportation of persons for hire.
(4) Be equally responsible with the operator for any violations of this
chapter, where said violation is known by the owner with the
exercise of due diligence on his part. [Amended 8-23-1983]
A. All licenses and permits issued hereunder shall expire at 12:00
midnight on the 31st day of December next following the date of
issuance. Renewal of licenses and permits shall be from January 1 to
12:00 midnight on December 31 next.
B. Applications for the renewal of all licenses and permits shall be made
no earlier than 60 days prior to the expiration dates thereof. An
application for a renewal of any license or permit made after the
expiration date thereof shall be considered a new application and not a
renewal. Where an application for a renewal of any license or permit
has not been approved prior to its expiration and said application has
been submitted prior to its expiration, the Town Clerk may issue a
temporary license or permit for a period not to exceed 60 days.
[Amended 8-23-1983]
A. For the issuance of a business license: $100.
B. For the issuance of a renewal business license: $100.
88.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), requiring repairs to be made within two weeks,
was repealed 8-23-1983.
§ 259-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-8
1:755
§ 259-9. Revocation of licenses and permits.
§ 259-10. Fares.
§ 259-11. Parking.
The Town Board may authorize the Superintendent of Highways to set off
a taxi stand in front of the principal place of business of a license holder,
reserving unto said license holder parking space for one vehicle used in his
taxi business.
§ 259-12. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-23-1983; 2-29-2000;
6-10-2008]
Each and every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment for 10 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for the
C. For the issuance of a permit: $25.
D. For the issuance of a renewal permit: $25.
A. The Town Board may revoke any license or permit issued under the
authority of this chapter if it determines the license or permit holder to
be incapable of properly conducting the business or trade so licensed or
otherwise unfit to conduct said business or trade. Where the Town
Board revokes any license or permit, it shall state the reasons therefor.
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be sufficient
cause for revocation of such licenses and permits. [Amended
8-23-1983; 2-29-2000]
B. A person whose license or permit has been revoked hereunder may not
reapply for the issuance of a new license for a period of at least six
months from the date of revocation thereof.
A. The Town Board may, by resolution or by amendment hereto and from
time to time, set, establish, change, amend or otherwise prescribe the
rates which may be charged hereunder by the owners or operators of
all motor vehicles operated in the business of transporting persons for
hire.
B. The Town Board may, by resolution, prescribe that all rates as
contemplated hereunder shall be determined by a standard metering
device.
C. The Town Board may, by resolution, prescribe methods for computing
rates, rate zones or other means for determining all rates as
contemplated herein.
D. The Town Board may, by resolution, require the posting within vehicles
of rate cards, maps, diagrams or other information designed to advise
passengers of the proper fares or rates.
§ 259-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 259-12
1:756
first offense, and by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for 15
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for a second offense, and by
a fine not less than $2,000 or by imprisonment for 30 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment, for a third or subsequent offense.
Chapter 273
TENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carnivals — See Ch. 119. Fire prevention — See Ch. 164.
§ 273-1. Permit required; exception. [Amended 2-29-2000]
A. No tent covering an area of more than 120 square feet shall be erected,
maintained, operated or used except with a permit from the Building
Director of the Town of Smithtown. For community facility uses, as
noted in the Table of Use Regulations,89 such permit shall be issued for
a stated period up to four months within any twelve-month period and
shall be revocable for cause. For business uses, as noted in the Table of
Use Regulations,90 such permit shall be issued for a stated period of up
to two weeks, including multiple such periods up to four months within
any twelve-month period and shall be revocable for cause. An
inspection fee of $25 shall be paid for each additional inspection for
such multiple periods. Application shall be made on a proper form and
shall include plans drawn to scale, showing details including, but not
limited to, structure, materials, supports and platforms. In addition to
such structural details, said plans shall include details as to the location
of the tent on the proposed site, as well as exits, aisles, seating
arrangements and means of egress within the tent. Such nonstructural
details shall be reviewed by the Fire Prevention Division of the
Department of Public Safety and shall be approved thereby upon their
compliance with the applicable sections of the Fire Code of the State of
New York. The Building Department shall not issue a permit except
upon the application's compliance with the provisions of this chapter
and the applicable sections of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code. [Amended 5-8-2007; 2-5-2013]
B. No permit shall be required under this chapter, provided that said tent
is an accessory use to a special event, parade or outdoor assemblage for
which a permit is required and has already been issued pursuant to
Chapter 119, Special Events, of the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, said tents shall fully comply with the
89.Editor's Note: See the Tables of Use Regulations included at the end of Ch. 322, Zoning.
90.Editor's Note: See the Tables of Use Regulations included at the end of Ch. 322, Zoning.
§ 259-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 273-1
1:757
§ 273-2. Fire watchers required.
One or more qualified persons to serve as fire watchers shall be employed
by all circuses, carnivals or other exhibitions where large crowds assemble.
They shall familiarize themselves with all fire-protection facilities and fire
prevention features and with the condition of exits and shall patrol the
entire tent area during the time of occupancy. They shall see that the aisles
and exitways are kept open and that no smoking rules are enforced.
§ 273-3. Standards. [Amended 2-5-2013]
The design, construction, flameproofing, location, maintenance and use of
tents for assembly shall be in compliance with the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code.
§ 273-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of any ordinance of the Town of Smithtown shall be guilty of an offense
punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both; however, for the purpose of
confirming jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers, such violations
shall be deemed to be misdemeanors, and for such purposes only all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm, association or corporation
violating any provisions of any ordinance of the Town of Smithtown shall
be subject to a penalty in a sum not exceeding $50 for the first such
violation and in a sum not exceeding $100 for any subsequent violation,
said penalties to be recoverable in a civil action in the name of the Town of
Smithtown as damages.
Chapter 277
(RESERVED)
Chapter 281
TOW TRUCKS
§ 281-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Tow Truck Ordinance
of the Town of Smithtown."
§ 281-2. Purpose.
It is, therefore, the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish an orderly
system for the safe and expeditious removal of damaged and/or disabled
provisions of this chapter, as well as the applicable provisions of
Chapter 119.
§ 273-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § 281-2
1:758
motor vehicles from the roads of the Town of Smithtown, to supervise
and control the operation of towing businesses within the Town, to ensure
that, when towing services are selected from a rotating list maintained at
the behest of the Town, motor vehicles damaged or disabled are towed
to convenient and certain locations and to protect the public from frauds,
overcharges and similar abuses.
§ 281-3. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, the following words for the purposes
of this chapter shall have the meanings herein indicated:
ACCIDENT — Any incident or occurrence in which one or more motor
vehicles come in contact with each other or other objects, thereby causing
the vehicles to be inoperable.
APPLICANT — A person who is applying for a towing business license.
BODY SHOP — A motor vehicle repair shop as defined in, and holding a
license as required by, the State of New York Motor Vehicle Repair Shop
Registration Act.91
CONTAINMENT AREA — Any place where tow trucks and/or motor vehicles
are stored and shall be in compliance with § 281-12E of this chapter.
DRIVER — Any person operating a tow truck upon the roads within the
Town.
DUTY OPERATOR — A licensed tower called from the duty roster.
FOR HIRE — Includes any incident where a fee, charge or other
consideration is directly or indirectly imposed for towing, and it shall
include any case where any person makes repairs on a towed vehicle for
a consideration and no charge is expressly imposed for the towing of such
vehicle.
GARAGE — Any place where mechanical repairs of motor vehicles are
conducted.
HEAVY-DUTY TOW TRUCK — A tow truck capable of righting and towing a
motor vehicle over four tons, with a minimum sixteen-ton boom capacity.
OPERATE — Includes the control and direction for the use of a motor
vehicle and the use of a vehicle for towing from places within the Town.
PERMIT — A certificate issued by the Town Clerk.
PERMITTEE — A person who is the holder of a valid towing permit.
TOWER — Includes a person owning or controlling one or more tow trucks
and driving or operating or causing any such vehicle to be operated upon
the public highways for hire.
TOWING — The carrying, lifting or moving of a motor vehicle by another
motor vehicle.
91.Editor's Note: See Vehicle and Traffic Law § 398 et seq.
§ 281-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 281-3
1:759
TOWING BUSINESS — The operation of one or more tow trucks for hire.
TOWN — The unincorporated area of the Town of Smithtown outside the
incorporated villages located within the Town of Smithtown, whether on
private property or on the roads of the Town.
TOW TRUCK — A motor vehicle which is designed or equipped for carrying,
lifting or moving another motor vehicle.
WINCHING — To hoist, haul or push, by a winch not connected with a
boom or not connected to the operation of towing, upon a flatbed.[Added
2-12-2002]
YARD FEE — Includes any fee, charge or other consideration directly or
indirectly imposed by the tower on the owner of a towed vehicle other than
towing, storage or repair of the vehicle.
§ 281-4. Permit required. [Amended 7-22-2003; 4-4-2006;
6-10-2008]
No person, firm or corporation shall operate a tow truck or other motor
vehicle designed for or capable of towing other motor vehicles for hire
within the Town of Smithtown unless such operator shall have obtained a
permit therefor from the Town Clerk as hereinafter provided, except that
such operators whose businesses are principally housed and/or situated
outside the Town of Smithtown may enter the Town to remove any motor
vehicles from any body and fender repair shop, gasoline service station with
facilities for auto repairs or specialized automobile repair facility or private
residence or to travel through the Town without such permit.
§ 281-5. Requirements for permit issuance; application. [Amended
7-22-2003; 4-4-2006; 6-10-2008]
A. No permit shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation unless the
same is actually engaged in the operation of a body and fender repair
shop, gasoline service station with facilities for automotive repairs or
specialized automobile repair facility, which business is principally
housed and/or situated within the Town of Smithtown and is not in
violation of any of the provisions of the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
B. Application for permit. To procure a permit pursuant to § 281-4 or any
renewal thereof, a verified application shall be made to the Department
of Public Safety setting forth the following information:
(1) The name, residence address and business address of the
applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other
business entity, the applicant shall also provide the name and
address thereof and the names and residence addresses for all
principals, officers, directors, partners and members.
(2) The registration number, vehicle identification number and the
make, model and year of each vehicle to be operated and the
equipment on each vehicle and its lifting and towing capacity.
§ 281-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 281-5
1:760
(3) The applicant shall furnish the Department of Public Safety with a
full set of the applicant's fingerprints. [Amended 2-26-2009]
(a) The applicant shall be charged a fee of $140, which fee shall
include the cost for a full search and retain from the Division of
Criminal Justice Service. Said fee shall be collected by the
Town of Smithtown. [Amended 12-17-2009]
(b) The Department of Public Safety shall take the applicant's
fingerprints and forward said prints to the Division of Criminal
Justice Service for a complete criminal background and
investigation upon receipt of the appropriate fee.
(c) The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall review all
information provided by the Division of Criminal Justice
Service in connection with the applicant's criminal background
and investigation.
(4) If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other business
entity, the applicant shall furnish the name, address, and date of
birth of each and every principal, officer, director, partner, and
member, as well as the percent of ownership interest of each such
person, and an affidavit from each such person describing his or
her duties and responsibilities.
(5) The applicant shall provide a record of a prior conviction or
convictions of any crime for which the applicant plead or was found
guilty. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other
business entity, it shall also provide a record of a prior conviction or
convictions of any crime for which it plead or was found guilty.
(6) The applicant shall provide a list of any and all pending lawsuits to
which it is a party and an explanation of each pending lawsuit,
including any civil, criminal or administrative proceeding.
(7) The applicant shall provide a statement affirming that any premises
utilized for the storage or repair of any vehicle is in full compliance
with all applicable law, rules or regulations and has full site plan
approval. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant
demonstrates that any storage is permissible in the zoning district
in which said vehicles or equipment is located and all permits have
been obtained.
(8) The applicant shall provide a statement of the location of the
storage area of the listed vehicles.
(9) The applicant shall provide any other information or
documentation required by the Town Clerk and/or Department of
Public Safety for the purpose of implementing the intent of this
chapter.
§ 281-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 281-5
1:761
(10) Each vehicle operated by the permittee shall be insured for a
minimum $100,000/$300,000 bodily injury and $15,000 property
damage automobile liability insurance; and the business shall be
insured with general liability insurance by an insurance company
duly authorized by the New York State Insurance Department to do
business in the State of New York.
(11) The following shall accompany all applications for a tow truck
permit:
(a) Department of Public Safety Inspection Report of Vehicle(s).
(b) Copies of insurance identification cards and policies indicating
coverage and limits as required under this chapter.
(c) Proof of workers' compensation insurance; or workers'
compensation insurance waiver if the applicant is a sole
proprietor.
(d) Copies of New York State registrations for all vehicles, which
shall be in the applicant's and/or business's name.
(e) A certificate of occupancy for the premises.
(f) A New York State motor vehicle repair shop certificate and
number.
(g) A New York State sales tax certificate of authority.
(h) A site inspection report from the Department of Public Safety
Investigation Division.
(i) Day, evening and emergency telephone numbers.
(j) Copy of rental/lease agreement if premises not owned by
applicant.
(k) Individual photographs (three of each principal, each two
inches by two inches).
(l) Business certificate (UCC verification if required).
(m) Business seal and notarized statements of acceptance and
compliance.
C. All applications and documentation shall be submitted to the
Department of Public Safety by December 30 of each year preceding
the year for which the applicant seeks a permit. Upon receipt of any
such application and documentation, the Department of Public Safety
shall review same and shall verify the truth and accuracy of said
application and documentation. The Department of Public Safety, in
order to establish the truth or accuracy of the information contained in
the application, may request any information pertinent to the
processing of said application and may, as necessary, request any
§ 281-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 281-5
1:762
§ 281-6. Permit fee.
additional information during the application process and for the entire
term of said permit. If the Department of Public Safety cannot confirm
the truth or accuracy of said material contained in the application; or
if it determines that a material misrepresentation is contained therein;
or if the applicant shall have been convicted of a misdemeanor or
felony which is determined to render the applicant unfit to carry on
the aforesaid operation; provided, however, that proper consideration
is given to New York State Correction Law §§ 701 through 703-b and
§§ 751 through 753 in making any such determination; or if it
determines the applicant to be unfit or incapable of properly conducting
the aforesaid operation, it shall issue a report to the Town Clerk, who
shall deny said application. The Town Clerk shall notify the applicant
within 30 days after receipt of a completed application as to whether
the application shall be approved or denied. If the application is denied
and the applicant has been operating within the Town prior to the
denial, then the applicant shall discontinue all operations within the
Town of Smithtown within 30 days of such notification. An applicant
who is denied a permit hereunder may request a review by the Town
Board, which shall, upon such request, review the basis for such denial
and shall determine whether such denial shall be affirmed or reversed.
[Amended 2-26-2009]
D. Prior to receiving any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, the recipient of said permit shall sign a sworn statement that
said permittee has:
(1) Read all terms, conditions, requirements and provisions of this
chapter;
(2) Understands the terms, conditions, requirements and provisions of
this chapter;
(3) Agrees to abide by all terms, conditions, requirements and
provisions set forth in this chapter; and
(4) Understands and agrees that any violation of any term, condition,
requirement or provision of this chapter may result in an
immediate suspension of all permits issued under this chapter to
the permittee, until such time as a permit revocation hearing can
be held and determination is made thereon.
A. No permit shall be issued unless a permit fee of $50 per vehicle listed
on the application is paid to the Town Clerk.
B. If the applicant wishes to be placed upon the duty rotation list at the
Fourth Precinct, he/she shall pay an additional fee of $150 to the Town
Clerk.
§ 281-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 281-7
1:763
§ 281-7. Identification on trucks.
Each vehicle for which a permit has been issued shall have a medallion
securely affixed to or printed on its driver's side and shall have legibly
inscribed permanently on its side and printed in letters not less than three
inches high the name and business address of the permittee and the permit
number assigned to the vehicle.
§ 281-8. Expiration of permits.
Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on the first day of
February following the issuance thereof.
§ 281-9. Soliciting work prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle for which a permit has been issued to
be operated on any public or private street or highway within the Town of
Smithtown for the purpose of soliciting towing and/or repair work at the
scene of any motor vehicle accident or breakdown on private property or on
a public or private street or highway.
§ 281-10. Towing lists. [Amended 6-10-2008]
A list of all persons, firms and corporations operating vehicles for which
permits have been issued shall be provided to the Fourth Precinct of the
Suffolk County Police Department by the Department of Public Safety for
the purpose of allowing the equitable distribution of all towing operations,
including responses to accidents and mechanical breakdowns causing the
obstruction of traffic.
§ 281-11. Approved lists of responding vehicles.
A. Any permittee that meets the requirements set forth in § 281-12 shall
be placed upon an approved list of responding vehicles at the Fourth
Precinct of the Suffolk County Police Department. That permittee may
be called upon to remove disabled motor vehicles from public highways
within the Town of Smithtown, called the "accident roster." At the
permittee's option, he/she may be placed on the non-accident roster at
the Suffolk County Police Department. From such list the permittee may
be called to remove motor vehicles, which are obstructing traffic as a
result of mechanical breakdowns, from the public highways within the
Town of Smithtown. The applicant may notify the Fourth Precinct that
he/she does not wish to be placed on one or more of the various rosters.
B. Any permittee that has been placed on the accident and/or non-accident
roster and that operates one or more vehicles with a lifting and towing
capacity in excess of four tons shall be placed on an additional approved
list of responding vehicles at the Fourth Precinct of the Suffolk County
Police Department. That permittee may be called to remove vehicles
from the public highways within the Town of Smithtown which are
involved in accidents and/or mechanical breakdowns and which the
§ 281-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 281-11
1:764
§ 281-12. Requirements for approved list placement.
No permittee shall be placed upon an approved list of responding vehicles
by the Fourth Precinct unless the following requirements are met:
police officer at the scene has determined to require heavy towing
equipment, which list shall hereinafter be referred to as the "heavyduty
roster."
C. Any permittee that has been placed on the accident, nonaccident or
heavy-duty roster and that operates a vehicle capable of a flatbed tow
shall be placed on an additional approved list of responding vehicles at
the Fourth Precinct of the Suffolk County Police Department. That
permittee may be called to remove vehicles from the public highways
within the Town of Smithtown which are involved in accidents and/or
mechanical breakdowns and which the police officer at the scene has
determined to require a vehicle capable of flatbed towing, which list
shall hereinafter be referred to as the "flatbed roster." [Added
4-10-2001]
A. The permittee shall maintain a twenty-four-hour towing service to
respond to emergency calls.
B. Each vehicle operated by the permittee shall be equipped with a
crowbar, a shovel, emergency flashing red lights affixed to said tow
truck, a working broom, a hacksaw, an axe, a CO2 foam fire
extinguisher, a carton containing at least one dozen red railroad-type
flares, dual rear wheels or four-wheel drive, a push bar, a tow bar, a
lifting boom, a power-operated winch with a four-ton minimum lifting
capacity, dolly wheels or flatbed carrier, flashing hazard lights (a
minimum of two red facing the rear of the truck and a minimum of two
amber facing the front of the truck), an emergency first-aid kit, safety
chains, a minimum of 100 feet of three-eighths-inch steel cable and
jumper cables.
C. Each vehicle operated by the permittee shall be insured for a minimum
$100,000/$300,000 bodily injury and $15,000 property damage
automobile liability insurance; and the business shall be insured with
general liability insurance by an insurance company duly authorized by
the New York State Insurance Department to do business in the State of
New York. [Amended 6-10-2008]
D. Rates and charges.
(1) The permittee shall agree to charge not more than the following
maximum rates for towing, regardless of the distance, within the
Town of Smithtown when called by the Suffolk County Police
Department, Fourth Precinct. [Amended 2-12-2002; 3-26-2002;
4-4-2006; 12-14-2010; 4-24-2014]
(a) Passenger cars.
§ 281-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 281-12
1:765
[1] For all passenger cars, regardless of weight, and all other
motor vehicles with a weight of not more than two tons:
$125 per tow at all times.
[2] For all dolly tows: $60 in addition to the normal charge.
[3] For all flatbed tows: $160 only when a vehicle is incapable
of being towed by a conventional tow truck and the police
officer at the scene deems the necessity of a flatbed tow.
[4] For winching: A flat fee of $45.
(b) Other.
[1] For trucks, buses and all other motor vehicles with a
weight of two tons or more: $250 per tow, heavy-duty.
[2] A reasonable extra charge may be made of $75 per half
hour for labor and services to right an overturned truck or
automobile or motor vehicle or to remove from the
highway any motor vehicle incapable of being towed, at
any time of the day or night.
(c) For storage: $30 per day or any part thereof and $35 per day
after seven days.
(d) The charging of yard fees is prohibited.
(e) Speedy Dry: $10 per bag.
(2) The permittee shall not solicit or receive any consideration,
commission or other endorsement from any source, other than the
above charges, for the delivery of any vehicle to any location and/or
body shop, repair shop or specialty garage. The charging of a fee to
clean up an accident scene is prohibited.
(3) The Town Board may modify, from time to time, any rate, charge or
fee set forth under this chapter by Town Board resolution.
E. The permittee shall maintain on its premises a six-foot-high fenced
containment area of not less than 2,500 square feet with a locked gate
for the storage of disabled, damaged or wrecked vehicles removed from
public property under the provisions of this chapter. This containment
area shall be used by one permittee only, and there shall be only one
containment area per site.
F. The permittee shall agree to respond to all emergency calls of the
Fourth Precinct Desk Officer, Suffolk County Police Department,
regardless of the hour of the day or the distance to the scene of the call,
provided that its equipment is not otherwise employed or deployed and
provided that the designated point is within the Town of Smithtown.
G. Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway
shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
§ 281-12 SMITHTOWN CODE § 281-12
1:766
§ 281-13. Rotation of duty operators.
§ 281-14. Requests for other towers.
Any owner or operator of a vehicle involved in an accident or a mechanical
breakdown causing obstruction of traffic may request a permittee other
than the duty operator, provided that the permittee is on one or more
rosters and the request is made to the police officer in charge at the scene
before an emergency call is made.
highway from such vehicle pursuant to the New York State Vehicle and
Traffic Law § 1219(c).
H. No permittee shall refuse or fail to remove a wrecked, damaged or
disabled vehicle from a road, street or highway after having agreed to
respond to an emergency call for the purpose of removing said vehicle.
[Added 3-11-1997]
A. The Precinct Commander of the Fourth Precinct, Suffolk County Police
Department, shall cause to be placed upon each roster, by name,
principal, location and telephone number, each permittee that has
complied with the requirements set forth in § 281-12.
B. Permittees shall be placed on each roster in the order in which they are
approved, and each permittee shall be entered only once regardless of
how many vehicles for which it holds permits or how many locations it
operates from.
C. The Precinct Commander of the Fourth Precinct, Suffolk County Police
Department, shall require that a copy of each roster be on file at the
communication desk at the Fourth Precinct.
D. The Suffolk County Police Department is hereby authorized to
designate one permittee at a time from each roster on a call-to-call
basis in the order in which they appear on the roster to receive
emergency calls from the Fourth Precinct, and each such permittee in
turn shall be known as the "duty operator."
E. Should more than one tow truck be deemed necessary by the police
officer in charge at the scene, the duty operators shall be sent to the
scene in rotation and shall have their choice of vehicles according to
that rotation. The first to arrive, however, shall assist the police officer
or officers in clearing vehicles and debris from the public highway,
regardless of their place in the rotation.
F. In any case where a duty operator has not arrived at the scene within
30 minutes from the dispatch time, to be recorded by the Fourth
Precinct of the Suffolk County Police Department, or has arrived with
equipment not adequate to perform the requested services, he shall
lose his turn in the rotation and shall not be entitled to receive any
compensation for responding.
§ 281-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 281-15
1:767
§ 281-15. Requests for alternate destinations.
Any owner or operator of a vehicle involved in an accident or a mechanical
breakdown causing obstruction of traffic may request the duty operator to
remove the vehicle to a body and fender shop, gasoline service station with
facilities for auto repairs or specialized automobile repair facility or private
residence located in the Town of Smithtown other than the duty operator's
premises, provided that the request is made, in writing, on an approved
form which shall be supplied by the duty operator.
§ 281-16. Written records.
§ 281-17. Removal from approved lists. [Amended 9-7-1993]
The Town of Smithtown may request that the Suffolk County Police
Department, Fourth Precinct, remove from one or more rosters any
permittee whom the Department of Public Safety Investigation Division has
determined, after investigation, has failed to abide by any one or more of
the requirements set forth in this chapter.
§ 281-18. Suspension or revocation of permits; other penalties.
§ 281-19. Hearing procedure.
A. Each permittee on a roster must maintain a written record of all tow
and service calls within the Town of Smithtown. These records will
include the name and address of the vehicle owner, the time and date of
the call, the location of the disablement, the location of the destination
of the tow and the amount charged.
B. These written records will be made available to any investigating
authority for a period of six months from this date.
A. Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended
or revoked by the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown after notice
and hearing for any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the
time and place of said hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage
prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address at least 10 days
prior to the date set for hearing. Said hearing shall be conducted in a
manner wherein the accused permittee is afforded due process of law.
C. At the conclusion of said hearing and as a result of the evidence
adduced therein, the Town Board may, in its discretion, revoke said
permit or, in lieu thereof, suspend the subject permit for a specified
period of time and/or censure the permittee and/or impose a fine not to
exceed $5,000.
A. The Town Clerk shall publish notice of the time and place of any hearing
provided for herein, which shall be previously set by the Town Board.
§ 281-15 SMITHTOWN CODE § 281-19
1:768
§ 281-20. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the abovementioned
provisions of any ordinances of the Town of Smithtown shall be
guilty of an offense punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both. However,
for the purpose of conferring jurisdiction upon the courts, such violations
shall be deemed misdemeanors. Equipment violations shall be subject to
a mandatory sum of $50 and any subsequent equipment violation not to
exceed $200. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm, association
or corporation violating any other provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a penalty in a sum not exceeding $2,500 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 15 days; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. A conviction
under this chapter is a violation of the law. In addition to such fine, the
defendant shall pay all costs and expenses incurred by the Town in
determining such violation. The foregoing shall be in addition to all
remedies available under the law to the Town of Smithtown.
§ 281-21. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon its adoption and publication
in accordance with the provisions of the Town Law.
Chapter 285
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Board — See Ch. 21.
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
Environmental and coastal quality
review — See Ch. 151.
Excavations and regrading — See Ch. 154.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 248.
The notice shall contain the subject matter of the hearing and the date,
place and hour designated therefor. In addition, if the hearing is for
revocation or suspension of a permit, the Town Clerk shall mail a copy
of said notice to the permittee concerned at the business address shown
upon the most recent application of such permit, not less than 10 days
nor more than 20 days from the date fixed for the public hearing.
B. The notice required herein shall be published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Smithtown, no less
than 10 days nor more than 20 days from the fixed date.
C. Upon any hearing for the suspension or revocation of a permit, the
permittee involved shall be entitled to be represented by legal counsel
and to present such testimony or other evidence in his own behalf as
may be relevant to the subject matter of the hearing.
§ 281-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 281-21
1:769
§ 285-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Tree Preservation and
Land Clearing Law of the Town of Smithtown."
§ 285-2. Findings; intent.
It has been established that trees stabilize the soil, control water pollution
by preventing soil erosion and flooding, absorb air pollution, provide us
with oxygen, yield advantageous microclimatic effects, have an intrinsic,
aesthetic quality, offer a natural barrier to noise and provide a natural
and valuable habitat for wildlife in our area and that the removal of trees
deprives all segments of our society of these benefits while disrupting the
ecological systems of which they are a part. It is, therefore, the intent of the
Town Board of the Town of Smithtown in enacting this chapter to regulate
the destruction and removal of trees to secure these various benefits to the
maximum extent possible for the present and future inhabitants of the Town
of Smithtown.
§ 285-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meanings ascribed herein:
HABIT — The natural growing characteristics of any tree, which includes
branch spread and distribution, branch height above ground and root
spread and distribution.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal
corporations or governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes all unimproved real property and improved
property which is either subject to further subdivision within the zoning
district in which it is located or, if nonresidential, is subject to an expansion
or replacement of existing facilities thereon which would result in a greater
percentage of lot area covered by either buildings or appurtenant facilities
in conformance with the Building Zone Ordinance of the Town of
Smithtown.92
TREE — Any living perennial, woody plant, its branches, its root system and
its trunk, if greater than three inches in diameter measured three feet from
ground level and six feet in height measured from ground level.
§ 285-4. Permit required for tree removal; consent of owner.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner of real property, as defined herein, or
any other person to cause, permit or allow the removal, destruction or
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Zoning.
§ 281-21 SMITHTOWN CODE § 285-4
1:770
§ 285-5. Exemptions.
substantial alteration of the habit of any tree on any parcel of real
property, as defined, in the Town of Smithtown without first having
obtained a permit issued therefor as prescribed by this chapter.
B. Notwithstanding the definition of real property heretofore and herein
or anything herein to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, association, corporation or partnership to cut, damage, carve, dig
or remove any tree, whether living or not living, standing or downed, in
the Town of Smithtown, on public or private property, without the prior
written consent of the owner of said property. Any person having the
prior written consent of the owner or owners of the property to cut,
damage, carve, dig or remove a tree or trees shall display the written
consent of the owner, upon demand, to any police officer of the Suffolk
County Police Department and/or Town of Smithtown employees
empowered to enforce local laws and ordinances of the Town of
Smithtown. The failure to display the written consent of the owner to
cut, damage, carve, dig or remove any tree or trees, upon request by
enforcing authorities, shall be a violation of this chapter. [Amended
7-25-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995]
A. No person shall be required to obtain a permit as prescribed by § 285-4
of this chapter for the destruction or removal of trees in accordance
with accepted ornamental procedures.
B. No person shall be required to obtain a permit as prescribed by § 285-4
of this chapter for the furtherance of normal business activities for
legally established commercial nurseries.
C. No person shall be required to obtain a permit as prescribed by § 285-4
of this chapter for the destruction or removal of trees incidental to
surveying and soil investigation activities.
D. Any person doing business as a public utility subject to the jurisdiction
of the New York State Public Service Commission and duly constituted
public agency authorized to provide utility services shall be permitted
to trim, prune or alter any tree which may otherwise be lawfully altered
by such person, to the minimum extent necessary to enable such person
to repair existing utility services, without having first obtained a permit
issued therefor pursuant to § 285-4 of this chapter.
E. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to real property included
in any approved subdivision or approved site plan when such approval
was granted prior to the effective date of this chapter.
F. The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation shall
be permitted to trim, prune or remove trees pursuant to the New York
State Environmental Conservation Law without the necessity of
obtaining a permit pursuant to this chapter.
§ 285-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-5
1:771
§ 285-6. Application procedure.
G. Any person required by the Code of the Town of Smithtown to submit an
application to the Planning Board for preliminary and/or final approval
of a proposed subdivision or an application for site plan approval to the
Board of Site Plan Review after the effective date of this chapter shall
submit with the application the information required for a permit
pursuant to § 285-6 of this chapter. No subdivision or site plan shall be
approved by the Planning Board or Board of Site Plan Review without
due consideration of such information and of the findings and purpose
of this chapter, as stated in § 285-2. Approval of a subdivision as a final
plat and the official filing of said final plat in the office of the County
Clerk or approval of a site plan by the Town of Smithtown Board of Site
Plan Review pursuant to this section shall relieve the applicant for such
approval of the necessity to obtain a permit required by § 285-4 of this
chapter. The approval and filing in the office of the County Clerk of a
subdivision as a final plat or approval by the Town of Smithtown Board
of Site Plan Review of a site plan pursuant to this section shall give
force and effect to the tree preservation and land clearing plan, as
submitted, subject to such conditions as may be imposed by either the
Planning Board or Board of Site Plan Review upon their approval. In the
event that any person does exceed an approval granted pursuant to this
section for the removal, destruction or alteration of the habit of trees,
he shall be guilty of a violation punishable pursuant to § 285-11 of this
chapter. [Amended 7-25-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995]
H. Owners of residentially zoned real property, as defined in § 285-3 of this
chapter, within the Town of Smithtown shall be permitted to remove, by
hand-held tools or equipment only, a total of 10 trees located on the
property upon which they reside, each year, for personal use, without
first having to obtain a permit pursuant to § 285-4 of this chapter.
[Amended 9-24-1985 by L.L. No. 12-1985; 7-25-1995 by L.L. No.
4-1995]
I. Owners of a residentially zoned parcel of land which is not further
subdividable, in accordance with the Zoning Code of the Town of
Smithtown,93 shall not be required to obtain a permit pursuant to
§ 285-4 of this chapter to remove trees located on their property.
[Added 7-25-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995]
A. Every applicant for a permit required by this chapter shall submit an
original application and 11 conformed copies to the Town Clerk of the
Town of Smithtown. [Amended 7-25-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995]
B. Such application shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and the owner, if not the
same.
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 322, Zoning.
§ 285-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 285-6
1:772
§ 285-7. Application fee.
Each application shall be filed with the Town Clerk and be accompanied by
an application fee of $100.
§ 285-8. Hearing.
Upon receipt of the application, the Town Clerk shall forward such
application to the Conservation Board of the Town of Smithtown. The
Conservation Board of the Town of Smithtown shall seek the guidance of
(2) The purpose of the proposed tree removal.
(3) The site of the proposed tree removal.
(4) An attached sketch or plan of the area on a scale of not less than
one inch equals 100 feet, clearly labeled "Tree Preservation and
Land Clearing Plan," which clearly indicates the following:
(a) An outline of existing heavily wooded areas on the site,
showing tree types and size ranges.
(b) The location and size of any trees to be removed.
(c) The location and size of any trees to be preserved.
(d) The location of any improvements on the property.
(e) Topographic contours at two-foot intervals in the United States
Coast and Geodetic Survey datum of mean sea level.
(f) A key map on a scale of one inch equals 600 feet, clearly
indicating the relationship of the subject property to the
primary and secondary highway system and main
intersections.
(g) The building zone district(s) in which the subject real property
and all adjoining parcels are located.
(5) The name and address of all owners of land within a radius of 200
feet from the perimeter of the real property upon which the tree
removal is proposed, as shown on the current Town of Smithtown
assessment roll.
(6) A paper print of a recent aerial photograph, 8 1/2 inches by 14
inches, or folded multiples thereof, at a scale of one inch equals 200
feet, including the subject property so identified and, at a
minimum, all lands within a radius of 500 feet of the perimeter of
the subject real property.
(7) A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) in accordance
with Chapter 153, Stormwater Management and Erosion and
Sediment Control, of the Code of the Town of Smithtown. [Added
5-17-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
§ 285-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-8
1:773
all governmental agencies which may be concerned with the application,
including but not limited to the Regional Office of the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation and the Suffolk County
Planning Commission. The Conservation Board shall review said application
and shall hold a public hearing on such application after causing to have
published a public notice of said hearing in the official newspaper of the
Town not less than 10 days prior to said hearing. In addition, all owners
of lands within a radius of 200 feet from the perimeter of the subject real
property shall be notified by the applicant of the hearing, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, mailed to the address shown on the current Town
of Smithtown assessment roll, not less than 10 days before the hearing.
An affidavit to that effect, together with the receipts, shall be filed with
the Conservation Board at the time of the hearing. At such public hearing
all interested persons or groups may appear. After the public hearing the
Conservation Board of the Town of Smithtown shall report within a
reasonable time to the Town Board its findings and make recommendations
with respect to the application for a permit. Such findings and
recommendations shall take into account the following considerations:
§ 285-9. Issuance of permit; conditions.
The Town Board may adopt a resolution directing the issuance of a permit
herein for the removal, destruction or alteration of the habit of trees,
subject to regulation by this chapter, if it finds that the public interest
will not suffer a significant adverse impact. The Town Board may, at its
discretion, impose conditions upon its approval and the issuance of said
permit.
§ 285-10. Environmental analyst's approval required for certificate
of occupancy. [Amended 2-5-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985; 5-8-2007 by
L.L. No. 5-2007]
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building Director for
any building, structure, premises lot or land unless the Environmental
Protection Director has determined that the tree preservation and land
A. The location and size of the trees to be removed.
B. The condition of the trees with respect to disease and potential for
creating hazardous conditions.
C. The proximity of the trees to existing or proposed structures and utility
appurtenances.
D. The necessity of the removal for the project in question.
E. The environmental effect of the removal.
F. Good horticultural and vegetation management practices.
G. Any of the considerations enumerated in the legislative intent of this
chapter.
§ 285-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 285-10
1:774
clearing plan, as approved or subject to conditions, and all other provisions
of this chapter have been complied with.
§ 285-11. Penalties for offenses.
§ 285-12. Administration. [Amended 2-5-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985;
4-30-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985]
This chapter shall be administered by any Suffolk County police officer,
the ordinance inspectors, the Director of Planning or the Environmental
Protection Director of the Town of Smithtown, who shall have the authority
to promulgate rules and regulations for the effective administration of this
chapter consistent with the legislative intent of this chapter. The Director
of the Planning Department and the Environmental Protection Director
shall have the authority to delegate the administration of this chapter to
appropriate department personnel.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any
rule, regulation or specification promulgated hereunder shall be guilty
of a violation.
B. Any person who shall violate any of the conditions imposed upon the
issuance of a permit under this chapter shall be guilty of a violation.
C. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter or the
rules, regulations and specifications promulgated hereunder or any of
the conditions imposed upon the issuance of a permit pursuant to this
chapter shall be fined in an amount of not less than $100 nor more than
$500 for each tree that was removed or destroyed in excess of those
allowed to be removed or destroyed pursuant to this chapter, or shall be
sentenced to imprisonment not exceeding 15 days for each violation, or
be punished by both fine and imprisonment.
D. In addition to any penalties which may be imposed pursuant to
Subsection C above, any person who violates any provision of this
chapter or any conditions imposed upon the issuance of a permit
pursuant to this chapter may be ordered to restore the premises
damaged by the unlawful destruction or removal of trees to such
suitable conditions as the Town Board may require. In the event that
such person refuses or fails to restore the real property to a condition
ordered by the Town Board, the Town Board may proceed in a court of
competent jurisdiction for an order directing such person to restore
such real property in conformity with the requirements of the Town
Board. In the event that the Town of Smithtown is compelled to restore
such real property, all costs incurred incidental to such restoration shall
be assessed against the real property in question.
§ 285-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-12
1:775
Chapter 288
TRESPASSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beaches and parks — See Ch. 101. Off-road vehicles — See Ch. 299.
§ 288-1. Trespassing restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass upon private property within
the Town of Smithtown or upon public property of the Town of Smithtown,
except such public property of the Town which shall be specifically
designated for the use by the public.
§ 288-2. Construal of trespassing. [Added 3-26-1968]
A person is trespassing within the Town of Smithtown when he enters or
remains unlawfully. A person "enters or remains unlawfully" in or upon
premises when he is not licensed or privileged to do so. A person who,
regardless of his intent, enters or remains in or upon premises which are
at the time opened to the public, does so with license and privilege unless
he defies the lawful order not to enter or remain, personally communicated
to him by the owner of such premises or other authorized person. A license
or privilege to enter or remain in a building which is only partly open to
the public is not a license or privilege to enter or remain in that part of the
building which is not opened to the public. A person who enters or remains
upon unimproved and apparently unused land which is neither fenced
nor otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders does
so with license and privilege unless notice against trespass is personally
communicated to him by the owner of such land or other authorized person
or unless such notice is given by posting in a conspicuous manner.
§ 288-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of any ordinances of the Town of Smithtown shall be guilty of an offense
punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both; however, for the purpose of
confirming jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers, such violations
shall be deemed to be misdemeanors, and for such purposes only all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm, association or corporation
violating any provisions of any ordinance of the Town of Smithtown shall
be subject to a penalty in a sum not exceeding $50 for the first such
violation and in a sum not exceeding $100 for any subsequent violation,
said penalties to be recoverable in a civil action in the name of the Town of
Smithtown as damages.
§ 285-12 SMITHTOWN CODE § 288-3
1:776
Chapter 293
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tow trucks — See Ch. 281.
Off-road vehicles — See Ch. 299.
Abandoned vessels — See Ch. 303.
§ 293-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words "vehicle," "abandoned vehicle,"
"owner," "park," "parking" or "parked" and "public highway" shall have the
meanings as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
§ 293-2. Prohibited acts.
§ 293-3. Removal of vehicles.
A. It is hereby declared to be unlawful to park or abandon any vehicle on
any public highway within the Town of Smithtown during a snowstorm,
flood, fire or other extreme public emergency which affects that portion
of the public highway upon which said vehicle is parked or abandoned.
B. It is hereby declared to be unlawful to leave any vehicle unattended on
or adjacent to any public highway within the Town of Smithtown where
said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic.
C. It is hereby declared to be unlawful to display or park a vehicle for the
purpose of selling the same on the following roads within the Town of
Smithtown or within the lines of the following highways or within a
distance of 250 feet therefrom of any intersecting street:
(1) State Route 25.
(2) State Route 25A.
(3) Terry Road between State Route 25 and Annette Avenue.
(4) Smithtown Boulevard.
(5) Veteran's Memorial Highway.
(6) State Route 347, also known as "Smithtown Bypass."
(7) Indian Head Road.
(8) Motor Parkway.
(9) Route 111.
§ 288-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-3
1:777
§ 293-4. Redemption of vehicles; fees. [Amended 2-12-2002]
After removal of a vehicle pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the
Superintendent of Highways, or other personnel as authorized by the Town
Board, may store such vehicle in a suitable storage area at the expense of
the owner. Such owner or person in charge of the vehicle may redeem the
same upon payment to the Superintendent of Highways or other agent of
the Town at the impound location of the amount of all expenses actually
and necessarily incurred in effecting such removal, such charges not to
exceed the following: for all passenger cars, trucks, buses and all other
motor vehicles, $250, together with any charges for storage, such storage
charges not to exceed $10 per day or fraction thereof.
§ 293-5. Report of removal.
The Superintendent of Highways or other Town personnel as authorized
by the Town Board to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall, without
delay, report the removal and the disposition of any vehicle removed as
provided herein to the Suffolk County Police Department and request the
Suffolk County Police Department to ascertain the owner of the vehicle or
person having custody of the same and to notify him of the removal and
disposition of such vehicle and of the amount which shall be required to
redeem the same.
A. The Town Board is hereby authorized to appoint, by resolution, such
Town department or personnel as deemed appropriate to administer
§ 1224 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, as such section
may from time to time be amended, with respect to the collection,
storage and disposition of abandoned vehicles.
B. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any public highway within
the Town of Smithtown during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other extreme
public emergency which affects that portion of the public highway upon
which said vehicle is parked or abandoned, said vehicle may be
removed at the direction of the Superintendent of Highways or other
personnel so authorized by the Town Board.
C. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway within the
unincorporated limits of the Town of Smithtown, where said vehicle
constitutes an obstruction to traffic, said vehicle may be removed at the
direction of the Superintendent of Highways or other personnel so
authorized by the Town Board.
D. Any vehicle which shall be abandoned in any public place within the
Town of Smithtown is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be
taken into custody by the Superintendent of Highways or other
personnel so authorized by the Town Board.
§ 293-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 293-6
1:778
§ 293-6. Town use of abandoned vehicles.
Pursuant to § 1224, Subdivision 6(a), of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, as such
section may from time to time be amended, the Town Board may convert
to Town use in any calendar year up to 1% of its unclaimed vehicles having
a wholesale value in excess of $750 or two such vehicles, whichever is
greater.
§ 293-7. Exemptions. [Added 4-9-1985 by L.L. No. 5-1985]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: police,
fire and emergency ambulance service vehicles and state and municipal
vehicles being used for official business, including but not limited to snow
removal and flood control.
§ 293-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of any ordinances of the Town of Smithtown shall be guilty of an offense
punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both; however, for the purposes
of confirming jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers, such violations
shall be deemed to be misdemeanors, and for such purposes only all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm, association or corporation
violating any provisions of this chapter of the Code of the Town of
Smithtown shall be subject to a penalty in a sum not exceeding $50 for the
first such violation and in a sum not exceeding $100 for any subsequent
violations, said penalties to be recoverable in a civil action in the name of
the Town of Smithtown as damages.
Chapter 296
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Safety Board — See Ch. 78.
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 81.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 245.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 259.
Tow trucks — See Ch. 281.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 293.
Off-road vehicles — See Ch. 299.
§ 293-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-8
1:779
Chapter 299
(RESERVED)
Chapter 303
VESSELS, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boat basin and mooring areas — See Ch. 108.
§ 303-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED VESSEL — Includes any vessel, float, houseboat, raft,
catamaran or buoy which remains unmoved in the same location at any
public dock, wharf, marina, bulkheading, berth or slip, when no specific
permission has been granted by the Town of Smithtown, for a period of five
days.
§ 303-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, association, partnership or corporation being the owner or
custodian of an abandoned vessel as described in § 303-1 herein shall be
deemed to have abandoned such vessel, unless the vessel shall have been
reported as missing or stolen to the police within 48 hours after the owner
or custodian knew or should have known that the vessel was missing or
stolen. Such owner or custodian shall be guilty of an offense punishable
by a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or
both; however, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, such violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor,
and for such purposes only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors
shall apply to such violations.
§ 303-3. Town to remove vessels.
Any abandoned vessel within the unincorporated area of the Town of
Smithtown is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be taken
into custody by the Town Board or any department or employee of the
Town of Smithtown designated by it, including but not limited to the
Superintendent of Highways. Said vessel shall be removed to such public
storage place as shall be designated by the Town Board for such purpose.
§ 303-4. Notice; disposition of vessels.
§ 293-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 303-4
1:780
§ 303-5. Sale of unredeemed vessels.
The sale of any abandoned vessel shall be a public sale, upon notice of such
sale being posted conspicuously in at least three public places within the
Town of Smithtown not less than 10 days prior to the date of sale. The Town
Board may cause such additional publicity of such sale as in its discretion
the Town Board shall deem necessary.
§ 303-6. Redemption by owner.
The owner of any abandoned vessel taken into custody hereunder may
redeem the same upon the payment to the Town of Smithtown of all
reasonable and necessary expenses incident to the removal, custody and
storage of such vessel and upon presentation of proof of ownership
satisfactory to the Town Board.
§ 303-7. Proceeds of sale.
The proceeds of any sale hereunder, less the reasonable and necessary
charges and expenses incident to the removal, custody and sale of such
abandoned vessel, shall be deemed abandoned property, subject to the
provisions of the Abandoned Property Law.
§ 303-8. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "Abandoned Vessel
Ordinance of the Town of Smithtown."
Chapter 308
WASHING AND DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 164. Water pollution — See Ch. 315.
A. The Town Clerk shall post conspicuously, in at least three public places,
notice that such vessel has been taken into custody and requesting the
owner to redeem the same.
B. In the event that the owner's address is known, the Town Clerk shall
notify the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, that said
abandoned vessel has been taken into custody and requesting the
owner to redeem the same.
C. In the event that the owner shall fail or refuse to redeem such
abandoned vessel within 30 days after such posting and mailing, if the
address of the owner is known, then the Town Board shall cause the
same to be sold as herein provided.
§ 303-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-8
1:781
§ 308-1. Legislative intent.
By adoption of this chapter, the Town Board of the Town of Smithtown
declares its intent to regulate in a manner consistent with the interests
of the citizens of the Town of Smithtown the maintaining and operation
of washing machines, drying machines and dry-cleaning machines.
Unattended, such machines constitute a threat to the safety and welfare of
the community. Therefore, recognizing the need for regulation, the Town
Board of the Town of Smithtown does enact this chapter.
§ 308-2. Attendant required.
Each person who is the owner, operator or manager of a business of
maintaining and operating for hire washing machines, drying machines
and/or dry-cleaning machines for personal or individual use, where made
available to the public, shall provide an attendant who is familiar with the
operation of such machines installed on the premises used therein and who
shall be in attendance at all times when such machines are made available
for hire.
§ 308-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOR HIRE — Includes the making available of the washing machines, drying
machines and/or dry-cleaning machines to any person for use by any means,
requiring the payment of money by the insertion of coins or otherwise.
PERSON — Includes an individual, any combination of individuals or a
corporation.
§ 308-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of any ordinance of the Town of Smithtown shall be guilty of an offense
punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both; however, for the purpose of
confirming jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers, such violations
shall be deemed to be misdemeanors, and for such purposes only all
provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm, association or corporation
violating any provisions of any ordinance of the Town of Smithtown shall
be subject to a penalty in a sum not exceeding $50 for the first such
violation and in a sum not exceeding $100 for any subsequent violation,
said penalties to be recoverable in a civil action in the name of the Town of
Smithtown as damages.
Chapter 312
§ 303-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 308-4
1:782
WATER DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 170.
Street excavations — See Ch. 245, Art. IV.
Waterways — See Ch. 318.
§ 308-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-4
1:783

ARTICLE I
Title; Definitions
§ 312-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Ordinances of the
Smithtown and St. James Water Districts."
§ 312-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD or BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — Refers to the Board of
Commissioners of the Smithtown and St. James Water Districts, Town of
Smithtown, County of Suffolk, State of New York.
DISTRICT — Refers to the Smithtown and St. James Water Districts, Town
of Smithtown and St. James Water Districts, Town of Smithtown, County of
Suffolk, State of New York.
PERMANENT INSTALLATION, PERMANENT SERVICE, PERMANENT
PERMIT OR PERMANENT LICENSE — Includes all other installations,
services, permits or licenses authorized by the Board.
TEMPORARY INSTALLATION, TEMPORARY SERVICE, TEMPORARY
PERMIT OR TEMPORARY LICENSE — Includes any installation, service,
permit or license not intended to be continued in operation for a period of
more than 12 months.
§ 312-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-2
1:785

ARTICLE II
Application for Water Service
§ 312-3. Application; consent to regulations.
§ 312-4. Arrearages to be paid.
No application for the use of water or of the facilities of the Smithtown and
St. James Water Districts will be approved, nor will any permit or license
be granted, nor will any contract or agreement be entered into with any
person, until all charges or arrearages due from such person to the water
district shall have been paid.
§ 312-5. Advance payment of fees.
Applications or contracts for the use or installation of water or water
facilities of the district shall not be acted upon, approved or accepted by the
Board of Commissioners until and unless the full amount of all fees, deposits
and installation charges, as the same shall from time to time be fixed by
this chapter or by the Board of Commissioners for the use of such water or
water facilities, shall have been paid to the district.
§ 312-6. Temporary or extraordinary service permits.
Applications for temporary service or for service of an extraordinary nature
will be accepted. Written applications will be issued, and temporary or
extraordinary water service will be supplied, provided that it does not
interfere with the use of water for fire protection and for general purposes.
A. All applications for the use of water or for the use of the water facilities
of the district or for the introduction of water into any premises or for
the extension of any pipe or main for the conveyance of such water
must be made in writing, on a form to be provided by the district and
signed by the owner of the property on which the installation is to be
made or his legally authorized agent.
B. No water shall be used for any purpose other than that represented in
the application.
C. Upon the acceptance by the Board of Commissioners of such
application, said application shall constitute a contract between the
applicant and the district, obligating the applicant to pay to the district
the established rate or rates as the same shall from time to time be fixed
by the Board of Commissioners and shall constitute an agreement to
comply with and be bound by the ordinances, rules and regulations of
the Smithtown and St. James Water Districts and amendments thereto.
Such applications shall also constitute a consent by the applicant and
consumer for all commissioners, agents, officers or employees of the
district to enter upon any property owned or leased by the applicant or
consumer for the purpose of installing, inspecting or removing for
repair any meters.
§ 312-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-6
1:787
Applicants requiring temporary or extraordinary water service shall
reimburse the district for all expenses incurred by the district in connection
with providing said temporary or extraordinary service.
§ 312-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § 312-6
1:788
ARTICLE III
Billing
§ 312-7. Bills payable at district office.
All bills for water or water facilities used or services performed by the
district shall be paid to the district at its business office, Lake Avenue, St.
James, New York. All checks in the payment of bills shall be received subject
to collection.
§ 312-8. Service classification; new services prorated.
§ 312-9. Bills for residences or dwellings.
§ 312-10. Discontinuance of service.
Any consumer may effect a discontinuance of service upon written request
therefor to the district. No allowance will be made for discontinuance of
service for the unexpired portion of any month unless said written notice is
received by the district on or before the 15th day of said month.
A. All bills are payable in accordance with the terms of the applicable
service classification.
B. For new service installed at any time during the billing period, the
minimum charge and the amount of water allowed thereunder will be
prorated according to the number of days remaining to complete the
billing period, after service has been made available.
A. Meters will be read quarterly, and consumers will be billed quarterly.
B. No bills will be rendered or payment accepted for less than the
minimum charge, except as prorated for new consumers and
discontinuing service pursuant to § 312-10 below.
C. Meters for consumers other than dwellings or residences may be read
quarterly, and in such cases bills may be rendered annually at the
discretion of the Board of Commissioners.
§ 312-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-10
1:789

ARTICLE IV
Deposits, Fees, Rates and Minimum Charges
§ 312-11. Prepayment required.
No person or corporation shall take water of the district or otherwise utilize
the facilities of the district for any purpose without the permission of the
district, obtained upon written application and upon payment of all fees,
charges and deposits required in connection therewith.
§ 312-12. Smithtown Water District rents and rates; metered
service. [Last amended 2-5-2019 (Board of Water Commissioners)]
Charges for water service shall be established and adopted by the Town
Board of the Town of Smithtown acting as the Board of Water
Commissioners. A schedule of current fees shall be available at the Town
Clerk's office and the Smithtown Water District.
§ 312-12.1. St. James Water District rents and rates; metered
service. [Last amended 2-5-2019 (Board of Water Commissioners)]
Charges for water service shall be established and adopted by the Town
Board of the Town of Smithtown acting as the Board of Water
Commissioners. A schedule of current fees shall be available at the Town
Clerk's office and the St. James Water District.
§ 312-13. Penalty for late payment.
A. Bills for water service shall become due and payable to the district, at
its office, on the 15th day of the month following the quarter-annual
period for which the bill is rendered. If such bills are not paid within 60
days from the date of the beginning of the quarter-annual period
following that for which the bill is rendered, a penalty of 10% of the
amount of such bills will be added thereto. If such bills remain unpaid
for a period of 60 days from the date of the beginning of the period
following that for which the bills are rendered, water service shall be
discontinued until such bills, together with the penalties, are paid.
B. Water rents and charges and penalties thereon are liens upon the real
property upon which the water is used, and on or before the day when,
under the Town Law, preliminary estimates of expenditures are
required to be submitted, the Superintendent shall file with the Town
Clerk a statement showing all water rents and charges, with penalties
thereon, unpaid for more than 60 days, which said statement shall
contain a brief description of each property to which the water was
supplied or upon which charges were incurred, the name of the owner
liable to pay the same, so far as may be known, and the amount
chargeable to such owner.
C. Such rents, charges and penalties shall not be collected by the
Superintendent of the District after the filing of such statement with the
§ 312-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-13
1:791
§ 312-14. Rates outside district.
The Board may establish a different or other rate for any water or service
furnished outside the geographical limits of the Smithtown and St. James
Water Districts.
§ 312-15. Sprinkler systems rate.
For a fire sprinkler system, the rate shall be a minimum of $50 per annum
for each system and $0.10 per annum for each sprinkler head in excess of
$500.
§ 312-16. New installation charge.
Town Clerk but may thereafter be paid to the Supervisor until such time
as a statement of such unpaid water rents, charges and penalties is
submitted to the Board of Supervisors for the purpose of levying the
same as a tax against the property affected.
A. An installation charge shall be made for each premises into which water
shall be introduced for permanent consumption. This charge shall
include the following materials and services which shall be furnished by
the district:
(1) A water meter and the setting thereof.
(2) A corporation stop and service clamp.
(3) A tap and inspection of the facilities.
(4) Meter pit covers and ring-style valves.
(5) Where remote reading meters are installed, a curb stop and curb
box in place of meter pit cover.
B. Applicant's responsibility.
(1) The applicant or consumer at his own expense shall:
(a) Furnish and install the meter pit and copper tubing.
(b) Install only meter pit coverings and ring-style valves.
(2) This is in accordance with the specifications on file and obtainable
at the Water District office.
C. Cost for three-fourths-inch service and equipment: $400. [Amended
6-9-1981; 2-5-2019]
D. Cost for one-inch service and equipment: $475.94 [Amended
6-9-1981; 2-5-2019]
94.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, Cost for two-inch water service, which immediately
followed, was repealed 2-5-2019.
§ 312-13 SMITHTOWN CODE § 312-17
1:792
§ 312-17. Plumbers' permits and performance bonds.
§ 312-18. Construction fees.
Persons desiring to use district water for building construction purposes
will be required to make application at the office of the Board therefor,
stating the name and address of the owner of the property and its location,
the estimated cost of building and the estimated length of time of the
construction period and, on receiving the permit, will be required to pay a
minimum charge of $5 for a building costing up to and including $20,000
and $0.25 for each $1,000 of additional cost or fraction thereof. Such permit
will be valid for a period of time only as stated thereon but may be renewed
for thirty-day periods thereafter if, upon investigation, it is found that
conditions warrant renewal. It will not be permitted to use district water for
this purpose through a hour service either on the same or from neighboring
premises. The willful waste of water or any violation of this chapter will be
cause for the discontinuance of the service. If the water is willfully wasted,
the Board may cancel such permit and stop the supply of water. The Board
A. Every plumber shall file with the Board or its authorized representative
a performance bond in the penal sum of $10,000 for each 100 homes or
fraction thereof in which he shall make installations, repairs or
improvements in any twelve-month period. Water main contractors
shall be required to furnish a performance bond in an amount equal to
100% of the total amount of the contract before commencement of
work. Such bonds shall be placed with one or more sureties acceptable
to the Board and shall be conditional that the licensee will pay to the
district the amount of all fines or other expenses imposed by the Board
in connection with the performance of the work of the licensee upon
any facility owned by or which at any time in the future may be owned
by the district and further conditioned that the licensee will indemnify
and save the district, the Board and the employees thereof harmless
from liabilities and all damages and injuries resulting directly or
indirectly from an installation, repair, extension or use of the facilities
of the district performed by him and further conditioned that the
licensee will replace and restore to the satisfaction and approval of the
appropriate government authority all streets and pavement removed by
the licensee in connection with the work performed by him. Such
performance bond is to cover and insure the district against defective
material or workmanship of such installations, repairs or improvements
for a period of one year from the date of inspection by the Smithtown
and St. James Water Districts as herein provided. [Amended
2-5-2019]
B. All water main contractors shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board
that they possess and necessary qualifications (financial, labor,
equipment and otherwise) to successfully complete the work.
C. All plumbers to whom permits are issued shall be duly licensed
plumbers of the Town of Smithtown and licensed by said township
pursuant to its plumbing ordinances.
§ 312-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-18
1:793
reserves the right to make either a flat rate for the service or to require
a meter to be installed. If a meter is installed, it must be placed in an
approved box of two-inch planks with a hinged cover fitted for a padlock to
be provided by the district and so placed that it will not be disturbed during
construction. In the winter, the box must be properly covered with earth
or otherwise made frostproof and must be uncovered, at any time, upon
the request of any member of the Board or its authorized representative
for inspection or reading. Any violation of the rules and regulations of the
Board will be cause for the removal of the meter and the discontinuance of
the service.
§ 312-19. Restoration of service. [Amended 6-9-1981; 3-26-2009]
Whenever it shall be necessary for the district to turn on the water supply
of any consumer at the consumer's request, a minimum service charge of
$25 for turning off and $25 for turning on shall be made.
§ 312-20. Testing meters. [Amended 2-3-1987; 12-2-2008 (Board of
Water Commissioners)]
A consumer's meter will be tested by the district upon receipt of his written
request therefor. In the event that his meter is found to be within the legal
limits of registration as prescribed by the Public Service Commission of
New York State, a charge of $50 shall be made. If the meter is found to be
overregistering, no charge for testing shall be made, and an adjusted bill
shall be rendered.
§ 312-18 SMITHTOWN CODE § 312-20
1:794
ARTICLE V
Installations
§ 312-21. Submeters prohibited.
No more than one premises or building shall be supplied through any single
tap without the written approval of the Board, nor may any district water be
submetered. In all permanent installations, separate and distinct stopcocks
and meters must be provided for each building or premises.
§ 312-22. Meters required.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all water service shall be rendered
and supplied through meters of a make and type approved and furnished
by the Smithtown and St. James Water Districts and shall be of such size as
the Board shall deem proper. The Board reserves the right to grant permits
upon application for the installation of temporary service at a flat rate for
such service or to require that a meter be installed.
§ 312-23. Connections to water mains.
No person shall make any attachment to or connection with the pipes
or mains of the district or make any repairs, additions, extensions or
alterations to the facilities of the district without the prior approval of the
Board, and work shall be performed only by an authorized employee of the
district, a plumber duly licensed by the Town of Smithtown or an approved
water main contractor.
§ 312-24. Tapping restricted.
A. All tapping of the district mains and setting of meters shall be
performed by an authorized employee of the district or by such other
person as the Board shall designate. No plumber or other person shall,
without specific authorization by the Board, tap or otherwise connect,
disconnect or repair any pipe, valve or other appurtenances to any
facility of the district, except that a duly bonded plumber, as defined by
§ 312-17 of this chapter, may make installations and repairs of water
lines and appurtenances on the consumer's side of the meter or curb
stop, provided that said installation or repair shall in all respects
comply with the specifications and requirements as may be established
by this chapter and by the Board of Commissioners.
B. Where a person other than an employee, officer of the district or
bonded plumber shall be authorized by the Board to tap mains and
install or set water meters, he shall post a surety bond covering his
workmanship and material in an amount that shall be satisfactory to the
Board.
§ 312-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-25
1:795
§ 312-25. Inspections of new work.
No water shall be introduced into private pipelines upon any premises until
and unless the same shall have been inspected and approved and, if there is
an inside meter on the premises, until said meter shall have been officially
sealed by the district.
§ 312-26. New installations of meters and underground meter pits.
§ 312-27. Accessibility of meters.
All meters shall be set in an accessible manner in a place approved by the
Board and shall not be obstructed in any manner that will interfere with the
prompt reading, repairing, testing or inspecting thereof.
§ 312-28. Right to enter.
The Board of Commissioners and its authorized employees and agents are
authorized to come upon the premises of the consumer at all times for
the purpose of reading, inspecting, repairing, maintaining or removing or
testing the water facilities, meters and appurtenances through which water
of the district is supplied.
§ 312-29. Setting of meters.
Meters shall be set with the inlet and the outlet in a horizontal plane with
the register on top. No outlet through which water may be taken may be
installed in any line between the main and the meter.
§ 312-30. Stop valves and appurtenances.
A. Except where authorized by the Board of Water Commissioners, all
meters for permanent installations shall be installed, in any accessible
location, in the interior of a dwelling, store or other building and shall
have a provision for remote reading. Meters may be installed in
underground meter pits located, whenever practical, between the curb
and sidewalk, as a special exception, when expressly authorized by the
Board of Water Commissioners.
B. The water meter, accessories and setting thereof; the corporation stop
and service clamp; and the tap and inspection of facilities shall be
supplied and furnished by the district at the expense of the consumer or
owner of the premises, and all other appurtenances shall conform in all
respects to the requirements of this chapter and specifications
established by the Board of Commissioners, which are on file and
obtainable at the Water District Office.
A. A stop valve shall be installed within the building at the closest
practicable point where the service line enters the building. Whenever
the meter shall be located within the building, the stop valves shall be
located on the inlet and outlet side of the meter.
§ 312-25 SMITHTOWN CODE § 312-30
1:796
§ 312-31. Protection and repair of meters.
§ 312-32. Leakage; vacancies.
§ 312-33. Repair and replacement of meters.
B. Whenever the Board permits the meter to be located within the
building, the applicant or consumer shall, at his own expense, install a
curb stop, extension service box and rod between the curb and
sidewalk, in addition to other appurtenances required under § 312-26
and in accordance with specifications on file and obtainable at the
Water District Office.
A. No hot water lines or other units capable of producing heat shall be
located within one foot of the meter.
B. In the event that a meter is damaged or destroyed for any reason
whatsoever, said meter shall be repaired or replaced by the district as
soon as conveniently may be, after notice to the district, at the cost and
expense of the owner of the premises or the consumer.
A. All leaks in any service line or appurtenance into and through which
district water is supplied shall be reported and repaired immediately, at
the cost and expense of the owner or consumer. In the event that such
leak or leaks shall not be promptly reported and repaired, the district
shall have the right to cut off the supply of water to such consumer.
B. Consumers shall have the water shut off when the premises become
vacant. In case a house or other building is to be closed for a time,
especially during cold weather, the owner or consumer must notify the
district in order that the meter may be read and the ring-style valves or
the curb stop be closed. In case of failure to do so, resulting in the
bursting of pipes by freezing, the owner or consumer shall pay for all
water thus lost, the quantity to be estimated by the district and added
to the next bill and paid in like manner as the regular water rental
charge.
A. Meters shall not be tampered with or disturbed by any unauthorized
person. In the event that damage to or destruction of a meter is caused
by such unauthorized tampering or disturbance, the meter shall be
repaired or replaced by the district, at the expense of the owner or
consumer, as soon as conveniently may be done after the district
received notice of such damage or destruction.
B. In the event that any meter fails to register or otherwise becomes out of
order, the consumer shall notify the district immediately.
C. All repair or replacement of meters shall be made by an authorized
employee or agent of the district.
§ 312-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-33
1:797
§ 312-34. Service pipes, fittings and mains.
§ 312-35. Proximity of main to sewage and drain.
No water main or service pipe shall be laid in a sewer or drain trench,
nor will any sewer or drain be permitted in any water main or service pipe
trench. No water main or service pipe will be permitted to pass within seven
feet of any sewage disposal system.
§ 312-36. Location of meter pit.
The meter pit shall be installed between the curb and the sidewalk where
practicable and shall be kept five feet clear of driveways.
D. All meters which, in the opinion of the Board, have become unsuitable
for further use shall be replaced by another meter, at the expense of the
district.
A. Service pipes, fittings, corporation stops, ring-style valves and meters
shall be of such size, make and construction as the district shall deem
proper. Service pipes less than two inches in diameter shall be of pure
seamless copper tubing with bronze fittings of a type and make
approved by the Board. All copper tubing shall be of the following
gauge:
Nominal Pipe Size
(inches)
Outside Dimensions
(inches)
Gauge
(BWG)
3/4 7/8 16
1 1 1/8 16
1 1/4 1 3/8 16
1 1/2 1 5/8 15
B. Service pipes two inches or more in diameter shall be of cast-iron pipe,
Class 150, with protective lining and shall be connected to a tee in the
main with a gate valve and box close to the main, unless a special
exception is authorized by the Board of Water Commissioners.
C. Lead goosenecks shall not be used.
D. No red or white lead or joint compound shall be used on joints between
the main and the meter.
E. All distribution pipes shall be of a quality and weight suitable for
service under a pressure equivalent to at least 330 feet head of water.
F. All permanent water mains hereafter installed within the Smithtown
and St. James Water Districts shall be of at least six inches in diameter.
§ 312-33 SMITHTOWN CODE § 312-37
1:798
§ 312-37. Protection of facilities.
All water pipes, service pipes and appurtenances shall be kept in good
repair and shall be protected from frost and heat and shall be kept in good
repair, at the expense of the consumer.
§ 312-38. Depth of installation.
All water mains and service pipes shall be laid at least four feet six inches
below the surface of the ground.
§ 312-39. Changes in ground elevation.
In the event that a change in ground elevation shall leave any service pipe
inadequately buried or result in a meter pit or other appurtenance of the
water facilities being projected above the ground or being covered with
earth, the consumer shall, at his own expense, have such service pipe or
meter pit raised or lowered, as the case may be, so as to conform to all of
the requirements of the district, this work to be performed by authorized
persons only.
§ 312-40. Street openings and excavations.
§ 312-41. Inspection required before backfilling.
Under no circumstances will any excavation containing water mains,
appurtenances or facilities belonging to the district or through which
district water is to pass be backfilled or covered until and unless such water
mains, appurtenances or facilities have been inspected by a duly authorized
employee or officer of the district.
A. No street or public ground shall be opened or excavated by any
consumer or applicant for water service until and unless said applicant
shall have been granted all permits required by the government
authorities or agencies affected or having a right to pass upon such
opening or excavation, nor until all performance bonds or other
securities and insurance policies that may be required shall have been
obtained and are in force.
B. The consumer or applicant making such street opening or excavation
shall take all precautions for the safety and convenience of the public
and shall assume all responsibility and liability for injury or damages
resulting therefrom and agrees to save and hold the district, the Board,
its agents and employees harmless from all liability for damages or
injuries resulting therefrom.
C. Open trenches shall be guarded with barricades and sufficient warning
lights or flares shall be displayed before sundown and maintained until
sunrise.
§ 312-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-42
1:799
§ 312-42. Notice of completion.
The consumer, applicant or owner shall file with the district a written
report of the completion of all attachments, connections, alterations and
extensions of water pipelines and appurtenances within 24 hours after
such completion, specifying the nature, location and type of attachment,
connection, alteration or extension.
§ 312-43. Inspection of new installations.
§ 312-44. Liability for damages; change in service without notice.
The district, its officers, agents and employees assume no responsibility or
liability for damages, injuries or leakages that may result from an increase
or decrease of pressure or a discontinuance of the supply of water, and
said supply may be cut off or discontinued or the pressure increased or
decreased at any time without notice to the consumer.
§ 312-45. Removal of defective installations.
Whenever it shall be found that a service installation has been made in any
manner other than that approved by the Board, the meter may be removed
and the service discontinued. Water shall not again be introduced into the
premises until the service installation is properly made and approved and
all expenses, charges and deposits paid by the consumer or owner of the
premises.
§ 312-46. Underground sprinkler systems.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, no corporation stop shall be opened
and no water shall be introduced into or permitted to run into any
premises after a new connection with the street main has been made or
a new extension or attachment has been made, unless and until the
pipelines, extensions and attachments have been inspected and
approved by the district.
B. In any unoccupied premises wherein the introduction of water shall
have been authorized or approved by the Board and which shall not
have been disconnected or cut off by the district, it is not required that
the water be cut off or disconnected where minor extensions or
attachments are made; provided, however, that the district shall be
notified of such minor extensions or attachment within 24 hours of the
making thereof. The district reserves the right, however, to require that
the consumer remove any attachments or extensions which do not meet
the requirements of specifications established by this chapter and by
the Board of Commissioners.
A. A prior approval must be obtained from the water district for an
installation of any type of underground sprinkler system.
§ 312-42 SMITHTOWN CODE § 312-46
1:800
§ 312-47. Air-conditioning systems.
No air-conditioning system shall be connected to district water service
unless it is the recirculating type and prior approval for the installation of
the same is obtained from the water district.
§ 312-48. Fire-protection systems.
A check valve with a five-eighths-inch detector meter on a bypass shall be
installed on all separate water main service connections used exclusively for
fire protection. All fire service lines shall be a constant diameter from the
street main to building line. If branch lines are installed, the main header
from the street shall have a flow capacity at least equal to the sum of the
capacities of the various branches.
§ 312-49. Interconnections, cross-connections and contamination.
B. A check valve and an approved vacuum breaker must be installed in the
manner prescribed by the district.
A. Interconnections or cross-connections or any other means whereby
water from other sources except those of the district's wells may be
introduced into the district's mains are strictly prohibited.
B. All public, industrial and commercial buildings and establishments are
required to install vacuum breaker antisiphon devices, approved by the
district, on all plumbing fixtures and other water outlets. Further, the
Board shall have the power to require approved vacuum breaker
antisiphon devices on any other plumbing fixtures or water outlets in
the district when, in the Board's opinion, danger of contamination of the
district's water supply exists.
C. To provide for the installation of pressure-regulating valves in new
homes, said installation shall be charged against water district surplus
accounts. [Added 3-21-1967]
§ 312-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-49
1:801

ARTICLE VI
Tampering with System; Penalties
§ 312-50. Cancellation or suspension of permits.
All permits issued by the Smithtown and St. James Water Districts for the
consumption or use of water and the use of the facilities of the district
are subject to cancellation, revocation or suspension by the Board of
Commissioners without notice. In the event of such cancellation, revocation
or suspension, the district may enter upon any premises whereon any of its
facilities or property shall be located and, in its discretion, remove the same
therefrom.
§ 312-51. Use of hydrants; permits; penalty; fees. [Amended
9-6-1983]
A. No person shall connect to, open or interfere with any fire hydrant or
draw water therefrom without the written consent and approval of the
Board of Water Commissioners or its designee, as provided herein,
except that a Chief of the Fire Department or his authorized assistants
may open or direct the opening of any fire hydrant in the event of a fire
or for fire drill or tournament purposes. Whenever a hydrant has been
so used, the Fire Department shall promptly notify the district of that
fact.
B. Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $250 or 15
days in jail, or both.
C. Procedures and regulations.
(1) A permit is required for each vehicle to be connected to a hydrant.
(2) Application. An application shall be submitted for each vehicle to
the water district, with the following information:
(a) The applicant's name.
(b) The address.
(c) The telephone number.
(d) The truck year and make.
(e) The truck license plate number.
(f) A description of the backflow prevention device.
(3) Connection to the hydrant must be by means of an approved
adaptor and reducer fitting with a one-and-one-half-inch gate valve
and followed by a double check valve (or other backflow-prevention
device, as required) to which the hose will be connected. Hydrants
are to be opened to their full capacity by use of a hydrant wrench
on the operating nut, and the flow started and controlled by the
§ 312-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-51
1:803
§ 312-52. Restoration of service.
In the event that the supply of water to any premises shall be turned off
for any reason, it shall not be turned on thereafter without the consent and
approval of the Board or its authorized representative. In such event, the
water may be turned on only by a duly authorized representative of the
district after all charges, fees and penalties have been paid.
§ 312-53. Emergency curtailment of use; penalty for
noncompliance.
one-and-one-half-inch valve. In no case shall a hydrant be used
to fill a tank vehicle which may contain chemicals (such as tree
sprayers or lawn fertilizers) without the use of a reduced pressure
backflow preventer or permanently attaching piping with an air
gap. Any evidence of damage arising out of the hydrant use
authorized by this permit is to be reported to the Water District
Foreman immediately.
(4) Check. A check in the amount of $62.50 for the first vehicle and $50
for each additional vehicle, made payable to the water district,
must be submitted with each application.
(5) Inspection. Each vehicle must be inspected by the District Foreman
or his delegated assistant.
(6) Permits will be issued to only those vehicles in compliance with the
rules and regulations of the water district and other applicable
rules and at the sole discretion of the Water District Foreman.
D. Permit in driver's possession. The driver of the vehicle must have the
original hydrant permit in his or her possession at all times and present
it to the water district personnel, Suffolk County police or New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation Inspectors, village
police and other authorized individuals upon demand.
E. Designated hydrant. The water district will designate on the hydrant
permit the location of the hydrants permitted to be used. No other
hydrants will be used.
F. Expiration dates of permits.
(1) Tree sprayers. All tree sprayers shall be issued seasonal hydrant
permits for the time period from February 15 to November 30 in a
given year.
(2) Other permits. All other hydrant permits shall be issued for a
maximum period of 30 days.
(3) Permit fees shall not be prorated.
A. In the event of an emergency or whenever, in the opinion of the
Chairman or Deputy Chairman of the Board of Commissioners, the
§ 312-51 SMITHTOWN CODE § 312-53
1:804
§ 312-54. Penalties for offenses; discontinuance of service.
In the event that any person shall violate the terms and provisions of this
chapter or rules and regulations or amendments thereto or of the directions
or requirements of the Board relating to the use of the supply of water, he
may be liable to the district for a civil penalty not to exceed the sum of $50
for each violation. In the event that such person shall be a consumer, all
service to him may be cut off and discontinued and shall not be restored
until such penalty, together with all other costs, charges and deposits, shall
have been paid.
§ 312-55. Siphonage.
water pressure or the supply of the water shall be reduced or is likely
to be reduced so that the general welfare, health or safety is affected
or is likely to be affected, the Chairman or Deputy Chairman of the
Board of Commissioners may order and direct such curtailment of the
use of water or facilities of the district as they may deem necessary.
Notice of such order or direction curtailing the use of water may be
given personally by any officer or employee of the district or by mail.
Publication of such order or direction in the official newspaper of the
district on one occasion shall be deemed due notice to all consumers of
the district.
B. In the event that any consumer shall fail or refuse to comply with such
order or direction after any of the notices heretofore provided shall
have been given, he shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed the
sum of $50 for each violation, payable to the district, and the water
supply furnished to any such violating consumer may be discontinued
until such penalty, together with all other charges, fees and deposits,
shall have been paid.
A. No attachments shall be made to any facility connected to the water
mains of the Smithtown and St. James Water Districts until such
attachment and other accessory facilities have been approved by the
Board of Commissioners or its duly authorized representative. In all
cases where there is a possibility of back siphonage, an approved
vacuum breaker and check valve shall be installed in such manner as
prescribed by the district.
B. No water shall be introduced into any such attachments until an
inspection by the district shall have been made.
§ 312-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-55
1:805

ARTICLE VII
Amendments
§ 312-56. Amendments.
The right is reserved to change or amend this chapter at any time in a
manner provided by law.
§ 312-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 312-56
1:807
Chapter 315
WATER POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Environment and
Waterways — See Ch. 27.
Dredging — See Ch. 138.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 170.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 177.
Dumping in waterways — See Ch. 318.
§ 315-1. Legislative declaration.
In pursuance of the provisions of Subdivision 14 of § 130 of the Town
Law,!BFN!Editor's Note: See now Subdivision 15 of Town Law § 130.!EFN!
to promote the public welfare, health and prosperity of its inhabitants, the
Town Board of Smithtown hereby enacts that the waters and shores of
Smithtown are declared to be among the greatest assets of the Town and of
its inhabitants.
§ 315-2. Pollution of waters prohibited.
No person or corporation shall deposit or discharge or cause to be placed or
discharged into any of the waters of the Town of Smithtown, including Stony
Brook Creek, St. James Harbor, the Nissequogue River and its tributaries
and Sunken Meadows Creek, or place on the shores or banks of said waters
any of the hereafter named substances or any other substance which may
render said waters unfit or undesirable for bathing, boating, fishing or other
recreational purposes or which may be deposited upon the public beaches
or shores of the Town parks or upon the flats or beds containing clams,
oysters, mussels or other shellfish or which may be carried by high tides or
floods into wells or springs along the banks of said waters.
§ 315-3. Forbidden substances.
Such forbidden substances as hereinbefore mentioned shall include
garbage, manure, dead animals, sewage or the outflow from any sewage
disposal plant or drain or drainage system, whether such waste outflow
or drainage be of solids or liquid, or any refuse or chemical or other
substance which may impair or prevent the growth and multiplication of fish
or shellfish in any of said waters or which may or shall interfere with either
the home use or marketability of such fish or shellfish or which shall render
such waters, their banks and shores unpleasant or unsuitable for the abovenamed
purposes of industry or recreation or which shall impair the value of
the real property contiguous to such waters or disturb or interfere with the
repose and comfort of its occupants.
§ 315-4. Penalties for offenses.
§ 312-56 SMITHTOWN CODE § 315-4
1:808
Chapter 318
WATERWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Environment and
Waterways — See Ch. 27.
Beaches and parks — See Ch. 101.
Boat basin and mooring areas — See Ch. 108.
Dredging — See Ch. 138.
Shellfish — See Ch. 233.
Abandoned vessels — See Ch. 303.
Water pollution — See Ch. 315.
§ 318-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Ordinance for Jointly Governing the
Waterways Within the Jurisdiction of the Town of Smithtown and the
Incorporated Villages of Nissequogue and Head-of-the-Harbor."
§ 318-2. Applicable areas.
This chapter shall, except when prohibited by the laws of the United States,
apply to all water and waterways within the jurisdiction of the Town of
Smithtown, including all inland lakes and millponds, and shall apply to
waterways within the jurisdictional limits of any incorporated village within
the boundaries of the Town of Smithtown upon the adoption of an ordinance
A. Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of any ordinances of the Town of Smithtown shall be guilty of
an offense punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both; however, for the
purpose of confirming jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers,
such violations shall be deemed to be misdemeanors, and for such
purposes only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply
to such violations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person, firm,
association or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter or
any ordinance of the Code of the Town of Smithtown shall be subject to
a penalty in the sum not exceeding $1,000 for the first such violation
and a sum not exceeding $2,500 for any subsequent violation and/or
imprisonment of 30 days for a conviction of a first violation and 60 days
for a conviction of a second or subsequent violation, or both, said
penalties to be recoverable in a civil action in the name of the Town of
Smithtown as damages. [Amended 3-20-1990]
B. The imposition of a penalty or fine or other disposition of a violation
shall not excuse or permit a continuance thereof, and each continuance
of a violation after the service of notice, summons or warrant, in a
prosecution or in any other way upon such person, that he is
committing such violation shall constitute a separate and new offense
punishable by a like fine or penalty.
§ 315-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-2
1:809
of substantially like purport by any such incorporated village in accordance
with the provisions and requirements of the Village Law of the State of New
York.
§ 318-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOAT OR VESSEL — Includes every description of watercraft or other
contrivance used or capable of being used as a means of transportation in
the water.
ENFORCING AUTHORITIES — For the purpose of this chapter or any
similar ordinance duly adopted by any incorporated village within the
boundaries of the Town of Smithtown, employees of the Town of Smithtown,
County of Suffolk, or other cooperating municipality, as the case may be, or
duly deputized by the Sheriff of Suffolk County and empowered to exercise
all the authority provided for in § 654 of the County Law of the State of New
York.
MOTORBOAT — Includes any vessel propelled on water, in whole or part,
by an engine or motor, whether inboard or outboard.[Added 7-12-1988]
OWNER OR OPERATOR — Any person or persons, including an individual,
firm, corporation, association or a partnership, owning, operating,
chartering or renting a motorboat.[Added 7-12-1988]
WATER SCOOTERS — A device designed for use by one or two persons
which incorporates a self-propelled, mechanical-driven apparatus which
transports the device and the individual over or through water utilizing a
pressurized stream or jet of water or similar force, such as but not limited to
personal water transportation devices, personal watercraft, scooters, water
skis, water skids or Jet Skis.[Added 7-25-1989]
§ 318-4. Mooring of boats.
A. The location of the mooring facilities and types of mooring permitted in
the various waterways subject hereto shall be under the supervision of
and regulated by the governing body of the municipality having
jurisdiction thereover.
B. No boat or vessel shall be anchored or moored so that it at any time
rests within the lines of any channel, nor shall any boat or vessel anchor
or moor within 50 feet of any channel marker or so as to interfere with
the full use of such channel, nor shall any boat or vessel anchor or moor
within 100 feet of any municipal dock or other marine facility.
C. Boats shall not moor or anchor so as to endanger the safety of or cause
damage to any boat previously anchored or moored nor so as to
interfere with the mooring of any boat or mooring previously laid down.
Any boats so moored or anchored shall be removed by the owner or
person in charge thereof on order of the enforcing authorities.
§ 318-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § 318-4
1:810
§ 318-5. Securing of boats or vessels.
All boats or vessels shall be moored in such a way as to be secure at all
times and under all conditions, and such anchoring or mooring shall be
subject to the supervision of the enforcing authorities.
§ 318-6. Hazards to navigation.
§ 318-7. Municipal dock.
§ 318-8. Use of boats near swimming areas.
No boat or vessel shall cruise or be operated within 200 feet of any lifelines
or bathing float, nor shall it be operated within 300 feet of any public or
private beach or area used for bathing or swimming.
§ 318-9. Speed limits; penalties. [Amended 7-12-1988]
D. If said boat is not removed after orders to so remove it, it may be
removed by or at the direction of the enforcing authorities at the
expense of the owner or person in charge of said vessel, and such
expense may be recovered by civil suit.
A. Any boat or vessel, including nonmechanical boats or vessels, which
becomes a menace to navigation or is unseaworthy or sinks, grounds or
otherwise becomes disabled shall be removed by the owner or person in
charge thereof on order of the enforcing authorities. If such boat or
vessel is not removed after an order to remove it, it may be removed by
or at the direction of the enforcing authorities at the expense of the
owner or person in charge of said boat or vessel.
B. The aforesaid has no application in an emergency situation wherein
either the safety of the boat or vessel and/or its passengers is at stake.
A. No pleasure boat shall be tied up or made fast to any municipal dock or
to other property of the Town of Smithtown or any municipality therein
for a longer continuous period than 10 minutes. In addition to the
penalties provided herein for a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or those of any coordinated village ordinance, the enforcing
authorities may cause any pleasure boat tied up or made fast to any
municipal dock or other property of the Town of Smithtown or any
municipality therein in excess of any continuous period of one hour to
be removed at the expense of the owner or person in charge of such
vessel.
B. The aforesaid has no application in an emergency situation wherein
either the safety of the boat or vessel and/or its passengers is at stake.
A. Unless otherwise lawfully posted, no person who is the owner or
operator of a motorboat shall allow the same to be operated in excess of
45 miles per hour within the waters of this Town.
§ 318-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-9
1:811
§ 318-10. Water scooter prohibition; penalties. [Added 7-25-1989]
B. No boat or vessel shall be operated in Stony Brook Harbor or the
Nissequogue River at a speed in excess of five miles per hour.
C. Penalties for speeding offenses. Every person convicted of a violation of
this section shall, for a first conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of
not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment; for a conviction of a second
violation, both of which were committed within a period of six months,
such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $250 or by
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment; upon a conviction of a third or subsequent violation, all
of which were committed within a period of six months, such person
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment
for not more than 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
A. Purpose.
(1) Due to its scenic and recreational qualities, the operation of water
scooters has caused severe concern for the safety of the people
using and enjoying the Nissequogue River. These water scooters
disturb all matter of shore and shallow wildlife, including but not
limited to wading birds, waterfowl, shore and marsh birds and fish.
Water scooters create excessive amounts of noise which interferes
with the reproduction of wildlife species. This noise also interferes
with the peaceful, quiet enjoyment surrounding the Nissequogue
River.
(2) The Nissequogue River's scenic and recreational qualities make it a
favorite location for fishing and bird- and other wildlife watching.
These same qualities of the river also contribute to a concern for
safety. The narrow, winding portions of the river, although scenic,
do not lend it to all uses. The Nissequogue River's narrow, winding
and constricting portions contribute to a grave safety concern by
creating dangerous blind spots that threaten other users of the
river.
(3) Therefore, it is the intent of the Town Board of the Town of
Smithtown to protect and enhance the quality of the Nissequogue
River and its surrounding environs as well as to protect and
enhance the safety of those individuals enjoying and using the
Nissequogue River.
B. No person shall cruise or operate any water scooter south of the
Smithtown Landing Country Club's southernmost boundary due east
until a point 100 feet east of the mean high-tide mark.
C. Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall, for a first
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $250 or by
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and/or
§ 318-9 SMITHTOWN CODE § 318-10
1:812
§ 318-11. Special provisions for aquatic events.
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit a municipality, having the marine
jurisdiction thereover, from designating, by resolution duly adopted, special
waterskiing areas or from issuing permits for aquatic events, boat races or
otherwise under proper supervision in limited areas for limited periods of
time, provided that prior permission for the aforesaid is obtained from the
United States Coast Guard and governing municipalities.
§ 318-12. Skiing and surfboarding restrictions.
§ 318-13. Equipment requirements.
imprisonment; for a conviction of a second violation, both of which were
committed within a period of six months, such person shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than
30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a conviction of
a third or subsequent violation, all of which were committed within a
period of six months, such person shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $750 or by imprisonment of not more than 60 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
A. No person shall use or operate a boat or vessel to tow a person on water
skis, a surfboard or a similar device in any harbor, the Nissequogue
River or within 200 feet of the shoreline in Smithtown Bay.
B. No person shall operate a vessel for towing a person on water skis, a
surfboard or a similar device unless there is in such vessel a person,
other than the operator, of at least 10 years of age, in a position to
observe the person being towed.
A. Every vessel, mechanically, sail- or manually propelled, shall have
United States Coast Guard-approved-type life preservers or life jackets
aboard, which shall be in sufficient numbers to provide one for each
person on board.
B. Every mechanically propelled vessel having an engine of more than 10
horsepower shall be provided with a sound-producing mechanical
appliance, except a siren, capable of producing a blast of two seconds
or more in duration and of such strength as to be heard plainly for a
distance of at least 1/2 mile in still water.
C. Every vessel, mechanically, sail- or manually propelled, shall carry an
anchor of sufficient weight and line or chain of sufficient strength to
provide a safe anchorage for such vessel. Sailboard-type sailboats shall
be excluded from this subsection.
D. Every mechanically propelled vessel shall be equipped with a Coast
Guard-approved fire extinguisher in accordance with the following
requirements:
§ 318-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-13
1:813
§ 318-14. Operating restrictions for vessels.
Class of
Motorboat
Size of
Motorboat
(feet) Requirements
A Less than 16 1 B-1 extinguisher
1 16 to less than 26 1 B-1 extinguisher
2 26 to less than 40 2 B-1 extinguishers
3 40 to less than 65 3 B-1 extinguishers
4 Over 65 As required by federal
regulations
E. Every mechanically propelled vessel of 18 feet or more used in
Smithtown Bay shall carry a fluorescent-orange distress flag, which
shall be a minimum of one foot square, and three hand-held-type red
flares for use at night to be displayed and used whenever such vessel is
in need of assistance.
F. The carburetor of every gasoline engine installed in a mechanically
propelled vessel, except outboard motors, shall be fitted with a United
States Coast Guard-approved device for arresting backfire.
G. Every vessel operated in the waterways under jurisdiction of this
chapter shall be equipped with lights as required by § 43 of the New
York State Navigation Law.
H. No person shall operate a boat or vessel without having an exhaust
from the engine so constructed and used as to muffle the noise of the
exhaust in a reasonable manner.
A. No person under the age of 16 years shall operate a mechanically
propelled vessel unless the operator is accompanied by a person 16
years or older or the operator is 10 years or older and is the holder of a
boating safety certificate issued to him by the State Conservation
Commissioner, and such certificate shall be available upon request to
any peace officer and any officer having authority to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
B. No person who is the owner of a mechanically propelled vessel shall
knowingly authorize or permit the operation thereof unless the
operator is 16 years or older or, if less than 16 years, is accompanied by
a person 16 years or older or, if 10 years or older, is the holder of a
boating safety certificate issued to him by the State Conservation
Commissioner.
C. No person in an intoxicated condition shall operate any vessel on the
waters under the jurisdiction of this chapter.
§ 318-13 SMITHTOWN CODE § 318-14
1:814
§ 318-15. Nuisances; penalties. [Amended 7-14-1992]
§ 318-16. Certain dumping prohibited. [Amended 9-21-1993]
The dumping of oil refuse and sewage or garbage and waste is prohibited
in areas covered by this chapter. Any dumping under this section shall
be deemed a violation under Chapter 315, Water Pollution, and subject to
penalties set forth therein.
§ 318-17. Floats.
Floats shall be moored in such a way as to be reasonably secure at all
times and under all conditions and anchored and moored subject to the
supervision of the enforcing authority.
§ 318-18. Enforcement. [Added 7-12-1988; amended 11-22-1988;
7-14-1992; 9-7-1993; 10-4-2011]
The Suffolk County Police Department and the Director of Public Safety or
his or her designees are hereby empowered to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, and every person operating and/or in charge of a boat navigating or
using the waterways of the Town shall at all times obey the lawful orders of
the members of such Police Department and Town officers, and such officers
shall have the right to stop any boat navigating or using the waterways of
the Town for the purpose of enforcing this chapter.
§ 318-19. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-12-1988]
D. No person shall operate any pleasure boat or any vessel when any
occupants of said vessel have extended their arms or legs over the bow
of said boat.
A. No person shall operate a boat in such a manner as to unjustifiably or
unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger the occupants of any other
boat or cause to frighten or endanger any seabirds, including but not
limited to swans, or cause a dangerous wake when approaching or
passing another boat.
B. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a
penalty in the sum of not more than $100 for the first violation and in
the sum of not more than $250 for subsequent violations.
A. Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter (except with respect to a violation of § 318-9)
shall be guilty of an offense punishable by fine or imprisonment, or
both. However, for the purpose of confirming jurisdiction upon courts
and judicial officers, such violations shall be deemed to be
misdemeanors, and for such purposes only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, any person, firm, association or corporation violating any
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty in a sum not
§ 318-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-19
1:815
Chapter 322
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 112.
Sale of Christmas trees — See Ch. 124.
Condominium and cooperative
conversions — See Ch. 129.
Environmental and coastal quality
review — See Ch. 151.
Excavations and regrading — See Ch. 154.
Freshwater wetlands — See Ch. 170.
Historic districts — See Ch. 185.
Junkyards and junk dealers — See Ch. 194.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 248.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 252.
exceeding $50 for the first such violation and in a sum not exceeding
$100 for any subsequent violation, said penalties to be recoverable
as damages in a civil action brought in the name of the municipality
responsible for such enforcement.
B. The penalty for violation of § 318-9 shall be governed by § 318-9C.95
95.Editor's Note: See also § 318-10 for penalties.
§ 318-19 SMITHTOWN CODE § 318-19
1:816
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 322-1. Title and short title.
§ 322-2. Declaration of purpose.
This Building Zone Ordinance is adopted for the purpose of promoting
the health, safety, morals or the general welfare of the community and in
furtherance of the following related and more specific objectives:
§ 322-3. Word usage; definitions.
A. The title of the Building Zone Ordinance of September 7, 1932, of the
Town of Smithtown, Suffolk County, New York, as heretofore amended,
is hereby amended to read as follows: "An Ordinance Regulating and
Restricting the Height, Number of Stories and Size of Buildings and
Other Structures, the Percentage of Lot That May Be Occupied, the Size
of Yards, Courts and Other Open Spaces, the Density of Population and
the Location and Use of Buildings, Structures and Land for Trade,
Industry, Residence or Other Purpose, in the Town of Smithtown
Outside the Limits of any Incorporated Village; and for Said Purposes
Dividing the Town Outside Such Limits into Districts; and Providing
Fines and Penalties for the Violation of its Provisions."
B. Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Town
of Smithtown Building Zone Ordinance of 1963."
A. To guide and regulate the orderly growth, development and
redevelopment of the Town of Smithtown outside the limits of any
incorporated village in accordance with a Comprehensive Plan and with
long-term objectives, principles and standards deemed beneficial to the
interests and welfare of the people.
B. To protect the established character and the social and economic wellbeing
of both private and public property.
C. To promote, in the public interest, the utilization of land for the
purposes for which it is most appropriate.
D. To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers and to provide
adequate light, air and convenience of access.
E. To prevent overcrowding of land or buildings and to avoid undue
concentrations of population.
F. To lessen and, where possible, to prevent traffic congestion on public
streets and highways.
G. To conserve the value of buildings and to enhance the value of land
throughout the Town outside the limits of any incorporated village.
A. Scope and meaning of certain words and terms.
§ 322-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-3
1:817
(1) Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, words used in the
present tense include the future, the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural includes the singular.
(2) The word "person" includes a profit or nonprofit corporation,
company, partnership or individual.
(3) The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory; the word "may" is
permissive.
(4) The word "lot" includes the word "plot."
(5) The word "structure" includes the word "building."
(6) The word "use" and the word "used" refer to any purpose for which
a lot or land or part thereof is arranged, intended or designed to be
used, occupied, maintained, made available or offered for use and
to any purpose for which a building or structure or part thereof is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, occupied, maintained,
made available or offered for use or erected, reconstructed,
altered, enlarged, moved or rebuilt with the intention or design of
using the same.
B. Definition of terms. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
AASHTO — The American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials.[Added 10-21-1986]
ACCESSORY CONVENIENCE SALES — An accessory use to a filling
station whereby food, beverages, periodicals and similar items are
purchased.[Added 7-8-1997]
ACCESSORY USE, STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — A subordinate use,
structure or building customarily incidental to and located on the same
lot occupied by the main use or building or on a contiguous lot in the
same ownership. The term "accessory building" may include a private
garage and/or private greenhouse.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — A public or private establishment which
presents topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators,
exotic dancers or other similar entertainments and which
establishment is customarily not open to the public generally and
excludes any minor by reason of age. This use includes adult massage
parlors, peep shows and adult theaters and similar types of
businesses.[Added 9-13-1994]
ADULT HOME — A residential facility under 100,000 square feet, for
residents over 65 years old, which is licensed or otherwise certified by
the State of New York as an adult home for the purpose of providing
long-term residential care, room and board, housekeeping, personal
care, and related forms of assistance provided by the operators of the
facilities.[Added 4-26-2007]
§ 322-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-3
1:818
ADULT RETAIL SHOP — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade videotapes, films, slides, books,
magazines or adult accessories, whether for sale or rent, and which
establishment is customarily not open to the public generally but
excludes any minor by reason of age.[Added 9-13-1994]
AGRICULTURE — Includes the cultivation of the soil for food products
or other useful or valuable growths of the field or garden, tillage or
husbandry, but shall not include dairying, the raising of livestock, fowl
or birds or other forms of animal husbandry where the same is carried
on as a business or gainful operation.
ANIMAL HOSPICE — All or part of the premises, buildings and facilities
utilized for the purpose of taking in and providing for the care and
treatment of sick, abandoned, homeless, injured, deformed and/or
terminally ill animals.[Added 7-11-2006]
ANTENNA, DISH — A device used to transmit and/or receive
electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based
uses wherein the device incorporates a reflective surface that is solid,
open-mesh or bar-configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone,
horn, parabola or cornucopia.96[Added 5-28-1991]
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — A residential facility under 100,000
square feet, which is licensed or otherwise certified by the State of New
York as an assisted living facility for the purpose of providing housing,
support services, personalized assistance, and health care for residents
over 65 years old. Such services should include, but not be limited to,
the providing of common meals, transportation services, various forms
of medical services, and related forms of assistance provided by the
operators of the facility.97[Added 4-26-2007]
AVERAGE NATURAL GRADE LEVEL — The mean elevation of the land
along and adjacent to the front of a building or structure prior to
the placement of any fill thereon, or as depicted on plans previously
approved in accordance with this chapter, whichever is more
recent.[Added 10-2-2012]
BASEMENT — A story partly below grade and having not more than 1/
2 its height below grade.[Amended 10-21-1986]
BERM — An artificial earthen mound that is higher than the adjacent
land.[Added 7-2-2008]
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Board of Zoning Appeals of the Town of
Smithtown, New York.
96.Editor's Note: The definitions of "appeal," "area of shallow flooding," and "area of special
flood hazard," added 8-25-1987, as amended, which immediately followed this definition,
were repealed 8-11-2009. See now Ch. 168, Flood Damage Prevention.
97.Editor's Note: The definition of "base flood," added 8-25-1987, as amended, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 8-11-2009. See now Ch. 168, Flood
Damage Prevention.
§ 322-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-3
1:819
BOARD, PLANNING — The Planning Board of the Town of Smithtown,
New York.
BOARD, TOWN — The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown, New
York.98
BUILDING — A structure with a roof supported by columns or walls and
having a horizontal area of more than 50 square feet.
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the horizontal area measured
around the outside of the foundation walls and of the floors of roofed
porches and roofed terraces inclusive, and including the area of
accessory buildings, if any.
BUILDING DIRECTOR — The Building Director of the Town of
Smithtown.[Amended 5-8-2007]
BUILDING LINE — That line established by the required front yard
depth as the closest point to the front property line at which a building
may be constructed.
CAPITAL INVESTMENT — The initial outlay by the owner or operator
of a use to establish a business, exclusive of the fair market value
of the structure in which the use is located. For nonconforming uses,
the initial outlay shall be calculated up to the date the use became
nonconforming.[Added 9-13-1994]
CAR WASH — A building or lot or part thereof containing facilities such
as water pumps, self-propelled brushes, conveyor chains and dryers,
used for washing motor vehicles.[Added 10-21-1986]
CELLAR — A story having more than 1/2 its height below grade. A
"cellar" is not included in computing the number of stories for the
purpose of building height measurement.[Added 10-21-1986]
CLUB, COUNTRY — A club for golfing, hunting, fishing, horseback
riding or similar sports.
CLUB, MEMBERSHIP, NONPROFIT — The premises, buildings and
facilities utilized by a local chapter holding a valid charter from an
international, national or state nonprofit membership organization or
by a bona fide local nonprofit civic association, which is not operated
for profit and which holds and maintains an income-tax-exempt status
under the regulations and rulings of the Internal Revenue Service of the
United States. Membership in the nonprofit club shall be regulated by
the articles or bylaws of the club, and the club shall cater exclusively
to members and their guests primarily for a social, literary, fraternal,
recreational, patriotic, educational, religious or political purpose. This
term shall not include a fitness center, swim club, country club, game
center or commercial public use, as defined herein, and any club
providing any child-care arrangement, including but not limited to day
98.Editor's Note: The definition of "breakaway wall," added 8-25-1987, as amended, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 8-11-2009. See now Ch. 168, Flood
Damage Prevention.
§ 322-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-3
1:820
care and day camp, as defined herein, must make separate applications
to the applicable entity charged with authorizing such child-care
use.99100[Amended 8-19-2003]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any commercially registered vehicle
weighing up to 10,000 pounds gross vehicular weight and measuring
up to 20 feet in length.[Added 12-10-1996; amended 11-4-1997;
8-2-2010]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE, LARGE — Any commercially registered
vehicle weighing more than 10,000 pounds gross vehicular weight or
measuring more than 20 feet in length.[Added 12-10-1996; amended
11-4-1997; 8-2-2010]
COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION — Any membership association set up for
the purposes of the ownership, maintenance and management of those
areas of townhouse development held in common ownership.[Added
8-9-1983]
COMMUNITY SHOPPING CENTER — A use of land, building or
structures permitted in the Shopping Center Business District, which
contains a minimum of 20 acres and less than 25 acres, has a minimum
of 100,000 square feet of gross floor area and serves a trade area
population of between 40,000 and 100,000.101[Added 9-24-1968]
CONTRACTOR SHOWROOM — An establishment of at least 3,000
square feet of floor area and used to display and place orders for
windows, doors, cabinets, countertops, carpets, recreational
structures, and similar items that are delivered to the customer's home
or business. A contractor showroom shall not include establishments
wherein customers leave the site with merchandise.[Added
3-22-2012]
COUNTER-SERVICE RESTAURANT — An eating establishment having
a seating capacity of more than 16 seats, where food and/or beverages
are served to patrons in their vehicles or are sold at counters inside
the building and patrons are not served at tables by waiters or
waitresses.102[Added 6-26-1973; amended 7-10-1979; 3-8-1994]
DAY CAMP — The use of a building, premises and facilities to provide
daytime instruction and recreational programs for two or more children
away from home. All camps operating during any summer month or
months shall be licensed by the Department of Public Health of the
99.Editor's Note: The definition of "coastal high-hazard area," added 8-25-1987, as amended,
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 8-11-2009. See now Ch. 168,
Flood Damage Prevention.
100. Editor’s Note: The former definitions of “coin-operated machines,” added 7-12-1966, and
“commercial center,” which immediately followed this definition, were repealed
11-3-2015.
101. Editor’s Note: The definition of “congregate care facilities,” added 3-26-1991, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 4-4-2017.
102. Editor’s Note: The definition of "custom work, shop for," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 3-22-2012.
§ 322-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-3
1:821
State of New York. This term shall not be deemed an accessory use to a
membership club.[Added 6-24-1975; amended 8-19-2003]
DAY-CARE CENTER — Includes any child-care arrangement, public,
private or parochial child-care center, school-aged child-care program,
day nursery school, kindergarten, play school, or similar school or
service, operating pursuant to any required authorization, license or
permit of the State of New York or the County of Suffolk; any facility
providing nonresidential care for three or more children or persons
with disabilities or persons over 65 years of age for not more than 16
hours a day; any facility that provides child-care services, as defined in
§ 410-p of the New York State Social Services Law; or any child daycare
center, as defined in § 390 of the New York State Social Services
Law. This term shall not be deemed an accessory use to a membership
club, nor shall the term apply to schools, community residences or
medical facilities.[Added 10-21-1986; amended 6-9-1992;
10-7-1997; 8-19-2003]
DECK — A flat-floored, roofless structure serving generally as outdoor
living space. The "deck" height is the greatest vertical distance between
the "deck" floor and natural or approved grade.[Amended 7-23-1991;
3-23-1993]
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.103[Added 8-25-1987; amended
9-12-1995]
DWELLING — A building arranged, intended or designed to be
occupied by one or more families living independently of each other
upon the premises.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building designed for and occupied
exclusively as a home or residence for not more than one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed for and occupied
exclusively as a home or residence for two families.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provisions for cooking,
living, sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one
family.104
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE LAND — Any area with one or more
of the following characteristics:[Added 1-7-1986]
Any area of special flood hazard as defined by Chapter 168, Flood
Damage Prevention, of the Town Code. [Amended 3-22-2012]
(1)
103. Editor’s Note: The definition of "discotheque," added 6-26-1973, as amended, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 3-22-2012. The definition of "drive-in
restaurant," added 6-26-1973, which also followed, was repealed 3-8-1994.
104. Editor's Note: The definition of "elevated building," added 8-25-1987, as amended, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 8-11-2009. See now Ch. 168, Flood
Damage Prevention.
§ 322-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-3
1:822
FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or
foster parent-child relationship or not more than two unrelated persons
who live together as a single housekeeping unit, using cooking facilities
and certain rooms in common as a nonprofit household. A "family" shall
not be deemed to include the occupants of a boardinghouse, dormitory,
family care facility or group care facility.[Amended 7-10-1979]
FAR (FLOOR AREA RATIO) — The gross floor area divided by the site
area.105[Added 6-20-1989]
FILLING STATION — A building or lot or part thereof supplying and
selling gasoline or other equivalent fuel for motor vehicles at retail
direct from pumps and storage tanks. A "filling station" may include
accessory facilities for rendering services for motor vehicles, such as
lubrication, washing and minor repairs.
FITNESS CENTER — The premises, buildings and facilities operated
and utilized by any for-profit business or nonprofit organization for the
purpose of operating an athletic center which offers exercise, fitness,
physical wellness, nutrition, health or sports programs to its members.
This term shall not apply to athletic or gymnasium programs of any
public or private grade school, high school, college or university where
such programs are offered exclusively to its students and/or faculty.
This term shall not include swim clubs, country clubs, game centers
or a commercial public use as defined herein, nor shall this term be
deemed an accessory use to a nonprofit membership club.106[Added
8-19-2003]
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the horizontal areas of all stories
of all buildings on a site, measured from the exterior faces of the
(2) Slopes in excess of 15%.
(3) Depth to seasonal high-water table of less than 10 feet.
Freshwater wetlands, as defined by Chapter 170, Article II, of the
Town Code.
(4)
A distance of less than 100 feet to the nearest surface water feature
identified on the latest United States Geological Survey 6.5-minute
topographic map.
(5)
Poorly drained soils, as defined by the United States Soil
Conservation Service.
(6)
(7) A habitat for protected, threatened or endangered species.
105. Editor's Note: The definition of "Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)," added
9-12-1995, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 8-11-2009. See now
Ch. 168, Flood Damage Prevention.
106. Editor's Note: The definitions of "flood elevation study," added 9-12-1995, "Flood Hazard
Boundary Map (FNBM)," "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)," "Flood Insurance Study,"
"flood or flooding," added 8-25-1987, "floodplain or flood-prone area," added 9-12-1995,
"floodproofing," "floodway," and "floor," added 8-25-1987, as amended, which immediately
followed this definition, were repealed 8-11-2009. See now Ch. 168, Flood Damage
Prevention.
§ 322-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-3
1:823
exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings,
but not including accessory buildings less than 150 square feet and less
than 10 feet in height, and not including cellars or half-stories.[Added
10-21-1986; amended 6-20-1989; 3-8-2011; 10-2-2012;
3-17-2016]
FLOOR AREA, MINIMUM HABITABLE — The total horizontal area of
all stories of a dwelling unit, measured between the outside walls of
the building, but excluding garages, carports, open porches, terraces,
utility rooms, basements and those floor areas that have a clear ceiling
height of less than seven feet six inches. The "minimum habitable floor
area" requirement of a dwelling with a height of more than one story
shall be increased by 300 square feet to allow for stairs and additional
hallway areas.
FUEL STORAGE AND DISTRIBUTION — A premises other than a filling
station used to store more than 5,000 gallons of flammable or
hazardous solids, liquids or gases in tanks or trucks.[Added
10-21-1986]
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing,
sales or service facilities.[Added 9-12-1995]
GAME CENTER — A room, hall or building or portion thereof which
contains five or more pinball machines, electronic videoscreen games,
foosball games, air hockey games or any other games or machines
determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals to be similar, for the use of
which fees are paid directly into the machines or to an operator.[Added
4-14-1981]
GAME ROOM — A room, hall or portion of the floor area of a building
which contains four or fewer pinball machines, electronic videoscreen
games, foosball games, air hockey games, skeebowls or any other game
machines determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals to be similar,
for the use of which fees are paid directly into the machine or to an
operator.[Added 4-14-1981]
GARAGE, PARKING — A building or portion thereof, not a private
garage, used for the storage of motor vehicles and not used for making
repairs thereto. The storage of motor vehicles under or above a building
or portion thereof shall be construed as a use of the
building.[Amended 1-7-1986]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building of not less than 10 feet in
width and 20 feet clear interior depth from door to wall and used for
the storage of not more than three private motor vehicles and for one
commercial motor vehicle owned and used by the owner or tenant of
the lot on which the "private garage" is erected.[Amended 1-23-1968]
§ 322-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-3
1:824
GARAGE, REPAIR — Except as provided for in § 322-12M, a building
used for adjustment, painting, replacement of parts or other repair of
motor vehicles or parts thereof, whether or not accessory or incidental
to another use, except for premises wherein the floor area for repair
work is less than or equal to 49% of the floor area used for a motor
vehicle show room.[Amended 6-9-1992; 11-1-1994]
GARAGE, STORAGE — An accessory building used for the storage
of goods, materials or equipment, not including motor vehicles, and
not used for repairs, assembly, servicing or a similar use.[Added
1-7-1986]
GARDEN APARTMENT — A building or group of buildings not more
than 2 1/2 stories in height, each building to contain not more than
eight dwelling units, and attached buildings to contain in the aggregate
not more than 16 dwelling units, with no portion of the buildings below
the first story or above the second story used for dwelling purposes.
HEALTH SPA — An establishment of at least 5,000 square feet that
has a pool and/or sauna and provides personal care treatments such
as massages, facials, hydrotherapy, and wellness education.[Added
3-22-2012]
HEIGHT OF A STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — Except as otherwise
provided herein, the height of a structure or building shall be the
vertical distance measured from the average natural grade level, as
defined in this chapter, to the highest point of the building or structure.
The highest point shall not include heating, ventilation and airconditioning
equipment; parapets; stairway and elevator bulkheads;
antennas; and other minor appurtenances. In the Nissequogue River
Corridor, the height of a structure or building shall be the vertical
distance measured from the lowest finished grade at the foundation
of the building or structure to the highest point of the building or
structure. The highest point shall include heating, ventilation and airconditioning
equipment; parapets; stairway and elevator bulkheads;
and antennas larger than 20 square feet measured in any vertical
plane.107[Added 10-21-1986; amended 10-2-2012]
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:[Added 9-12-1995]
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or
(2)
107. Editor's Note: The definition of "highest adjacent grade," added 8-25-1987, as amended,
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 8-11-2009. See now Ch. 168,
Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 322-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-3
1:825
HOME CENTER — A premises which is more than five acres in size,
which is used for the sale of building products, tools, garden supplies,
flooring products and so forth, whose operation is located entirely
within a building. For purposes of this chapter, this use is classified
as a retail establishment, not otherwise listed herein, pursuant to
§ 322-8B.[Added 1-21-1997]
HOME OCCUPATION[Amended 10-9-1984] —
HOOKAH LOUNGES AND VAPE STORES/LOUNGES — Any facility or
location whose business operation, and its principal use, includes onsite
indoor smoking/sale of electronic cigarettes, vape pens, vapors,
e-liquids, other legal marijuana derivatives or other substances. As
it relates to provisions concerning hookah lounges and vape stores/
lounges, the term "smoking" is defined as the inhalation of the smoke/
liquid nicotine/vapors/water pipe tobacco and other substances
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior.
(3)
An accessory activity of a professional or occupational nature
which is conducted entirely within a dwelling unit and which is
conducted solely by members of the family residing within the
unit and not more than one additional person who does not reside
within the unit. The use is to be clearly incidental and secondary
to the residential use of the dwelling unit. Furthermore, the use
shall not have an adverse effect on the surrounding residences.
The following uses and similar uses are not to be permitted as
occupations: beauty parlors, hairdressing and manicuring
establishments, barbershops; tearooms; tourist homes;
convalescent homes; funeral homes; retail or wholesale shops or
stores; dancing schools; real estate offices; veterinarian offices;
animals hospices; animal boarding facilities; kennels; and animal
hospitals and biological or medical testing laboratories (effective
October 9, 1984). [Amended 7-11-2006]
(1)
Any home occupation which had been in existence in compliance
with this definition108 and Chapter 322, the Building Zone
Ordinance of the Town of Smithtown, prior to October 9, 1984,
shall be subject to the provisions of Article XI of the Building Zone
Ordinance.109
(2)
108. Editor's Note: "This definition" refers to the previous definition of "home occupation,"
which read as follows: "HOME OCCUPATION -- A customary personal service occupation
such as dressmaking, millinery and home cooking, provided that such occupation shall be
conducted solely by members of the resident family and in the main building only, that not
more than the equivalent of 1/2 of the area of one floor shall be used for such purposes,
that there shall be no external evidence other than a nameplate sign, that no stock-intrade
shall be kept, and that no mechanical or electrical equipment is used except
customary household equipment. Beauty parlors, barbershops, hairdressing and
manicuring establishments shall not be deemed to be home occupations."
109. Editor’s Note: The definition of “home professional office,” as amended, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 4-4-2017.
§ 322-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-3
1:826
encased in electronic cigarettes, vape pens, and pipes commonly known
as "hookah," " waterpipe," "shisha," and "narghile," or any similar
device.[Added 4-26-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
HOSPITAL — The premises or buildings, whether publicly or privately
operated, used for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human
ailments, which may include related facilities such as laboratories,
training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices. A "hospital"
shall be deemed to include a clinic, convalescent home, nursing home
or rest home but shall not include institutions for the treatment of
alcoholism, drug addiction or mental diseases. Dormitories may be
permitted as accessory buildings, provided that they are limited
exclusively to nurses or other staff.
HOTEL — A building or part thereof which has a common entrance,
common heating system and general dining room and which contains
seven or more living and sleeping rooms designed to be occupied by
individuals or groups of individuals for compensation. A "hotel" shall
not provide apartment dwelling units.
HOUSE TRAILER — A movable single-family dwelling of more than 17
feet in length, equipped with a vehicular chassis but lacking one or
more of the following mechanical systems and equipment: plumbing,
heating, electrical, cooking and refrigeration. See "mobile home."
JUNK — Discarded materials including scrap metal, old iron, steel,
brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals; old cordage, rope, rags,
fibers or fabrics; wastepaper; salvage materials; old machinery,
equipment and parts, whether dismantled or not; and motor vehicles no
longer used as such, whether for the purpose of resale of used parts or
components therefrom, for the purpose of reclaiming for use some or
all of the materials therein, whether metal, glass, fabric or otherwise,
for the purpose of disposing of the same or for any other purpose;
but "junk" shall not include materials or objects held and used by a
manufacturer as an integral part of his own manufacturing processes.
This term shall not include construction and demolition debris.[Added
6-27-1989; amended 11-18-2003]
JUNKYARD — Includes a lot, land, or structure used as an automobile or
vehicle salvage yard; an automobile or vehicle reduction yard; a motor
vehicle junkyard; an automobile or vehicle wrecking establishment;
an automobile or vehicle graveyard; a scrap metal processing yard or
facility; or a vehicle dismantling yard or facility. This term shall not
include a transfer station as defined herein.[Amended 6-27-1989;
11-18-2003]
KIOSK OR BOOTH — A structure or building with one or more open
sides designed for retail sales or service, separating its occupant from
patrons or customers, whether on a public street, sidewalk, parking
lot or any other portion of the lot cited property. The term "kiosk"
or "booth" shall not include a telephone booth or a passenger
shelter.[Added 5-8-1979]
§ 322-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-3
1:827
LOCAL WATERFRONT AREA — The area of the Town, excluding
incorporated villages, described in the Town of Smithtown Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program on file with the New York State
Department of State.[Added 10-21-1986]
LOT — A parcel of land, exclusive of street areas, used or designed
to be used by one use or structure or by a related group of uses or
structures and the accessory uses or structures customarily incident
thereto, including such open spaces as are arranged or designed and
required in connection with such structure or group of structures. A
"lot" may or may not be the land shown as a single "lot" on a duly
recorded plat or other official record.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — A lot with frontage on two or more intersecting
streets, at their point of intersection.
LOT FRONTAGE — The dimension measured from side lot line to side
lot line, or the equivalent in the case of a corner lot, along a line
parallel to the street line at the required minimum front yard depth (the
building line).
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — Any boundary of a lot. Any "lot line" not a rear lot line nor
a front lot line shall be deemed a side lot line.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The dividing line between the lot and a street. On
a corner lot, both street lines shall be considered "front lot lines."
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite the front lot line.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot extending from one street to another.110
LUMBERYARD — A premises, less than five acres in size, which is
principally used for the sale of lumber and related materials which will
be used in building construction. For purposes of this chapter, lumber
products shall include unfinished and finished wood, substitute wood
products, roofing materials and related construction material, stored
within and/or outside of a building or structure.[Added 1-21-1997]
LWRP (LOCAL WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION PROGRAM) — The
Local Waterfront Revitalization Program of the Town of Smithtown,
as submitted to the Secretary of State pursuant to the Waterfront
Revitalization and Coastal Resources Act (Executive Law Article 42), a
copy of which is in the office of the Town Clerk.111[Added 6-20-1989]
MICROBREWERY — An establishment required to be licensed as a
microbrewery by the New York State Liquor Authority.[Added
3-22-2012]
110. Editor’s Note: The definition of “lowest floor,” added 8-25-1987, as amended, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 4-4-2017.
111. Editor's Note: The definitions of "manufactured home" and "mean sea level," added
8-27-1985, as amended, which immediately followed this definition, were repealed
8-11-2009. See now Ch. 168, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 322-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-3
1:828
MINI-STORAGE WAREHOUSE — A building or a group of buildings in
a controlled-access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes
of individualized, compartmentalized and controlled access stalls or
lockers for the dead storage of customer's goods or wares.[Added
8-27-1985; amended 10-21-1986; 12-1-1987]
MOBILE HOME — A movable single-family dwelling equipped with
a vehicular chassis and provided with all the following mechanical
systems and equipment: plumbing, heating, electrical, cooking and
refrigeration. See "house trailer."
MODIFICATION OF ZONING PROVISIONS — The implementation of a
plan to permit greater flexibility of the zoning requirements in certain
residence districts, pursuant to the provisions of § 54-10Q.112
MOTEL — The premises and building or group of buildings, whether
detached or in connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling
units, with direct outside access and related office and with or without
restaurant facilities, designed primarily for transient automobile
travelers and provided with accessory off-street parking facilities. The
term "motel" includes buildings designed as tourist courts, motor
lodges, auto courts and other similar appellations but shall not be
construed to include mobile or immobile trailers.
MOTOR VEHICLE SHOWROOM — The use of any building or lot or part
thereof for the sale, rent, lease or display of new or used automobiles,
vans, trucks, trailers, buses, farm machinery, construction equipment,
recreation vehicles or boats.113[Added 10-21-1986]
NIGHTCLUB — An establishment, not including a membership club,
that has dancing with music or live entertainment in conjunction with
the consumption of alcoholic beverages.[Added 3-22-2012]
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure lawfully existing at
the effective date of this chapter, or any amendment thereto affecting
such structure, which does not conform to the Table of Dimensional
Regulations of this chapter114 for the district in which it is situated,
irrespective of the use to which such structure is put.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use of a building, structure, lot or land
or part thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this chapter, or
any amendment thereto affecting such use, which does not conform to
the Table of Use Regulations of this chapter115 for the district in which
it is situated.
112. Editor's Note: Original § 54-10Q of the 1964 Code was repealed 10-21-1986.
113. Editor's Note: The definition of "National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)," added
8-25-1987, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 9-12-1995 and
8-11-2009. The definition of "new construction," added 8-25-1987, as amended, which also
followed this definition, was repealed 8-11-2009. See now Ch. 168, Flood Damage
Prevention.
114. Editor's Note: The Table of Dimensional Regulations is included at the end of this chapter.
115. Editor's Note: The Table of Use Regulations appears at the end of this chapter.
§ 322-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-3
1:829
NONNUISANCE INDUSTRY — Any industry the manifestations of
which do not extend beyond the limits of the property where it is
located by reason of the emission of odor, dust, fumes, smoke, gas,
vibration, light, noise or similar condition or any other condition
hazardous to the community.
NURSERY — A building or lot or part thereof used for raising flowers,
shrubs or plants for sale.[Added 10-21-1986]
NURSERY SCHOOL — A school designed to provide daytime care and
instruction for two or more children from two to five years of age, other
than children of the resident family, licensed by the New York State
Board of Regents and operated on a regular basis. A day camp shall not
be deemed to be a "nursery school."116[Amended 6-24-1975]
OPEN-FRONT RESTAURANT — An eating establishment where food
and/or beverages are purchased at open counters and may be
consumed on the premises outside the building, whether in parked
vehicles or seated at outdoor tables or counters.[Added 6-26-1973]
OUTDOOR DINING AREA — Any unenclosed or partially enclosed
outdoor area that is adjacent to and operated as part of an enclosed
sit-down restaurant and that is used for the purpose of serving food
and drink to customers seated at tables. The "outdoor dining area"
shall be allowed only as an accessory use to the sit-down restaurant
use, as defined by the term "restaurant" in this section. It is subject
to all the requirements set forth in §§ 322-9B, 322-10B117 and
322-82C(25).[Added 2-5-1985]
OUTDOOR INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES — Any mixing, sorting, screening,
purifying, assembling, disassembling, compacting, painting, coating,
finishing, or other action of any material, product, equipment, vehicle,
or vessel that is not entirely within an enclosed building unless these
activities are conducted for the development of a site in accordance
with a valid building permit. Storage, loading, and unloading shall not
be considered as an outdoor industrial activity.[Added 9-22-2016]
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping, locating, storing, stockpiling,
maintaining, housing or placing of any good, material or equipment of
whatever kind or nature or any vehicles, vessels, or any parts thereof,
any trailer or shipping or storage container, including roll-offs, between
the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in any location other than within
an enclosed building.[Added 2-13-1990; amended 12-6-1994;
9-22-2016]
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A special purpose zoning district that overlays
another zoning district of the Town, or a portion thereof, and which
provides therein either more restrictive or less restrictive zoning
standards than the underlying zoning district. [Added 4-24-2014]
116. Editor's Note: The definition of "one-hundred-year flood," added 8-25-1987, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 9-12-1995 and 8-11-2009. See now Ch.
168, Flood Damage Prevention.
117. Editor's Note: Section 322-10 was repealed 11-24-1992.
§ 322-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-3
1:830
PARKING AREA — A lot or part thereof used for the storage or parking
of motor vehicles with or without the payment of rent or charges in
money and/or other consideration.
PARKING SPACE — A stall or berth which is arranged and intended
for parking of one motor vehicle in a garage or parking area, with a
minimum width of nine feet and a minimum length of 18 feet.
PAVED SURFACE — The land surface covered with asphalt, concrete,
bricks, cobblestones, gravel, plastic or similar material.[Added
9-5-2000]
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY (PWSF) — Facility for the
provision of personal wireless services, as defined by Section 704 of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996. A PWSF is any unstaffed facility for
the transmission and/or reception of personal wireless services, usually
consisting of an antenna array, transmission cables, equipment shelter
and, a mount. See Chapter 242 of the Town Code.[Added 5-15-2001]
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL PARK — A community of industries grouped
according to an overall master plan to guide the development and
improvement of the entire industrial park tract, which shall contain a
minimum of two acres.[Added 12-24-1968; amended 10-21-1986]
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A tract or parcel of land
located in the Planned Residential Development District, controlled by
legal or beneficial owner or owners or other persons with enforceable
proprietary interest, inclusive of the condominium ownership and/or
lessee, such land to be developed as a single entity for a number of
dwelling units with lot size (if lots are present), coverage, density, bulk
of buildings or other dimensional regulations which do not correspond
to any one residential district established by any other Article or section
of this chapter, except as set forth in Article VI of this chapter.[Added
5-20-1969; amended 2-1-1972]118
POWER EQUIPMENT SHOP — A building or portion thereof used to
service, repair, rent, and/or sell lawnmowers, snowblowers,
snowmobiles, personal watercraft, and similar equipment.[Added
3-22-2012]
119PROPANE EXCHANGE — The use of land for the outdoor storage of
propane cylinders for the purpose of sale, rent, lease, or trade.[Added
7-13-2004]
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice of the time and place of a hearing, meeting
or proceeding printed in the official newspaper of the Town of
Smithtown, New York, and the erection of a sign or signs on the
118. Editor's Note: The original definition of "Planning Director" in the 1964 Code, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 1-22-1981. The term was added again
1-25-1983 but was not defined.
119. Editor's Note: The definitions of "primary frontal dune," added 9-12-1995, and "principally
above ground," added 8-25-1987, as amended, which immediately preceded this definition,
were repealed 8-11-2009. See now Ch. 168, Flood Damage Prevention. The definition of
"premises," which also preceded this definition, was repealed 3-22-2012.
§ 322-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-3
1:831
premises, prior to the time of such hearing, meeting or proceeding, as
provided by law and this chapter.
PUBLIC OR SEMIPUBLIC BUILDING[Amended 4-2-1985;
9-12-1989] —
PUBLIC UTILITY — Persons, firms and corporations supplying gas,
electricity, water, power, transportation, telegraph or telephone service
to the general public; and public utility machinery and equipment,
which shall include pipes, lines, wires and other conductors or conduits,
materials, apparatus, poles, towers, tanks, tools, vehicles, supplies and
storage facilities used by "public utilities."
REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER — A use of land, buildings or
structures permitted in the Shopping Center Business District, which
contains over 30 acres of land, has over 300,000 square feet of gross
floor area and contains one or more full-line department stores and
serves a trade area population of over 150,000.[Added 5-23-1967]
RESEARCH LABORATORY — A building for experimentation in pure
or applied research design, development and production of prototype
machines or devices or of new products and the uses accessory thereto.
With respect to the application of this chapter, such "research
laboratory" shall meet the standards of a nonnuisance industry.
RESTAURANT — An eating establishment in which food and/or
beverages are prepared and served to patrons seated at tables and/or
counters inside the building. The term "restaurant" shall not include the
types of eating or drinking establishments commonly known as "openfront
restaurants," "curb-service roadside stands," "counter-service
restaurants" or establishments of the type at which food and/or
beverages are consumed on the premises outside the building, nor
shall it include a tavern, bar, inn, discotheque or any other similar
use.[Amended 6-26-1973]
RETAIL STORE OR SHOP — An establishment wherein goods, wares,
merchandise, produce, commodities or similar articles are offered for
sale or sold to the general public or the ultimate consumer.120[Added
1-7-1986]
Any nonprofit school, elementary or high, accredited by the New
York State Education Department; library; museum; fire station;
governmental administration building; civic center; passenger
transportation station or terminal; hospital; municipal garage; or
church, synagogue or similar place of worship, provided that said
building is not used in whole or in part for any commercial purpose.
(1)
Any building used or controlled exclusively for public purposes
by any department or branch of a state, county or municipal
government.
(2)
(3) Any building used principally for religious assembly.
§ 322-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-3
1:832
SAND MINING — Any alteration of the surface or subsurface conditions
of land by any activity that removes, deposits or disturbs rock, gravel,
sand, silt, soil or any other geologic deposits. This term shall not be
construed to include any site preparation activity for which a permit
has been issued pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 112, Article II;
154, Article III; 245, Article IV; 248; 252; or 285 or Article XIII of this
chapter of the Town Code.121[Added 10-8-1985]
SHIPPING CENTER — A building or portion thereof used primarily to
accept packages to be delivered via messenger or commercial carriers.
The term "shipping center" may be combined with printing and copying
services.[Added 3-22-2012]
SIGN — Any surface, fabric, device, group of letters or display
arranged, intended, designed, painted, drawn, erected, hung,
constructed, maintained or used to convey information visually, which
is exposed to public view, upon which is displayed or included forms
shaped to resemble any human, animal, plant, product or similar
physical object or any text, trademarks, banners, insignias, decorations,
symbols, letters, numbers, figures or marks. See Article X for specific
kinds and types of signs.[Amended 6-25-1985]122
SIGN WIDTH — The vertical distance measured between the top and
bottom of a sign.[Added 6-25-1985]
SOLID WASTE — Garbage; refuse; sludge; stumps; wood chips;
discarded leaves, grass, mulch, or other plant materials; or used
concrete, asphalt, brick, glass, wood, plastics, metal, ceramics,
containers, or other manufactured materials. The term shall not apply
to waste or recyclable material stored in cans, dumpsters, or
compactors as an incidental accessory use to residences, schools,
offices, stores, restaurants, and similar uses.[Added 9-22-2016]
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE — A use in one or more districts for which
the Board of Appeals may grant a permit pursuant to the provisions of
Article XII.123
STORY — That portion of a building which is between one floor level
and the next higher floor level or the roof, except that the topmost
"story" shall count only where the wall plates are at least five feet 10
inches above the plate of the next lower "story."
STORY, HALF — That portion of a building which is between the
topmost floor level and the roof where the wall plates are less than
120. Editor's Note: The definition of "sand dunes," added 8-25-1987, which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 9-12-1995 and 8-11-2009. See now Ch. 168, Flood
Damage Prevention.
121. Editor's Note: The definition of "satellite antenna," added 9-11-1984, which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 5-28-1991.
122. Editor's Note: The original definitions of "sign, business," "sign, real estate" and "sign,
temporary," which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 6-25-1985.
123. Editor's Note: The definition of "start of construction," added 8-25-1987, as amended,
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 8-11-2009. See now Ch. 168,
Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 322-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-3
1:833
five feet 10 inches above the plate of the next lower story, provided
that the floor area shall not exceed 1/2 the floor area of the next lower
story.[Amended 10-21-1986]
STREET — Any state, county or Town road or any "street" shown upon
a subdivision plat filed in the County Clerk's office.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and a street.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on or under the
ground or water or upon another "structure" or building. The portions
of buildings, garages, sheds, cabanas, gazebos, swimming pools,
porches, patios, decks, parking lots, driveways, stairs, steps, fences,
retaining walls, signs, lights, flagpoles, statues and similar items. For
the purpose of this chapter, truck facilities shall not be considered
structures.124[Amended 2-13-1990]
SUBREGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER — The use of land, buildings or
structures permitted in the Shopping Center Business District, which
contains a minimum of 25 acres but less than 30 acres of land, has a
minimum of 200,000 square feet of gross floor area and serves a trade
area population of between 100,000 to 150,000.125[Added 9-24-1968]
SWIMMING POOL — A receptacle for water or an artificial pool capable
of holding water depth at any point of more than 24 inches deep at any
point, designed or intended for the purpose of the immersion or partial
immersion therein and including all appurtenant equipment. The word
"pool" shall be construed to mean in-ground, above-ground, on-ground
outdoor water pools, hot tubs and spas that are installed or constructed
indoors or outdoors.[Amended 5-5-2009]
TAVERN, BAR OR INN — An establishment where mainly beverages
are served with or without food as an auxiliary accommodation.[Added
6-26-1973]
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to showing motion
pictures, musical entertainment or stage productions on a paid
admission basis. For purposes of this chapter, this use shall not include
and specifically prohibits any adult uses and adult entertainment as
defined in this chapter.[Added 5-11-1999]
THEATER, MULTIPLEX — A type of theater for motion pictures,
musical performances or live acts that has more than two auditoriums
and more than 500 seats.[Added 4-25-1989]
TOWN ENGINEER — The Town Engineer of the Town of Smithtown.
TOWNHOUSE STRUCTURE — Three or more single-family attached
homes (dwelling units), each of which has its own access to the outside
and is in single and separate ownership.[Added 8-9-1983]
124. Editor’s Note: The definition of “structure, built-prior,” added 2-13-1990, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 3-22-2012.
125. Editor's Note: The definition of "substantial improvement," added 8-25-1987, as amended,
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 8-11-2009. See now Ch. 168,
Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 322-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-3
1:834
TRANSFER STATION — Includes a lot, land or structure, or any
combination thereof, where solid wastes, including but not limited to
uncontaminated waste resulting from construction, remodeling, repair
and demolition of structures and roads, masonry materials, concrete,
drywall and refuse, are taken from collection vehicles and placed in
or exchanged with other transportation units for movement to another
facility or where solid wastes are temporarily collected and/or
processed and subsequently placed in transportation units for transport
to another facility. This term shall not include any lot, land or structure
or any combination thereof which handles recycled asphalt products
exclusively.[Added 11-18-2003; amended 5-19-2005]
TRUCKING STATION — Any premises, except for retail stores, used for
the maintenance, repair or storage of four or more commercial vehicles
at the same time.[Added 1-7-1986]
VARIANCE — Authorization by the Board of Zoning Appeals, or the
Planning Board where authorized pursuant to § 322-30.4 of this chapter
or § 248-31A and B of the Town Code, to utilize land for a use or in
a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter.[Amended 3-22-2012;
4-4-2017]
VEHICLE STORAGE RACK — Accessory structure or mechanical
equipment that is utilized to allow vehicles to be stored above finished
grade as an accessory use to a motor vehicle or boat showroom.[Added
1-23-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
VOCATIONAL SCHOOL — A building or portion thereof used for the
teaching of specialized courses, including, but not limited to, business,
trades, college exam preparation, and driver education.[Added
3-22-2012]
WALL — A work or structure of wood, stone or other materials or
combination thereof intended for defense, security, screening or
enclosure or for the retention of earth, stone, fill or other materials as
in the cases of retaining walls, bulkheads and seawalls.
WAREHOUSE — The use of a building by retailers, wholesalers and
other commercial or industrial users, the principal activity of which
is the storage of commodities. This definition shall not be deemed to
include "mini-storage warehouses," as that term is defined within this
chapter.126[Added 6-26-1973; amended 8-27-1985]
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — An establishment wherein goods, wares,
merchandise, produce, commodities or similar articles are offered for
sale or sold only in bulk or large quantities to wholesalers and retailers
or to institutional, industrial or business uses. A "wholesale business"
does not include any establishment wherein goods, wares,
merchandise, produce, commodities or similar articles are offered for
sale or sold to the general public or the ultimate consumer. Any
126. Editor's Note: The definition of "water-dependent use," added 8-25-1987, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 9-12-1985 and 8-11-2009. See now Ch.
168, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 322-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-3
1:835
§ 322-4. Application of regulations. [Amended 6-25-1985]
business wherein goods, wares, merchandise, produce, commodities
or similar articles are offered for sale and that has front windows
comprising more than 25% of the area of the front wall shall create a
rebuttable presumption that the business is a retail store or shop as
defined in this chapter.[Added 1-7-1986]
WINERY — An agricultural processing facility, located on a site of 10
acres or more, used for the commercial purpose of processing grapes,
other fruit products, or vegetables to produce wine or similar spirits.
Processing includes crushing, fermenting, blending, aging, storage,
related administrative office functions, retail sales, and tasting facilities
for the products of the facility. A minimum of nine acres of the winery
site must be devoted solely to the cultivation of the fruit products or
vegetables to be processed on site into wine or spirits. The winery
must be licensed by, and operated in compliance with the requirements
of, the New York State Department of Agriculture and Markets and
the New York State Liquor Authority.[Added 9-8-2009; amended
4-22-2010]
WINERY EVENT — An accessory activity of a winery approved by
the Town Board which may include festivals, weddings, receptions,
conferences, a seasonal restaurant operation with a seating capacity of
no more than 60 seats that operates only from March through October,
and other similar activities; provided that any such activities occur
only Monday through Thursday between 8:00 a.m. and sunset and
Friday, Saturday, and Sunday between 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.[Added
4-22-2010]
YARD, FRONT — The required open space extending along the street
line of any street on which the lot abuts.
YARD, REAR — The required open space extending along the rear lot
line (not a street line) throughout the whole width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE — The required open space extending along the side lot
line from the front yard to the rear yard.
A. Interpretation. In applying and interpreting this chapter, its provisions
shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience or the general
welfare.
B. Relation of Building Zone Ordinance to other provisions of law and to
provide covenants and agreements.
(1) Nothing contained in this chapter shall be taken to repeal,
abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with the Town
Building Code127 and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code [NOTE: Title 9, Subtitle S, Chapter I, of the
127. Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Building Construction.
§ 322-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-4
1:836
Official Compilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State
of New York, Volume 9-Executive (B), 9 NYCRR] or any rules or
regulations adopted or issued thereunder or the rules and
regulations of the Department of Health Services of the County of
Suffolk or any other provisions of law or ordinance or regulation,
existing or as may be adopted in the future, when not in conflict
with any of the provisions of this chapter, nor is it intended by
this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements,
covenants or other agreements between parties; provided,
however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of buildings, structures, premises, lots or land upon
the height of the buildings or structures or requires larger lots,
yards, courts or other open spaces than imposed or required by
such other provisions of law, ordinance or regulation or by such
easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
(2) Wherever the provisions of any other law or ordinance or
regulations impose a greater restriction than this chapter, the
provisions of such other law or ordinance or regulations shall
control.
(3) No provision contained in this chapter shall be construed as
justifying the encroachment of any building or structure with any
street lines now or hereafter laid down on any subdivision plat filed
in the office of the County Clerk or within any state, county or Town
road.
C. The minimum required lot area, frontage, or yard for one building or
structure shall not be used as any part of the required lot area,
frontage, or yard for any other building or structure. [Amended
6-24-2010]
D. The parking spaces required for one building, structure or use shall not
be included in the computation of required parking spaces for a second
building, structure or use. [Amended 6-24-2010]
E. Where districts are referred to as "more restrictive" or "less
restrictive," such designations shall refer to the order in which the
districts are listed in § 322-5, with the first-named, or CF District, being
the most restrictive. [Amended 10-21-1986]
F. The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be specific. Those
matters for which there is no specific provision in this chapter shall be
deemed to be prohibited.
G. Each principal use shall have its own frontage on a public street, and no
principal use or structure shall be located behind any other principal
use. [Added 10-21-1986; amended 12-6-1994]
§ 322-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-4
1:837
H. In all districts no lot area shall be made smaller than the minimum lot
required for that district in which the lot is located without the approval
of the Smithtown Planning Board. [Added 10-21-1986]
I. It shall be a violation of this chapter to solicit or advertise for purposes
of selling or renting property or portions of property when such sale or
rental will result in property being utilized in violation or contravention
of the uses permitted in §§ 322-7B, 322-8B, 322-9B and 322-10B, Table
of Use Regulations. [Added 10-21-1986]
J. Rental property registry. [Added 7-16-2019]
(1) Any residential dwelling that is not owner-occupied must be
registered with the Town on the rental property registry.
(2) A residential dwelling must be leased or rented in its entirety as
one dwelling; no partitions for the purpose of dividing the
residence into separate apartments or multiple dwelling units shall
be permitted.
(3) No person, real estate broker, or agent shall list, show, or occupy
any home that has not been registered with the Town.
(4) Each residential dwelling to be registered shall be accompanied by
a $100 application fee.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Department of Public Safety to maintain
the rental property registry.
§ 322-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-4
1:838
ARTICLE II
Districts and Boundaries on Building Zone Map
§ 322-5. Districts enumerated. [Amended 5-20-1969; 6-7-1977;
8-9-1983; 10-21-1986; 4-8-2014]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Town of Smithtown, outside the limits of
any incorporated village, is hereby divided into 20 classes of districts, which
are designated as follows:
A. Special purpose districts:
(1) CF District (Community Facility).
(2) O District (Overlay).
B. Residence districts:
(1) R-43 District (One-Family on one acre of lot area).
(2) R-21 District (One-Family on 1/2 acre of lot area).
(3) R-15 District (One-Family on 15,000 square feet of lot area).
(4) R-10 District (One-Family on 10,000 square feet of lot area).
(5) R-10S District (One-Family on 10,000 square feet of lot area).
(6) RM-7 District (One-Family on 7,500 square feet of lot area; Two-
Family on 15,000 square feet of lot area).
(7) RM-GA District (Garden Apartments at 2,500 square feet of lot area
per family).
(8) PRD Planned Residential Development District.
(9) RC Retirement Community District.
(10) R-6 Residential District.
C. Business districts:
(1) PB District (Professional Business).
(2) OB District (Office Business).
(3) SCB District (Shopping Center Business).
(4) NB District (Neighborhood Business).
(5) CB District (Central Business).
D. Industrial districts:
(1) WSI District (Wholesale and Service Industry).
(2) LI District (Light Industry).
§ 322-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-5
1:839
§ 322-6. Adoption of map; interpretation of boundaries.
(3) HI District (Heavy Industry).
A. The boundaries of each of the districts listed in § 322-5 are hereby
established as shown upon the Building Zone Map of the Town of
Smithtown, dated 1963, which accompanies this chapter and which,
with all notations, references and other matter shown thereon, is
hereby declared to be part of this chapter.128
B. The district boundary lines, unless shown otherwise, are intended
generally to follow street center lines, railroad right-of-way boundary
lines or their center lines, other similar right-of-way lines or lot lines or
boundaries of subdivisions or Town or village boundary lines, all as
shown on the Building Zone Map. Where a district boundary line does
not follow such a line but is shown parallel to such a line on the Building
Zone Map, the distance between the parallel line shall be as
dimensioned on the Building Zone Map. Such dimensions shall be
construed to read from the outside edge of all rights-of-way rather than
from their center lines.
C. Where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street
layout as shown on the Building Zone Map, the designation shown on
the mapped streets shall be applied in such a way as to carry out the
Building Director's judgment as to the purpose and intent of the
Building Zone Map for the particular area in question. [Amended
5-8-2007]
D. When the location of a district boundary line cannot be otherwise
determined, the determination thereof shall be made by the Building
Director by scaling the distance on the Building Zone Map from a line of
known location to such district boundary line. [Amended 5-8-2007]
E. In the case of uncertainty as to the true location of a district boundary
line in a particular instance, an appeal may be taken to the Board of
Appeals as provided in § 322-81.
F. When a district boundary line divides a lot in a single ownership at the
effective date of this chapter or any subsequent amendment thereto,
the Board of Appeals may permit extension of the less restrictive use as
hereinafter provided in § 322-83A(1).
G. The district boundary descriptions contained in the Building Zone
Ordinance of September 7, 1932, and shown on the Building Zone Map
that formed a part thereof, both as amended, revised and reenacted
from time to time, are hereby superseded in their entirety by the
provisions of this Article II and by the Building Zone Map of the Town of
Smithtown, dated 1963, which forms a part of this chapter.
128. Editor's Note: The Building Zone Map is available for inspection in the office of the Town
Clerk.
§ 322-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-6
1:840
ARTICLE III
District Regulations
[Amended 1-26-1965; 3-29-1966; 6-21-1966; 7-12-1966; 6-27-1967;
8-27-1968; 7-22-1969; 9-7-1971; 10-26-1971; 2-27-1973; 6-26-1973;
11-20-1973; 6-8-1976; 5-2-1978; 5-8-1979; 7-10-1979; 4-14-1981;
7-12-1983; 9-11-1984; 10-9-1984; 11-27-1984; 1-22-1985; 2-5-1985;
4-23-1985; 6-25-1985; 8-27-1985; 10-8-1985; 11-12-1985;
12-17-1985; 1-7-1986; 10-21-1986; 1-20-1987; 8-25-1987;
8-22-1989; 11-24-1992]
§ 322-7. Intent of districts.
A. Special purpose districts.
(1) CF District (Community Facility). The regulations set forth in this
section or set forth elsewhere in this chapter and applicable to the
CF District are intended to provide for adequate area for religious,
educational, recreational, institutional, agricultural, environmental
and municipal facilities and uses to serve the present and future
needs of the community and the region.
(2) Flood hazard districts. The Town Board of the Town of Smithtown
finds that the potential and/or actual damages from flooding and
erosion may be a problem to the residents of the Town of
Smithtown and that such damages may include the destruction or
loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities, both
publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life.
In order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the
purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, these provisions are
adopted.
(a) Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in
specific areas by provisions designed to:
[1] Restrict and prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water or erosion hazards or
which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood
heights or velocities.
[2] Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage
at the time of initial construction.
[3] Control alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters.
§ 322-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-7
1:841
[4] Prohibit and control filling, grading, dredging and other
development which may increase erosion or flood
damages.
[5] Prevent and regulate the construction of flood barriers
which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may
increase flood hazards to other lands.
[6] Qualify for and maintain participation in the National
Flood Insurance Program.
(b) Objectives. The objectives of these provisions are to:
[1] Protect human life and health.
[2] Minimize the expenditure of public money for costly floodcontrol
projects.
[3] Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of
the general public.
[4] Minimum prolonged business interruptions.
[5] Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines,
streets and bridges located in areas of special flood
hazard.
[6] Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound
use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as
to minimize future flood blight areas.
[7] Provide that developers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard.
[8] Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood
hazard assume responsibility for their actions.
(3) O District (Overlay). The regulations set forth in this section or set
forth elsewhere in this chapter and applicable to an O District are
intended to provide adequate flexibility for development and the
uses therein to better serve the present and future needs of the
community and the region. [Added 4-8-2014]
B. Residence districts. (Reserved)
C. Business districts.
(1) PB District (Professional Business). The regulations set forth in this
section or set forth elsewhere in this chapter and applicable to the
PB District are intended to encourage low-intensity office
development of single-family residence character compatibly mixed
with one- and two-family residential uses, principally for areas in
§ 322-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-7
1:842
which a similar pattern of use has occurred or for areas where an
office-residential pattern is appropriate between Central Business
Districts and residential neighborhoods.
(2) OB District (Office Business). The regulations set forth in this
section or set forth elsewhere in this chapter and applicable to the
OB District are intended to encourage office development of high
aesthetic areas unsuitable for residential development and which,
for environmental, economic, fiscal, aesthetic or other reasons to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare, are
inappropriate for intensive commercial or industrial uses.
(3) SCB District (Shopping Center Business). The regulations set forth
in this section or set forth elsewhere in this chapter and applicable
to the SCB District are intended to provide for retail shopping
centers composed principally of groups of retail and service
establishments of integrated architectural and site design, to serve
community-wide or regional needs.
(4) NB District (Neighborhood Business). The regulations set forth in
this section or set forth elsewhere in this chapter and applicable to
the NB District are intended to encourage moderate-intensity
retail, office and service development and uses which are
compatible in scale and character with, and are designed
principally to serve the needs of, the adjoining neighborhoods and
are adequately buffered from residential districts.
(5) CB District (Central Business). The regulations set forth in this
section or set forth elsewhere in this chapter and applicable to the
CB District are intended to encourage traditional commercial
development and uses, especially those which depend on and
encourage pedestrian traffic and public transportation, principally
for areas where a similar pattern of use has occurred and which is
appropriately buffered from residential neighborhoods.
D. Industrial districts.
(1) WSI District (Wholesale and Service Industry). The regulations set
forth in this section or set forth elsewhere in this chapter and
applicable to the WSI District are intended to provide adequate
land along appropriate arterial highways for automotive-related
nonretail needs and for uses which require extensive land for
outdoor storage or display and for uses that do not generate large
traffic volumes.
(2) LI District (Light Industry). The regulations set forth in this section
or set forth elsewhere in this chapter and applicable to the LI
District are intended to provide, in appropriate locations, office,
research and development, wholesale and light manufacturing on
sites of high aesthetic character, with adequate buffering from
adjoining residential neighborhoods.
§ 322-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-7
1:843
§ 322-8. Use regulations.
§ 322-9. Dimensional regulations.
§ 322-10. (Reserved)
§ 322-11. Prohibited uses.
(3) HI District (Heavy Industry). The regulations set forth in this
section or set forth elsewhere in this chapter and applicable to the
HI District are intended to provide appropriate locations for safe
and efficient heavy industrial activities necessary to serve the
needs of the community.
A. No building or structure or part thereof shall be erected or altered or
used, and no lot or land or part thereof shall be used, except for a
purpose specifically permitted by the Table of Use Regulations in the
district in which said building, structure, lot or land is located.
[Amended 6-24-2010]
B. In any district, any covenant, restriction, easement or other such
limitation or condition placed upon property at the direction of the
Town Board, the Town Planning Board, the Town Board of Zoning
Appeals or the Town Board of Site Plan Review, or pursuant to Chapter
323, Transfer of Density Flow Rights, of the Town Code, shall become
part of the zoning requirements for such property. Any violation of any
such covenant, restriction, easement or other such limitation or
condition shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Nothing in this
section, however, shall vest the Board of Zoning Appeals with the
authority to modify or eliminate any such covenant, restriction,
easement or other such limitation or condition not imposed by the
Board of Zoning Appeals. [Added 9-28-2004129; amended 5-7-2013]
C. The Table of Use Regulations is located at the end of this chapter.
A. No building or structure or part thereof shall be used, erected,
structurally altered, enlarged or rebuilt except in conformity with
dimensional regulations as indicated in the Table of Dimensional
Regulations for the specific district in which it is located. [Amended
6-24-2010]
B. The Table of Dimensional Regulations is located at the end of this
chapter.
A. No building, structure, lot or land in any district in the Town of
Smithtown shall be used for any of the following uses, except as
provided in Article XI: [Amended 3-8-1994]
129. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection B as C.
§ 322-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-11
1:844
Acid manufacture
Ammonia or chlorine manufacture
Blast furnace
Cabbage products manufacture
Cement, lime or gypsum manufacture
Chemical poisons manufacture
Chemical works or manufacture
Coal tar products manufacture
Curb-service restaurant
Display of motor vehicle(s) for the purposes of sale, except as
permitted in this article and except that residents shall be permitted
to display one intact motor vehicle owned by them and registered to
them for purposes of sale in the driveway of their home, provided that
said driveway or the portion of said driveway utilized for this purpose
does not fall within the bounds of a right-of-way of a state road or
highway
Distillation of coal, wood or bones
Explosives or gunpowder manufacture or storage
Fat rendering or refining
Fertilizer manufacture
Fish smoking or curing
Gas manufacture
Glue manufacture
House trailers or mobile homes
Incineration or reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal, refuse, junk
or similar materials, except at a municipal facility
Ink or lampblack manufacture
Junkyard or dump, except those licensed by Town ordinance
Kiosk or booth specifically designated for retail sales or service,
whether on a public street, sidewalk, private property or parking area
Meat products' manufacture
Open-air retail sales establishments other than for automotive fuel or
horticulture products
Open-front restaurant
Open-front stores arranged and designed for the purpose of making
sales to persons on the public street or sidewalk
Outdoor industrial activities, except in the HI District [Added
9-22-2016]
Outdoor storage of materials attractive to animals unless it is in
enclosed containers [Added 9-22-2016]
§ 322-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-11
1:845
Outdoor storage of solid waste [Added 9-22-2016]
Outdoor storage on any parking spaces or maneuvering areas [Added
9-22-2016]
Outdoor storage on any required landscaped areas or buffer areas
[Added 9-22-2016]
Outdoor storage that could cause fumes, odors, or dust, or which is a
fire hazard [Added 9-22-2016]
Outdoor storage that is not accessory to a permanent building on the
site [Added 9-22-2016]
Outdoor storage that may be transferred off-site via wind or
precipitation [Added 9-22-2016]
Paint manufacture
Paper or pulp manufacture
Petroleum refining
Plastics' manufacture
Rear dwelling without separate frontage and other lot dimensional
requirements
Recreation center devices such as sky rides, Ferris wheels, roller
coasters and shooting galleries, except on a temporary permit issued
by the Town Board
Rolling mill
Rubber manufacture
Smelting of metal ores
Soap manufacture
Stockyards or abattoir
Tanning of skins or hides
Transfer station [Added 11-18-2003]
Any other use which may be determined by the Board of Appeals to
constitute a hazard to the health, safety or general welfare of the
community
B. No building, structure, lot or land in any district within 1/2 mile of the
Nissequogue River, measured from the bank of the river at any point
downstream from Veteran's Memorial Highway or Brooksite Drive,
shall be used for the following uses:
Any use listed in Subsection A above
Concrete products' manufacture
Contractors' storage and equipment yard
Counter service restaurant
Dance club [Amended 11-3-2015]
§ 322-11 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-11
1:846
Dry-cleaning plant of more than 4,000 square feet
Filling station
Laundry plant of more than 4,000 square feet
Machinery repair service plant
Monument works
Parking garage
Printing plant
Repair garage
Trucking station
§ 322-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-11
1:847

ARTICLE IV
Supplementary Use and Building Regulations
§ 322-12. Placement of accessory buildings, structures and uses.
[Amended 9-28-1971; 3-4-1975; 5-2-1978; 4-14-1981; 7-7-1981;
3-2-1982; 6-26-1984; 6-25-1985; 1-7-1986; 2-13-1990]
A. Except for underground septic systems, no accessory use shall be
permitted unless it is on the same plot and in the same class of zoning
district as an existing permitted or lawfully nonconforming principal
use; further, parking spaces must be within 500 feet of the building
which they intended to serve.
B. Except as provided for in Subsection D below, no accessory structure
shall be permitted in the required front yard or side yard, regardless of
whether the accessory structure is between the principal building and
side property line. (See figure below.)
C. No outdoor storage, as that term is defined in § 322-3, shall exist except
pursuant to an approved site plan.
D. The following accessory structures may be located within the required
front or side yard, provided that they comply with all other provisions of
§ 322-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-12
1:849
this chapter: fences, walls, retaining walls, driveways, curbs, parking
areas, drainage structures, lighting, signs, septic systems, underground
fuel tanks, utility cables and pipes, litter baskets, fuel pumps and
benches.
E. Access driveways to required off-street parking areas and truck-loading
spaces shall lead to a public street over the same lot or by means of a
permanent easement across an adjoining lot.
F. Private garage floor area within principal buildings shall not exceed
750 square feet. [Amended 2-22-1999]
G. (Reserved)130
H. Swimming pools shall be at least six feet from all dwellings. [Added
3-23-1993;131 amended 9-27-2007; 10-2-2012]
I. Outdoor storage and display shall not be permitted in any district
except as an accessory use and in accordance with the following
requirements:
(1) The storage of manure or odor- or dust-producing substances shall
be in a waterproof container and shall not be permitted within 50
feet of any side or rear lot line or within 100 feet of any front lot
line.
(2) Solid waste shall not remain on the premises for more than one
week and must be stored in closed waterproof containers;
furthermore, the lot area used for the storage of refuse shall not
exceed 1% of the gross floor area of the site.
(3) For uses other than one- and two-family dwellings, refuse
containers or compactors must be screened from view from
adjoining properties and highways. [Amended 11-3-2015]
(4) Charity drop boxes may be placed only on commercial, industrial
and institutional sites, provided that the boxes are set back more
than 10 feet from all property lines and do not encroach on any
required planting areas, parking areas, driveways or areas needed
for traffic safety.
(5) (Reserved)132
(6) For institutional, business and industrial uses, no outdoor storage
or outdoor display shall be permitted except in conformity with an
outdoor storage or outdoor display area shown on a site plan
approved pursuant to Article XIII.
130. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, regarding the location of detached accessory
buildings, was repealed 9-27-2007.
131. Editor's Note: This amendment also redesignated former Subsections H, I, J and K as
Subsections I, J, K and L, respectively.
132. Editor's Note: Former Subsection I(5), regarding outdoor storage of large vehicles, was
repealed 12-10-1996. See now Subsection N of this section.
§ 322-12 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-12
1:850
(7) Motor vehicle and boat showrooms. [Amended 11-19-1996;
10-7-1997]
(a) Unregistered motor vehicles and boats shall not be parked,
stored or displayed in required parking areas. No vehicles shall
be parked, stored or displayed in drive aisles and landscape
areas. [Amended 10-4-2016; 1-23-2020 by L.L. No.
2-2020]
(b) Outdoor storage and display shall not exceed three times the
gross floor area.
(c) Not more than one vehicle or boat per 100 feet of frontage on a
public street shall be displayed or stored above the approved
grade within the front yard, which shall include the entire area
between the street and the principal building. Vehicle
platforms shall not exceed four feet in height. Platforms or lifts
for display purposes shall not create visual obstruction and
shall not be located in an area that is reserved for landscaping,
customer parking, required setback, or a public right-of-way.
[Amended 1-23-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
(d) Vehicle storage racks shall be subject to the following
limitations: [Added 1-23-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
[1] Racks or lifts shall only be permitted on portions of
property that are zoned WSI, and the locations shall be
subject to approval by the Board of Site Plan Review.
[2] Racks shall only be used for storage. Outdoor repair/
vehicle maintenance or any other use shall not occur on
racks.
[3] Rack locations shall be permitted in the rear of the
principal building and in no case less than 10 feet from any
lot line and 50 feet to a residence district.
[4] Vehicle storage racks shall be screened from view from all
adjacent streets, public rights-of-way, and adjacent
properties.
[5] Vehicle storage rack locations shall be permitted in the
rear yard only and shall meet principal structure setback
requirements.
[6] Vehicle storage racks shall only be used for storage; no
outdoor repair, vehicle or boat maintenance, or any other
use shall be permitted.
[7] In the case where the Zoning Board of Appeals has granted
either a variance or a special use permit to use the
residential portion of a property for business, vehicle
storage racks for the storage of inventory or customers'
§ 322-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-12
1:851
vehicles or boats are specifically prohibited from being
located in the area of the lot that is the subject of such a
grant.
(8) The parking and/or storage of motor vehicles, trailers, boats and
similar articles shall not be permitted in the required front yard,
except on paved surfaces. For residential uses, except garden
apartments and townhouse dwellings, not more than 25% of the
required front, side or rear yards shall be paved surfaces, except
that the maximum paved surface in the required front yard shall be
increased as necessary to accommodate a twelve-foot swath for a
circular driveway; and the maximum paved surface in one side yard
shall be increased as necessary to accommodate a driveway not
exceeding 10 feet in width for access to a detached garage, or
increased to 50% for a side-entry garage; and paved surfaces shall
be set back at least one foot from side and rear lot lines. [Amended
9-5-2000; 10-2-2012]
(9) For nurseries, the outdoor storage and display of live plants shall
be permitted to the extent that such storage and/or display does
not encroach on any parking or truck-loading areas or driveways
needed for traffic safety. The outdoor storage of mulch, supplies,
equipment and vehicles shall not exceed 25% of the outdoor
storage of live plants.
(10) An owner, tenant or occupant of private property in a residence
district may store not more than one unregistered motor vehicle on
a residential lot. Unless enclosed in a building, the unregistered
vehicle must be covered at all times with an automobile cover that
shall be kept in good repair and/or the unregistered vehicle shall be
screened from the view of adjacent properties and the abutting
streets through the use of shrubbery and/or fencing in accordance
with the Town Code. [Amended 10-7-1997; 10-4-2016]
(11) In the WSI District, outdoor storage and display shall not exceed
two times the gross floor area of the site, except for nurseries,
motor vehicle showrooms and boat showrooms.
(12) In the WSI District, outdoor storage and display shall be set back at
least 25 feet from the front property line and 25 feet from any
residence district; shall not exceed six feet in height, except for
vehicles and plants, provided that they are stored on the ground
and are not stacked, except as provided for in § 322-12I(7); and
shall not be located in any required buffer area or planting or
maneuvering area. In the HI District, outdoor storage shall not be
located in the required front yard. [Amended 10-7-1997;
9-22-2016; 1-23-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
J. The harboring or stabling of horses or ponies shall be in compliance
with the following requirements:
§ 322-12 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-12
1:852
(1) The proposed use shall be on not less than 1/2 acre of land.
(2) There shall not be more than one horse or pony per 1/2 acre of
land, except that on a plot of 3/4 acre two such animals may be
permitted. On a plot of one acre, three such animals may be
permitted. Additional horses or ponies may be permitted at the rate
of one such animal per additional 1/2 acre. The use shall be
accessory to the principal residential use of the property or shall be
for the purpose of agricultural use. All activities shall be conducted
for the use of the resident. No boarding or rental of horses or
ponies shall be permitted whatsoever.
(3) All horses or ponies shall be sheltered in barns, stables or other
roofed structures which shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the Building Code133 of the Town of Smithtown
and pursuant to all applicable provisions of this chapter.
(4) All horses or ponies shall be harbored in a fenced-in area that does
not encroach into any required front or side yard. Furthermore, the
fence shall be set back at least six feet from any side or rear
property line. The fence shall be between four and six feet in height
and shall be constructed of suitable material. All enclosures shall
provide for a gate with a safety latch or lock.
K. In the SCB, CB and NB Districts, game rooms shall be permitted as an
auxiliary and incidental use for the following uses only: taverns,
restaurants, counter service restaurants, discotheques, hotels and
motels. Only one game room shall be permitted per site. The floor area
of the building used as a game room shall not exceed 10% of the total
building area or 250 square feet, whichever is less, and further, no sign
referring to said game machines or game rooms shall be erected,
affixed or maintained in such a way as to be visible from the exterior of
the building.
L. Drive-in windows. [Amended 5-9-2017]
(1) This is a prohibited use in the LI District except as an accessory use
to a bank.
(2) Queuing lanes shall be provided of sufficient length to prevent
queued cars from interfering with traffic on any highway or in the
parking area.
(3) All queue lanes shall be at least 50 feet from any residence district.
(4) Drive-in windows, order boards, and menus shall be at least 75 feet
from any residence district and shall not be located on any building
elevation facing a residence district.
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Building Construction.
§ 322-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-12
1:853
(5) The drive-in/order board speaker system shall not be audible at the
property lines.
M. The installation of tires, batteries, stereo systems and car phones
purchased on premises shall be permitted as a customary accessory use
to any retail store exceeding 100,000 square feet gross floor area in the
SCB District, provided that all of the following requirements are met:
[Added 11-1-1994]
(1) Outdoor storage or display of tires, batteries, stereo systems and
car phones and outdoor installation work shall not be permitted at
any time.
(2) The floor area for installation shall be less than 10% of the floor
area of the retail store to which it is accessory.
(3) No portion of the area used for installation shall be less than 300
feet from any developed residential district.
(4) If any portion of the area used for installation is less than 500 feet
from any developed residential district, all garage doors associated
with the installation facility shall face away from said residential
district.
N. Parking and/or storage of commercial vehicles. [Added 12-10-1996]
(1) In all districts:
(a) The use shall be clearly accessory and incidental to a principal
use that has site plan approval. All other parking and/or
storage of commercial vehicles which are not accessory or
incidental will be classified as a trucking station.
(b) The parking and/or storage of large commercial vehicles shall
not be permitted, except in conformity with an approved site
plan.
(c) No repair, maintenance or any other service shall be permitted
except at a filling station or repair garage or trucking station.
(d) The use shall not be permitted in any required front yard,
buffer, landscaping, parking spaces, aisles, sidewalks or
planting strips.
(e) No large commercial vehicle shall be parked or stored within
100 feet of a residence district.
(2) In the CF, PB and OB Districts and residence districts:
(a) No large commercial vehicle shall be parked or stored
overnight.
(b) Not more than one commercial vehicle shall be parked or
stored overnight.
§ 322-12 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-12
1:854
§ 322-13. Fences, walls, and berms. [Amended 10-21-1986;
2-13-1990; 12-9-1997; 1-27-1998; 7-2-2008]
(c) No commercial vehicle which would otherwise be permitted to
be parked or stored pursuant to Subsection N(2)(b), above,
shall be so permitted, if said vehicle shall have a commercial
sign affixed or painted thereon. [Added 8-2-2010]
(3) The number of commercial vehicles parked and/or stored on a site
shall note the following:
District
Maximum number of commercial
vehicles
CB, NB and SCB 1 per 7,500 square feet of gross floor
area
WSI and HI 1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
area
LI 1 per 1,500 square feet of gross floor
area
O. Outdoor dining areas. In Central Business (CB) Districts, the
regulations set forth in § 322-82C(25) shall be met. [Added
10-2-2012]
A. No fence, wall, or berm shall exceed six feet in height; except that no
fence, wall, or berm in a required front yard shall exceed four feet in
height, except as otherwise provided in the Table of Dimensional
Regulations located at the end of this chapter, and no fence, wall, or
berm in a corner clearance triangle, as described in § 322-16 of this
chapter, shall exceed two feet in height. [Amended 10-2-2012]
B. No retaining wall higher than 30 inches, and no fence, berm or other
wall higher than four feet, shall be constructed or substantially
reconstructed except in conformity with a building permit.
C. The height of a fence or wall shall be measured vertically from the
natural or approved grade to the top of the fence or wall, including the
posts and appurtenances, but not including an arbor built into any such
fence or wall, provided said arbor shall not exceed eight feet in height.
For purposes of this section, an arbor shall be defined as an ornamental
structure forming an archway over an opening or gateway within a
fence or wall. No fence or wall shall be located on a berm. [Added
10-2-2012]
D. The posts and structural members shall face inward, except for
residential fences abutting business and industrial land uses.
E. The minimum setback of retaining walls from all property lines shall be
the height, of the retaining wall or three feet, whichever is greater.
Fences and walls shall be set back from retaining walls one foot for
every foot of height of the retaining wall.
§ 322-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-13
1:855
§ 322-14. Height.
§ 322-15. Yards. [Amended 2-25-1939; 8-22-1989; 3-23-1993]
F. Retaining walls may be constructed of only pressure-treated timber,
mechanically stabilized segmental block (mortarless), or cast-in-place
concrete. Timber walls shall not exceed four feet in height, and shall not
be used in tiered retaining wall construction.
G. The maximum grade of berms shall be one foot vertical for every three
feet horizontal. No portion of a berm shall be on public property.
H. All berms shall consist of only pure Long Island loam and topsoil.
I. The entire berm shall be stabilized with live groundcover. No tree
species with a maximum typical height greater than 20 feet shall be
planted on any berm.
J. No stormwater runoff shall be diverted by the construction of a berm in
a manner that creates the need for drainage structures on adjacent
properties or causes or worsens flooding on nearby property.
K. The Board of Site Plan Review may modify these requirements in the
site plan approval process as it determines necessary to promote the
purposes of this chapter.
A. Nothing herein contained shall restrict the height of a church spire,
cupola, dome, belfry, clock tower, transmission line tower, flagpole,
chimney flue, public water supply tank or any firesafety structure which
may be required by the New York State Fire Safety Code. [Amended
9-5-1989; 12-10-1991; 8-31-1999]
B. No structure erected pursuant to Subsection A above to a height in
excess of the height limit for the zone in which it is situated shall:
(1) Have a lot coverage in excess of 10% of the lot area.
(2) Be used for residence or tenancy purposes.
(3) Have any sign, nameplate display or advertising device of any kind
whatsoever inscribed upon or attached to such structure.
C. Notwithstanding the maximum height limits stipulated in §§ 322-8C,
322-9C and 322-10C134 (Table of Dimensional Regulations), a public or
semipublic building may be erected to a height not to exceed 50 feet,
provided that its front, side and rear yards are increased above the
stipulated minimum by one additional foot for each foot that such
building exceeds the stipulated height limit. [Amended 10-21-1986]
A. All required yards shall be kept open except for:
134. Editor's Note: See now the Tables of Dimensional Regulations located at the end of this
chapter.
§ 322-13 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-15
1:856
§ 322-16. Corner clearance.
On a corner lot, within the triangular area (see sketch) determined as
provided in this section, no wall or fence or other structure shall be erected
to a height above the curb level in excess of two feet; no vehicle, object or
any other obstruction of a height in excess of two feet shall be parked or
placed therein; and no hedge, shrub or other growth shall be maintained
at a height in excess of two feet, except that trees whose branches are
(1) Cornices, eaves and gutters projecting not more than 18 inches.
(2) Steps giving access to the first floor.
(3) Bay windows, chimneys and fireplaces not wider than six feet and
projecting not more than 24 inches.
(4) Decks as specifically authorized in § 322-15B.
(5) Handicap ramps.
(6) Porticos, up to six feet wide and up to six feet deep; provided the
structure to which it is attached meets all other required setbacks.
[Added 10-2-2012]
B. Except for the R-6 District, decks shall observe the following setbacks:
(1) Decks under six inches in height are permitted in any required yard
but shall be set back at least three feet from all property lines.
(2) Decks six to 18 inches in height shall be permitted to encroach
eight feet into the required front yard, provided that the deck shall
meet the side yard requirements for principal buildings.
(3) Decks having a maximum height of six to 36 inches shall comply
with the setback requirements for accessory structures.
(4) Decks over 36 inches in height shall comply with the setback
requirements for principal buildings.
(5) Decks shall not be used in determining the FAR, but decks greater
than six inches in height shall not exceed the actual building
coverage.
(6) Railings, posts and/or walls shall not exceed four feet in height
above the decks.
C. Through lots shall provide for the applicable required front yard on
each street frontage.
D. For garage entrances facing into a side yard area, when attached or
part of the main building in any residential zone, the minimum side yard
on that side of the building shall be increased to 35 feet, the other
minimum side yard shall be observed and the total for both side yards
shall be increased pursuant to the above.
§ 322-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-16
1:857
trimmed away to a height of at least eight feet above the curb level shall
be permitted. Such triangular area shall be determined by the intersecting
street center lines and a diagonal connecting two points, one on each street
center line, each of whose points is 75 feet from the intersection of such
street center lines.
§ 322-17. Swimming pools.135
It shall be unlawful to construct, install, enlarge or maintain any outdoor
swimming pool on any lot or land area except in compliance with the
following requirements:
A. The construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any pool
shall require a permit issued by the Building Director, and the proposed
work shall be subject to all applicable provisions of the Town of
Smithtown Code and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code. [Amended 5-8-2007; 5-5-2009]
B. A complete set of drawings and plans shall be submitted to the Building
Director, showing, among other things, the exact location of the pool
with respect to the lot or land on which it is to be located and the
applicable zone district regulation and information pertinent to the pool
itself, the fence construction, the water supply system and all
appurtenances, as well as detailed plans and vertical elevations. All
construction shall be in conformance with such drawings and plans as
approved by the Building Director. [Amended 5-8-2007]
C. Water disposal. All water either overflowing or emptying from the pool
shall be disposed of on the owner's land, and plans submitted shall
show provisions made for preventing such water from flowing onto the
land of any adjoining property owner or into any abutting street.
D. Fences. All pools shall be completely and continuously surrounded and
enclosed by a permanent durable wall, barrier or fence, in accordance
with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code
requirements. In the event that the swimming pool is the above-ground
type and is so constructed that it contains a wall, barrier or fence
mounted on top of the pool structure installed in accordance with the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, it must be
additionally enclosed with a fence around the property in compliance
135. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 252, Swimming Pools.
§ 322-16 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-17
1:858
§ 322-18. Temporary storage of private mobile homes or house
trailers.
§ 322-19. Environmentally sensitive lands. [Amended 1-7-1986;
7-12-1988]
with § 322-13 herein. [Amended 9-21-1965; 2-1-1972; 5-8-2007;
5-5-2009]
E. Size and location. All pools which are accessory uses shall comply with
the requirements for accessory buildings, except that the lot area
occupied by such pools shall not be included in computing the
percentage of the lot area which may be built upon.
A. One private mobile home or house trailer may be temporarily stored on
the same lot with a single-family dwelling for a period not to exceed
three months in any calendar year, provided that:
(1) The mobile home or house trailer belongs to the occupant of the
single-family dwelling or his guest.
(2) The occupant of the single-family dwelling is either the owner of
the property or has the written permission of the owner to store
such unit.
(3) The mobile home or house trailer is not used for residential
purposes.
(4) Every toilet shall be sealed or locked so that it cannot be used
during the storage period.
(5) The mobile home or house trailer shall be located on the lot or land
in conformance with the provisions of this chapter for accessory
buildings.
(6) The mobile home or house trailer and its site shall be maintained in
a manner compatible with community standards and it shall not
constitute a nuisance or hazard to the health, safety and general
welfare of the community in which it is located.
B. Applications for such temporary storage permits shall be made to the
Building Director. They shall be approved prior to the time that the
mobile home or house trailer is located on the site. [Amended
5-8-2007]
C. Any permit issued pursuant to this section may be revoked by the
Building Director, in the exercise of his reasonable discretion, if after
due investigation he deems that the permit holder has violated any of
the provisions of this chapter or the conditions on which the permit was
issued. [Amended 5-8-2007]
§ 322-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-19
1:859
§ 322-20. Required buffer yards and screening adjoining residential
districts.
A. In any location on the Building Zone Map where environmentally
sensitive lands are shown as not included in any zoning district, such
lands shall be construed to lie with a CF District.
B. No environmentally sensitive land shall be used to calculate the
permitted density, building coverage, floor area or minimum lot area.
[Amended 9-12-1989; 4-4-2017]
C. Except as provided for in Subsection F, no environmentally sensitive
land shall be altered by excavation, storage, compaction, construction
activities, vegetation removal or the placement of fill or other activity.
[Amended 4-28-2011]
D. No structure, including but not limited to buildings, decks, garages,
sheds, swimming pools, fences, walks and driveways, shall be
constructed, enlarged, altered or replaced within 100 feet from any
wetland, escarpment, natural surface water feature or significant
wildlife habitat.
E. No structure shall be constructed, enlarged, altered or replaced within
10 feet of any slope higher than five feet and having a slope greater
than 25% or any A or V Flood Hazard Zone. [Amended 9-8-2015 by
L.L. No. 3-2015]
F. In areas where the only environmentally sensitive land that will be
impacted is land where depth to the seasonal high water table is less
than 10 feet, the following actions shall be exempt from Subsection C:
[Added 4-28-2011]
(1) Construction of a deck.
(2) Installation of a fence.
(3) Construction of a shed less than 100 square feet.
A. In order to assure orderly and compatible relationships between
residence and nonresidence districts along their common boundaries,
the provisions of this section are general requirements to be applied as
indicated in specific districts. They do not take precedence over special
requirements indicated for particular uses or for special exception uses
in the other sections of this chapter.
B. Required setbacks and buffer yards adjoining a residence district:
[Amended 11-10-1970; 6-25-1985; 10-21-1986; 2-13-1990]
(1) In the PB, OB, SCB, NB, CB and WSI Districts, the minimum
required side and/or rear yard shall be 50 feet.
(2) In the LI and HI Districts, the minimum required side and rear yard
shall be 100 feet, shall be maintained as a densely planted buffer
§ 322-19 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-20
1:860
§ 322-21. Apartment, business or industrial groups; building layout
and spacing between buildings.
§ 322-22. (Reserved)138
zone and shall not be used for parking, storage or accessory
structures except for the buffer fence as required by this chapter.
C. Required buffer screen adjoining a residence district. In the CB, SCB,
NB, OB, WSI, LI and HI Districts, a six-foot screen fence (stockade,
metal posts) shall be erected at the side and rear property lines on
metal fence posts fixed in concrete footings, in accordance with Town
specifications. The fence posts shall not face residential property and,
in addition, a ten-foot-wide protective planting strip shall be established
and maintained in accordance with Town specifications immediately
inside the fence along the residence district boundary. [Amended
11-29-1966; 11-20-1973; 6-25-1985; 8-31-1999]
D. Landscaping. [Added 6-25-1985]
(1) All areas of any site not used for structures, driveways, parking,
truck-loading areas and walkways shall be planted with ground
cover, shrubs and trees in conformance with a landscape plan
approved by the Board of Site Plan Review in accordance with the
provisions of Article XIII.
(2) In the case of injury or death to any plant material, the plant shall
be promptly replaced with a plant of the same species and of the
same specifications as shown on the approved site plan.
E. (Reserved)136
F. All roof equipment must be screened from view from the street(s)
adjoining the property. [Added 6-25-1985]137
A. In individual building plans, wings of the same buildings which are
substantially parallel to each other shall be not less than 30 feet apart.
B. Principal buildings in a group development shall be not less than 30 feet
apart at their nearest point to each other.
C. Groups of accessory structures, such as a garage compound, or
individual accessory structures equivalent in floor area to principal
buildings, shall be not less than 30 feet from the nearest point on a
principal building.
D. Minor accessory structures shall meet the requirements of § 322-12A.
136. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, regarding in-ground irrigation systems, added
6-25-1985, was repealed 11-3-2015.
137. Editor's Note: Original § 54-10I(7) of the 1964 Code, added 6-25-1985, which immediately
followed this subsection and provided for dumpster regulations, was repealed 2-13-1990.
138. Editor’s Note: Former § 322-22, Commercial Center, as amended, was repealed 11-3-2015.
§ 322-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-23
1:861
§ 322-23. Research laboratory and nonnuisance industry.
§ 322-24. Planned industrial park.
A. A research laboratory or nonnuisance industry shall not be deemed to
include any use prohibited in § 322-11, any open storage of waste or
scrap materials or any open storage of materials, products or
equipment over an area exceeding the area of the principal building.
B. Permitted open storage areas shall be screened from view from the
property line.
C. All materials processing and/or manufacturing of products shall be
done indoors.
D. Water used in processing where a pollutant or any additive is
accumulated in the process water shall not be disposed of on the
premises. Pure process water may be disposed of on the premises by
discharging into the sanitary waste disposal system or into a
stormwater recharge basin, provided that such facilities have adequate
capacity for the additional water.
E. There shall be no more than 50 employees per acre of site area on the
site at any one time.
A. In the WSI, LI and HI Districts, application may be made for a planned
industrial park status. (See § 322-3, definition of "planned industrial
park.") Such application shall be accompanied by the proposed
subdivision master plan for the entire site area showing streets, lots,
building areas, parking areas and landscaping, among other things
required by the Town of Smithtown Subdivision Regulations139 for a
subdivision submission. [Amended 12-24-1968; 10-21-1986]
B. The Planning Board, in its consideration of the proposed subdivision
plans through the statutory public hearing, shall also determine
whether the area is suitable for development as a planned industrial
park within the meaning of this chapter, whether the proposed planned
industrial park is consistent with the use of surrounding property and is
designed to promote and benefit the welfare of the Town and whether it
complies with all the provisions of this chapter for such park.
C. The Planning Board, in its consideration of the overall master plan for a
planned industrial park, may require larger front, side or rear yards
around the perimeter of the park than indicated in the Table of
Dimensional Regulations, § 322-10C. [Amended 5-2-1978;
10-21-1986]140
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. 248, Subdivision of Land.
140. Editor's Note: Original § 54-10N(3.1) of the 1964 Code, which immediately followed this
subsection and dealt with minimum distances between buildings, as amended, was
repealed 6-25-1985. Original Subsection N(4) and (5) of the 1964 Code, as amended, was
repealed 5-2-1978.
§ 322-23 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-24
1:862
§ 322-25. Drainage. [Amended 4-13-1965; 1-11-1972; 10-21-1986]
The drainage of stormwater incident to any residential, commercial,
industrial or other development use shall be stored and disposed of on the
subject site in accordance with the specifications of the Town Engineer.
No site shall be developed in a manner that would cause the discharge of
stormwater into a wetland, stream, pond or similar surface water feature,
unless the Town Engineer determines that the quantity, quality and other
characteristics of the discharge after construction are the same as the
characteristics of the discharge from the site in its natural state.141
§ 322-26. Outdoor and window lighting. [Added 2-13-1990;
amended 9-13-1994]
D. In approving a planned industrial park, the Planning Board may require
changes in the proposed subdivision plan as it deems necessary and
desirable for the proper utilization of the subject property and the
protection of property values.
E. The Planning Board shall require the actual construction by the
industrial developer of streets, drainage facilities, landscaping and
other improvements in the same manner as for residential subdivisions.
F. There shall be no loading area located in any front yard area, whether
an actual or required front yard. Loading areas located in a side yard
area, if visible from any street, shall be screened with a wall and/or
plant material. [Added 5-2-1978]
A. Any outdoor lighting of any use shall be arranged in such a way that no
direct glare is cast toward any highway or adjacent property, and
luminary devices shall be hooded and/or arranged so that the source of
the illumination is not visible from such highway or residential use.
[Amended 4-15-2004]
B. In business and industrial districts, outdoor lighting other than for a
permitted sign shall be limited to the illumination of the building for
security purposes and to the lighting of parking areas and accessways
as necessary for the same movement of pedestrians and vehicular
traffic. Lighting intensity shall be limited to that which is necessary to
afford the minimum adequate illumination for the purposes set forth in
this section. The location, intensity and design of all luminary devices
shall be subject to approval of the Board of Site Plan Review.142
C. In all districts, flashing, intermittent, moving or chaser lights or lighting
of varying intensity shall be prohibited, except for the period between
November 15 and January 15.
141. Editor's Note: Original § 54-10P of the 1964 Code, which immediately followed this section
and regarded airports, as amended, was repealed 10-21-1986.
142. Editor's Note: Original § 54-10Q of the 1964 Code, which immediately followed this
section and regarded modification of zoning provisions, as amended, was repealed
10-21-1986.
§ 322-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-27
1:863
§ 322-27. Schools. [Added 8-22-1989]
§ 322-28. Counter-service restaurants.143 [Added 5-9-2017]
The following requirements shall be met:
§ 322-29. Local Waterfront Revitalization Program (LWRP). [Added
7-25-1989]
A. All schools shall be on sites having not less than five acres and not less
than 300 feet of frontage on public streets.
B. All principal and accessory buildings shall be set back at least 100 feet
from all property lines. For the expansion or renovation of a
nonconforming structure, the Board of Site Plan Review may reduce
this setback requirement so that it equals the existing setback of the
nonconforming structure. [Amended 8-9-1994]
C. The gross floor area shall not exceed 10% of the total site area.
D. All parking and loading areas shall be set back 50 feet from all streets
and 75 feet from residential parcels.
A. This is a prohibited use in the LI District except when located in a
building used primarily for office and/or non-nuisance industry and the
use is less than 20% of the gross floor area.
B. No more than two curb cuts shall be permitted. They shall be at least 75
feet apart and shall be at least 75 feet from any residence district.
C. Densely planted buffer areas at least 25 feet in depth shall be provided
adjacent to residence districts.
A. The following actions shall be subject to the LWRP: zone changes,
subdivisions, site plans, building permits for new buildings, special
exceptions, permits for any actions requiring the following variances;
land use, height, signage, parking, density or environmentally sensitive
lands, and shall not be approved, authorized, issued or altered until the
Town Board determines in writing, pursuant to Chapter 151, Art. II of
the Town Code, that the action is consistent with the LWRP policies,
standards and conditions. [Amended 12-20-1994]
B. The land use of all nonresidential districts in the local coastal area shall
not be expanded, intensified or changed, except to water-dependent
uses, unless the Town Board determines that no water-dependent use is
feasible and further finds that such change, expansion or intensification
of use is consistent with the policies, standards and conditions
described in § III of the LWRP.
143. Editor’s Note: Former § 322-28, Coin-operated machines, added 7-12-1966, as amended,
was repealed 11-3-2015.
§ 322-27 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-29
1:864
§ 322-30. Satellite dish antennas. [Added 9-11-1984; amended
5-28-1991]
The Town Board finds that dish antennas, due to their shape, opacity and
size, create more of a visual impact on the community than do other types
of antennas. The intent of these regulations is to permit the reception
of satellite transmissions in the Town while simultaneously preventing,
avoiding or minimizing the visual contrast of such antennas with regard to
the elements of line, form, scale and color.
C. Natural vegetation shall be preserved and street trees and new plant
materials shall be installed for all structures constructed and/or
enlarged after the effective date of this provision so that at least 75% of
the building that would otherwise be visible from any surface water in
the coastal area shall be screened at the time of completion of
construction.
D. Buildings in the local waterfront area shall conform to the requirements
specified in the following table:
A. In all districts:
(1) All installations shall employ to the extent possible colors and
finishes that blend with the surroundings.
(2) Roof-mounted antennas shall not exceed the permitted height of
principal buildings and shall be located on the back half of the
building.
(3) Ground-mounted installations greater than 10 feet in height shall
be screened with evergreen trees located along the antenna's
nonreception window axes.
(4) Ground-mounted installations shall comply with all dimensional
requirements for accessory buildings.
B. In residence districts:
(1) Not more than one dish antenna shall be permitted per site.
(2) Dish antennas shall not exceed 10 feet in diameter.
C. In business and industrial districts, ground-mounted antennas
exceeding 10 feet in diameter shall comply with all dimensional
requirements for principal buildings.144
§ 322-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-30.1
1:865
§ 322-30.1. Mini storage warehouses. [Added 8-14-1990; amended
1-25-2000; 4-9-2002]
§ 322-30.2. Adult retail shop or adult entertainment. [Added
5-30-2000]
The following apply to an adult retail shop or adult entertainment:
§ 322-30.3. Personal wireless service facilities. [Added 5-15-2001]
All personal wireless service facilities shall be classified as either Tier One,
Tier Two or Tier Three type of facility as defined in Chapter 242 of the Town
Code and be subject to the following review procedures:
A. The use of the premises shall be limited to the rental of indoor space for
dead storage, except that one accessory apartment, for use as
manager's quarters and leasing office, shall be permitted as a
customary accessory use. Other uses, and the storage of toxic or
hazardous materials as defined by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development, shall be prohibited.
B. All buildings shall be at least 42 feet apart. No building shall exceed the
maximum height or the floor area ratio of the district in which the
building is located. [Amended 3-19-2020 by L.L. No. 6-2020]
C. All exterior building materials shall have flat earth-tone finishes or
other color scheme approved by the Board of Site Plan Review.
D. No storage unit door shall be visible from any residential property or
any public street. Any wall higher than one story which is visible off site
shall be enhanced by providing relief, such as pilasters, corbeled
cornices or similar ornamentation.
E. Except for one access drive nearly perpendicular to the street, all paved
areas shall be enclosed by buildings or six-foot-high dense evergreen
plantings. No fence shall be permitted in the required front yard(s).
A. The building shall be at least 500 feet from any residence district, park,
playground, school, church or similar place of public assembly.
B. The building shall be at least 500 feet from any other adult use.
C. The building shall have the same colors, finishes and materials of
recently approved site plans in the vicinity as determined by the Board
of Site Plan Review.
A. All Tier One facilities shall be required to obtain a site plan exemption
pursuant to § 322-89B.
144. Editor's Note: Original § 54-10Z of the 1964 Code, which immediately followed this
subsection and regarded sand mining, as amended, was repealed 10-21-1986.
§ 322-30.1 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-30.3
1:866
§ 322-30.4. Variances in subdivisions. [Added 4-9-2002; amended
9-11-2007]
B. All Tier Two facilities shall be required to obtain a special exception
approval from the Planning Board and to obtain site plan approval
pursuant to § 322-89A. In reviewing this petition, the Planning Board
shall use the following procedures:
(1) The Board shall conduct a public hearing following the special
exception procedures as outlined in § 322-94, except that the
Planning Board and not the Town Board shall render a decision.
(2) The Planning Board shall evaluate the application using the
standards outlined in § 242-5 of Chapter 242 of the Town Code.
(3) The Board shall not render a decision until it has received a report
from the Planning Department which contains an assessment
pursuant to § 242-11 of Chapter 242.
(4) The Board may approve the application as submitted, recommend
approval with conditions, or the Board may select an alternative
location as described in § 242-8 of Chapter 242.
(5) In determining the necessity of a Tier Two personal wireless
service facility, the Planning Board may require the services of an
independent consultant. Costs associated with this review may be
assigned to the applicant pursuant to Chapter 242.
C. All Tier Three facilities shall be required to obtain a special exception
approval from the Town Board, pursuant to § 322-102.1, and to obtain
site plan approval pursuant to § 322-89A.
D. All personal wireless service facilities shall be required to be inspected
pursuant to § 242-14 of Chapter 242.
A. In addition to the authority to grant and require area variances to
facilitate cluster development in subdivisions simultaneously with final
plat approval as previously delegated to the Planning Board by the
Town Board in 1954 pursuant to § 278 of the Town Law, the Planning
Board shall have the additional authority to grant area variances
simultaneously with final plat approval, provided that all of the
following conditions are met:
(1) The change does not alter the density required by the zoning
district.
(2) The change complies with § 322-19, Environmentally sensitive
lands.
(3) The change would result in the addition of not more than one lot to
the proposed subdivision, provided it does not alter the density of
the zoning district.
§ 322-30.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-30.4
1:867
(4) When, in the Board's judgement, the change meets one or more of
the following objectives:
(a) There is a public purpose or benefit in changing the
requirement pattern;
(b) The alteration, such as a frontage reduction, is consistent with
the surrounding lots;
(c) The change would preserve historically significant structures
or features of the Town;
(d) The change would preserve, protect, or promote scenic or
environmentally sensitive lands;
(e) The alteration would better protect the homeowner from
undesirable land uses;
(f) The change would reduce the amount of regrading or clearing
of property;
(g) The change would be incidental or minor and not alter the
character of the neighborhood.
B. In making its determination as to granting any area variance, the
Planning Board shall grant the minimum variance that it shall deem
necessary and adequate and at the same time preserves and protects
the character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of
the community. In making such determination, the Planning Board shall
consider and render a determination in accordance with the following
standards and criteria:
(1) Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the character
of the neighborhood or detriment to nearby properties will be
created by the granting of the area variance;
(2) Whether a benefit sought by an applicant can be achieved by some
method, feasible for the applicant to pursue, other than by an area
variance;
(3) Whether the proposed variance is substantial;
(4) Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or
impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the
neighborhood or district; and
(5) Whether the alleged difficulty necessitating the area variance was
self-created by an applicant, which consideration shall be relevant
to the decision of the Planning Board, but shall not necessarily
preclude the granting of the area variance.
§ 322-30.4 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-30.5
1:868
§ 322-30.5. Hookah lounges and vape stores/lounges. [Added
4-26-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
Hookah lounges and vape stores/lounges shall be prohibited within 1,500
feet of the lot line of any park, playground, religious institution, or school.
§ 322-30.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-30.5
1:869

ARTICLE V
Overlay Districts145
[Added 4-8-2014]
§ 322-31. Declaration of policy and purposes.
The Town Board finds that there are areas of the Town that develop with
a specific, consistent character such that they may be treated as a distinct
entity for purposes of regulating dimensional, use, and other zoning
standards. The regulations in this Article V are intended to permit
expansion or restriction of the standards of the zoning district(s) in which
such an area is situated, provided that the area, boundaries and the specific
permitted variation from standards shall have been established as an
overlay district by the Town Board. The purpose of this article is to establish
standards and procedures which will foster healthy growth and orderly
development within each overlay district so established.
§ 322-32. Criteria for overlay districts.
In order for an area to be designated an overlay district, it shall meet the
following criteria:
§ 322-33. Procedure.
A. There shall be multiple lots and multiple property owners within the
district boundaries delineated on the Town's Zoning Map.
B. There shall be specific characteristics that set the area apart from the
balance of the zoning district(s) in which it is located, which
characteristics shall be enumerated in the designation of the area as an
overlay district.
C. There shall be a public purpose(s) served by the designation of an area
as an overlay district, and the designation of the district shall specify
how the expansion or restriction of the standards of the underlying
zoning district supports such purpose(s).
A. If the Town Board determines to establish an overlay district, it shall do
so pursuant to the procedures outlined in Article XIV herein.
B. A proposed overlay district shall include:
(1) A description of the boundaries of the area to be designated as the
overlay district;
(2) A description of purpose(s) for creating the overlay district in
accordance with § 322-32;
145. Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Flood Hazard Areas, added 8-25-1987, as amended, was
repealed 8-11-2009. See now Ch. 168, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 322-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-33
1:871
§ 322-34. Specific overlay districts.
(3) A statement of the specific expansion or restriction of dimensional
and use regulations that shall apply to the district;
(4) Any additional information relevant to the decision of the Town
Board on whether to designate an area as an overlay district.
C. All overlay districts shall be shown on the Building Zone Map adopted
pursuant to § 322-6 and incorporated therein as part of the map.
A. The Hauppauge Industrial Park Overlay District.
(1) The Hauppauge Industrial Park, also known as the "John V. N. Klein
Industrial Park," is a unique land use feature of Town containing a
large concentration of high-value warehousing, manufacturing, and
office uses in an attractive planned industrial park setting. The
regulations set forth in this section are intended to provide
flexibility to allow the Hauppauge Industrial Park to continue to be
attractive for high-quality business development, and to be
competitive with other industrial areas in the region and nation.
The Hauppauge Industrial Park Overlay District shall comprise a
portion of the Light Industrial zoned properties located in the
Hauppauge Industrial Park. [Amended 7-14-2015]
(2) Overlay district accommodations and standards:
(a) Parking garages not exceeding two stories, both aboveground
and underground, shall be permitted as a customary accessory
use to offices, non-nuisance industries, hotels, and banks. The
yard setbacks for parking garages shall be the same as for
principal buildings. Parking garages shall not be considered
floor area for the purposes of this chapter.
(b) Outdoor storage shall be permitted as a customary accessory
use, provided that it meets the following criteria:
[1] All storage shall be screened from view. The storage area
shall be surrounded by a solid fence, not exceeding six feet
in height, or by dense evergreen hedges at least eight feet
in height. If all or part of the entire site is surrounded by a
solid fence, not exceeding six feet in height, or by dense
evergreen hedges at least eight feet in height, and the
storage area is screened from view thereby, no additional
screening shall be required.
[2] No storage area shall be located in a required front and or
within 10 feet of any property line.
[3] No storage area shall exceed 10% of the gross floor area;
provided, however, that a storage area may be up to 20%
of the gross floor area, if it is entirely within containers.
§ 322-33 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-34
1:872
§ 322-35. through § 322-40. (Reserved)
[4] No material may be stored pursuant to this section in a
manner contrary to that required by any other section of
the Town Code.
(c) Lobbies, atria, and similar amenity spaces over 1.5% of the
building size as determined by the Board of Site Plan Review
shall not be used in calculating the floor area for determining
compliance with the floor area ratio and parking requirements.
(d) No structure shall exceed 50 feet in height, except along
Vanderbilt Motor Parkway (C.R. 67), where no structure shall
exceed 62 feet in height. [Amended 7-14-2015]
(e) No modification of any use, structure, or site pursuant to this
Article V shall be permitted except in conformity with an
approved site plan or site plan exemption as described in
§ 322-85 of this chapter and on a site that is otherwise in
compliance with this chapter.
§ 322-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-35
1:873

ARTICLE VI
Planned Residential Development District
[Added 8-25-1987]
§ 322-41. Power to create district; purpose.
The Town Board may, upon written application pursuant to the
requirements of Article XIV of this chapter and its sections, consider and
permit the change of the zone designation of a parcel of land to the PRD
District and apply the zoning regulations of this district and establish any
supplementary regulations thereto, wherein the health, safety and general
welfare of the Town are concerned, in conjunction with the development or
redevelopment of an area for a Planned Residential Development District,
if, in its opinion, it shall find that the request is pursuant to and in the spirit
of the provisions of § 322-2 and this section of this chapter. The purpose
of such change shall be to enable and encourage the flexibility of design
and the development of land which would provide for a diversification
of residential housing types and forms of ownership in such a manner
as to promote the most appropriate use of the land and to preserve the
natural and scenic amenities of an area. Any area changed to the Planned
Residential Development District shall have applications for building
permits issued and construction started, as well as site construction, in
accordance with the approved site plan within 18 months from the date
of Town Board approval; otherwise, the Town Board may, upon its own
initiative, hold a public hearing and revert the zoning back to its previous
classification.
§ 322-42. Application requirements.
Prior to consideration, all applications shall comply with the following
requirements and be presented to the Town Board and made part of the
application:
A. An overall development plan for the entire tract covered by the
application, prepared by competent professionals licensed by the State
of New York to do this work. Indicated thereon will be shown:
(1) Property lines and the names of adjoining owners.
(2) Topography, showing existing contours and elevations, areas with
existing growth, watercourses and water areas based upon an
actual field survey, the plan to further indicate certification by a
licensed land surveyor or professional engineer that the
topography shown resulted from an actual survey and the date of
that survey.
(3) Areas for surface water retention facilities.
(4) Areas for sanitary sewage treatment facilities.
(5) Street and road alignment and proposed parking areas.
§ 322-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-42
1:875
§ 322-43. Referral to Planning Department; open space.
The Town Board shall refer all applications for a change of zoning to
the Planned Residential Development District to the Planning Board for
a recommendation and report. Within 45 days after such reference, the
Planning Board shall file with the Town Board its recommendation and
report. The Town Board shall determine whether there shall be dedication
of land to be set aside as open space, and if in the Town Board's opinion, it
is in the interest of the general public due to topography, historical interest,
natural features, unusual conditions or for ecological reasons, such open
space shall then be so included and shown. If the Town Board does make
such a requirement, a minimum of 10% of the land shall be so designated
and dedicated to the Town of Smithtown as open space as part of the platted
area.
§ 322-44. Review criteria; required plans.
If such application is approved by the Town Board, the applicant shall then
be referred to the Planning Department, and the applicant shall prepare
and submit a plat and final site plans, in full detail, in accordance with the
requirements of the Planning Department, along with application, fees and
other drawings, as required, on which a duly advertised public hearing will
be held, and, if approved, the plat will be filed in the County Clerk's office
pursuant to § 276 and 277 of the Town Law of New York State.
(6) The location of structures with first-floor elevations.
(7) Areas to be set aside for the planned residential development use.
(8) Areas to be dedicated to the Town for open space use.
B. Typical elevation drawings of each building type, with materials
indicated for the exterior treatment thereof.
C. Typical floor plans for each building and dwelling unit or units, if
variations are to be used.
D. Drafts of agreements as well as deeds to ensure maintenance,
operation, replacement and such other obligations and the perpetuity
thereof so as to ensure the health, safety and the general welfare of the
development as a whole, and said instruments shall be filed and
recorded in the County Clerk's office when properly executed and
sealed after the approval, pursuant to § 322-88 of this chapter.
A. The Planning Board shall review, among other things, the following:
(1) The arrangement of the buildings, dwelling units and structures
upon the site, as well as the height, length and spacing thereof,
open spaces (public and private), landscaping, off-street, open and
enclosed parking spaces and street layouts, driveways and all other
physical features as shown on the site plan and or plat or otherwise
described.
§ 322-42 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-44
1:876
(2) The location, shape and improvements of that land, if any, which is
to be dedicated for public purposes to the Town other than open
space.
B. The following plans shall be submitted to the Planning Board along with
the subdivision application and filing fees:
(1) The site plan shall show the names of adjoining owners, the
location of structures with first-floor elevations, street and road
locations, open spaces and utility distribution, among other items
so mentioned.
(2) The grading plans shall show all existing and proposed contours
and elevations, as well as areas with existing natural growth,
watercourses and water areas.
(3) Drainage plan. Areas for surface water retention facilities and
piping thereto shall be shown as designed by a professional
engineer.
(4) Sewage plan. Areas for sanitary sewage treatment facilities and the
piping thereto shall be shown as designed by a professional
engineer.
(5) The street and road plan shall show the profile and alignment of all
proposed and existing roads or highways giving access thereto.
(6) The final plat shall show the area to be recorded and filed in the
Suffolk County Clerk's office for the first section of the land
subdivision and if not divided into sections, then the entire
development, all pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of the
Town of Smithtown.146
(7) The landscape plan, as designed by a registered landscape
architect, shall show the landscaping of the entire site.
(8) Elevation drawings of the building and structures shall be shown
for each building or structure type with materials shown for the
exterior treatment thereof.
(9) Typical floor plans for each building and dwelling unit or units, if
variations are to be used.
(10) An agreement of recordable form as well as all deeds to ensure
maintenance, operations, replacement and such other obligations
and the perpetuity thereof so as to ensure the health, safety and
general welfare of the development as a whole, and said instrument
shall be recorded and filed in the Suffolk County Clerk's office
along with the final plat, when properly executed and sealed.
146. Editor's Note: See Ch. 248, Subdivision of Land.
§ 322-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-45
1:877
§ 322-45. Filing of plats.
Upon the filing of the plat in the office of the County Clerk, a copy shall
be filed with the Town Clerk, who shall make appropriate notations and
references thereto in the Town Zoning Ordinance or Map.
§ 322-46. Permitted uses.
The following permitted uses in the Planned Residential Development
District may be included and shall be limited to:
§ 322-47. (Reserved)147
§ 322-48. Building and elevation plans.
Upon approval by the Planning Board of the plat and site plan, the applicant
will submit individual building plans and elevation drawings to the Board of
Site Plan Review pursuant to § 322-88 of this chapter after the plat is signed
by the Chairman of the Planning Board and the plat, along with deeds and
agreements pursuant to § 322-42D, is filed in the County Clerk's office.148
A. Residential dwelling units in detached or attached structures or any
combination thereof, and the occupancy of all units shall be restricted
as follows:
(1) To any person of the age of 48 years or over;
(2) To a husband or wife, regardless of age, residing with his or her
spouse, provided that the spouse of such person is of the age of 48
years or over; or
(3) To the child or children residing with a permissible occupant,
provided that the child or children is or are of the age of 18 or over.
B. Nonresidential uses of religious, cultural or a recreational character
incidental thereto, to the extent that they are designed and intended
only to serve the residents of the Planned Residential Development
District.
147. Editor's Note: Former § 322-47, Dimensional regulations, was repealed 11-24-1992.
148. Editor's Note: Original § 54-10U of the 1964 Code, which immediately followed this
section and regarded commercial public recreational uses, as amended, was repealed
10-21-1986.
§ 322-45 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-48
1:878
ARTICLE VII
Retirement Community District
[Added 6-7-1977]
§ 322-49. Declaration of policy. [Amended 7-25-1989]
The Town Board hereby finds that there is an increasing need by persons of
or nearing retirement age for reasonably priced dwelling accommodations
in planned separate residential areas which will be inhabited by persons
similarly circumstanced and which have been specially designed and
developed for such age group, located in close proximity to centralized
activity centers, community facilities or medical centers. Dwellings
designed for this age group shall be made available at a cost to the tenants
below prevailing rental costs in the Town of Smithtown at the time of
occupancy, which cost shall reflect any applicable government subsidy. At
all times, first priority for occupancy shall be given to elderly residents of
the Town of Smithtown and their families.
§ 322-50. Minimum requirements. [Amended 1-26-1988; 6-21-1988;
7-25-1989; 12-19-1991; 11-24-1992]
§ 322-51. Design standards. [Amended 1-26-1988; 6-21-1988;
7-25-1989; 2-13-1990; 11-24-1992]
A. Occupancy of all dwellings constructed pursuant to this section shall be
restricted to persons of 55 years of age or older. Units constructed
pursuant to § 322-101 shall be restricted to persons of 62 years of age
or older. Occupancy of all units may include one additional member of
their immediate family or a companion, including a child who is 18
years of age or older. Not more than 10% of the dwelling units may be
occupied by handicapped persons.
B. Rentals to tenants shall be lower than prevailing rentals in the Town,
exclusive of governmental subsidies.
C. Assessment. All dwelling units constructed pursuant to this article shall
be taxable for real estate purposes within the requirements of
applicable New York State assessment laws.
A. The maximum length of any building shall not exceed 160 feet.
B. The minimum habitable floor area of each dwelling unit shall not be less
than 550 square feet.
C. Parking areas shall not be located more than 200 feet from the entrance
to the dwelling unit it is designed to serve.
D. Usable open space for recreational uses, appropriate in location, nature
and size, shall be provided at the rate of at least 200 square feet per
dwelling unit. If, in the Town Board's opinion, due to topography,
ecological reasons, historical interest or any other unique conditions,
§ 322-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-51
1:879
§ 322-52. Permitted uses. [Amended 7-25-1989]
Any and all accessory uses shall be of a nondwelling or nondomiciliary use.
Permitted uses in this section can be of a religious, cultural or recreational
character, outpatient health facility, utility and maintenance facilities and
communal dining and food preparation facilities intended to serve the
elderly of the community.149
additional open space should be preserved, such lands shall be set aside
as open space and be so designated on all site plan drawings.
149. Editor's Note: Original § 54-10V(5) and (6) of the 1964 Code, which immediately followed
this section and dealt with procedures and assessments, was repealed 7-25-1989. Original
§ 54-10W, regarding hotels and motels, as amended, was repealed 10-21-1986.
§ 322-51 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-52
1:880
ARTICLE VIII
R-6 Residential District
[Added 8-9-1983]
§ 322-53. Declaration of policy and purposes.
§ 322-54. Permitted and prohibited uses.
A. The Town Board finds that the age structure of the Town of Smithtown's
population is undergoing significant changes. The population is
increasing, but household size is decreasing. The median age is
increasing as the school-aged population declines. As a result of these
demographic changes, the housing needs of the Town's residents have
expanded beyond that available within the Town. In recognition of this
need and demand for alternative types of owner-occupied housing, for
the permanent residents of the Town of Smithtown the R-6 Residential
District is hereby established.
B. The purposes of the R-6 District are to:
(1) Provide an alternative type of permanent, owner-occupied housing.
(2) Protect the environment and preserve open space.
(3) Facilitate the adequate and economical provision of streets and
utilities.
(4) Promote quality in design and construction.
A. Within the R-6 District, the following uses and structures shall be
permitted:
(1) Townhouse structures.
(2) Existing structures, such as closed schools, that can be adapted to
meet the requirements for the R-6 District. At the discretion of the
Town Board, an application to adapt an existing school building
may be exempt from complying with § 322-57E, F, G and I of this
article.
(3) Accessory uses and structures, specifically:
(a) Enclosed parking garages.
(b) Indoor and outdoor recreational and club facilities, provided
that such uses are accessory to the townhouse development
and are to be used only by the residents of the development
and their guests and further provided that all such accessory
buildings and incidental uses shall be planned as an integral
part of the residential development.
B. Within the R-6 District, the following uses shall be prohibited: the
storage of recreational vehicles (e.g., boats, trailers, campers, etc.),
§ 322-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-54
1:881
§ 322-55. Procedure.
§ 322-56. (Reserved)150
§ 322-57. Requirements. [Amended 9-25-1984; 10-28-1986;
11-24-1992]
unless a single suitable communal facility is provided within a structure
or enclosure.
A. Written application for a change of zone shall be submitted to the Town
Board, pursuant to § 322-94 of the Town Code.
B. If the application for a zone change is approved by the Town Board, the
applicant may then submit an application to the Planning Board to
obtain subdivision approval pursuant to Chapter 248 of the Code of the
Town of Smithtown. The applicant shall be subject to all requirements
set forth in Chapter 248 of the Town Code and this section (Chapter
322, Article VIII).
C. After the final plat has been approved by the Planning Board, the
applicant shall submit an application to the Board of Site Plan Review,
pursuant to Chapter 322, § 322-88, of the Code of the Town of
Smithtown.
D. After the Board of Site Plan Review has approved the application, the
final plat shall be recorded and filed at the Suffolk County Clerk's office.
A. Each dwelling unit shall be owner-occupied; however, nothing herein
shall prevent an individual owner-occupant from renting his or her
individual unit.
B. Building coverage, including a garage, shall not exceed 15% of the site
area. Enclosed garages may not be converted into habitable floor area.
C. The minimum site size shall be five acres; the maximum site size shall
be 35 buildable acres and 200 units.
D. The front yard setback from the public road on which the site fronts
shall be no less than 100 feet. The setbacks for the side yards and rear
yard of the entire site shall be 50 feet from the property lines. There
shall be a minimum distance from internal roadways to buildings of 20
feet. No townhouse structure, accessory structure or internal roads
may be placed within the required yards.
E. There shall be a minimum of 50 feet between the rear of any two
townhouse structures and a minimum of 30 feet between the sides of
any two townhouse structures.
150. Editor's Note: Former § 322-56, Fees, was repealed 11-24-1992.
§ 322-54 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-57
1:882
§ 322-58. Design specifications.
F. Each townhouse structure may contain up to six dwelling units. The
maximum length of any townhouse structure shall be 200 feet.
G. The owner of a dwelling unit may use or own property to the rear (and/
or side, where applicable) of the dwelling unit, the depth of which shall
not exceed beyond 20 feet from the dwelling unit.
H. There shall be four on-site, off-street parking spaces provided for each
dwelling unit. Fifty percent of the spaces shall be designed and
designated as overflow spaces for visitors and may be paved with
crushed stone or porous paving subject to approval of the Board of Site
Plan Review.
I. A community association shall be established by the developer and shall
become the responsibility of the residents of the development. The
following conditions shall apply:
(1) The purposes of the community association shall include the
ownership, management and maintenance of all property held in
common ownership.
(2) All improvements within the site shall be commonly owned and
maintained or shall be owned and maintained by the community
association, except that space as set forth in Subsection G above,
the use of which shall be controlled by the association.
(3) Membership in the association shall be automatically required
concomitant with ownership of a dwelling unit.
(4) The offering plan inclusive of the bylaws of the association and
declaration of any rules and regulations promulgated by the
developer shall be submitted to the Planning Board along with the
application for final plat approval and shall be reviewed by the
Planning Board at that time. Such document shall:
(a) Detail the legal structure of the association and delineate its
responsibilities and methods of operation.
(b) Grant permission for emergency personnel (e.g., fire, medical
or police) to enter the premises.
(c) Detail which properties and facilities are to be owned by the
community association or held in common ownership and
which are to be held in individual ownership.
A. All townhouse and accessory structures within a development shall be
of the same architectural style and shall use compatible exterior
building materials and colors.
B. Adequate facilities for the storage of refuse shall be provided in
appropriate, but inconspicuous, locations and shall be screened by
§ 322-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-58
1:883
landscaping, fencing or walls which are designed and constructed to
harmonize with the architecture of the townhouse structure and the
surrounding environment. The same applies to utility appurtenances.
C. Site elements such as mailboxes, fencing and lighting shall be of a
architecturally compatible design and shall be used in a consistent
fashion throughout the development.
D. Internal roadways shall be 24 feet in width, except at the entrance to
the development. No on-street parking shall be permitted.
E. Where enclosed garages are used, the width of the paved area shall not
exceed that of the garage entrance(s).
F. Each dwelling unit within a townhouse structure should be
individualized by variations in building setbacks, roofline, and roof
slopes.
G. Each dwelling unit within a townhouse structure shall have windows on
at least two sides of the unit.
H. Decks shall conform to the following requirements: [Amended
7-23-1991]
(1) Except for railings less than three feet in height, decks shall not be
enclosed by any sort of wall, roof, fixed or permanent awning or
canopy. Retractable awnings are permitted so long as they are a
uniform design approved by the Board of Site Plan Review.
[Amended 12-18-2008]
(2) No deck, patio or paving shall be permitted more than 10 feet from
the rear of the dwelling unit. [Amended 6-9-1992]
(3) Decks greater than six inches above the approved grade shall be
set back at least three feet from all lot lines.
(4) No deck shall be more than 18 inches above the approved grade.
I. The required front, side and rear yards for the entire site shall be
adequately screened by vegetation to provide privacy for the residents
of both the development itself and adjacent homeowners. Existing
vegetation shall be maintained, as shall supplemental plantings
required by the Planning Board or Board of Site Plan Review. In no case
shall trees be cut down prior to the submission of plans to the Planning
Board.
J. The exteriors of all sides of all buildings shall be covered with
decorative architectural materials. Not more than two principal siding
materials shall be permitted in any R-6 District. Architectural materials
which are simulations of other materials shall not be permitted. [Added
9-25-1984]
§ 322-58 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-58
1:884
ARTICLE IX
Parking and Loading
§ 322-59. Off-street parking and truck-loading space required.
Off-street parking and truck-loading space requirements shall be provided
for and kept available as an accessory use to all permitted and special
exception uses of buildings, structures and land, in amounts not less than
those specified in this article.
§ 322-60. Method of determining off-street parking requirements.
§ 322-61. Residential parking schedule.
The schedule of off-street parking space requirements for residential uses
shall be as follows:
Use Required Number of Spaces
One-family and two-family dwelling
unit
2 per dwelling unit
Apartment dwelling unit 1.5 per dwelling unit
Residential membership club or
country club
1 per residence unit plus 1 per each
2 employees on the premises at any
1 time
Accessory apartment dwelling unit
[Added 7-12-1983]
1 per dwelling unit
Retirement community [Added
2-13-1990]
3 per 4 dwelling units
A. The requirement for a simple use (e.g., a one-family dwelling or a retail
store) shall be determined directly from the schedule of such
requirements, which is a part of this article.
B. The requirement for a combination use made up of several component
uses (e.g., a bowling alley with auditorium seating and a restaurant and
bar, or a retail store and office building) shall be determined by
establishing the requirements for each component use from the
schedule of such requirements, which is a part of this article, and
adding them together.
C. When the required number of spaces is determined to be a fraction, it
shall be increased to the next highest whole number.
D. If the use is not specifically listed in the schedule of such requirements,
the requirement shall be the same as the most similar listed use.
E. Uses which require approval through the special exception use
procedure, as provided in § 322-82, may be required to provide offstreet
parking spaces in excess of the requirements of this article, as
indicated in § 322-82B(8).
§ 322-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-61
1:885
Use Required Number of Spaces
Townhouse 4 per dwelling unit
Congregate-care facility [Added
3-26-1991]
1 per dwelling unit
§ 322-62. Nonresidential parking schedule.
The schedule of off-street parking space requirements for nonresidential
uses shall be as follows:
Use Required Number of Spaces
Adult entertainment [Added
9-13-1994]
See "Discotheque"
Adult retail shop [Added
9-13-1994]
See "Retail store"
Animal hospital, animal hospice,
kennel, animal boarding or
veterinarian [Added 10-26-1971;
amended 10-21-1986; 7-11-2006]
1 per 125 square feet of gross floor
area
Auditorium, church, convention hall,
stadium, studio or other place of
public assembly not otherwise
classified [Amended 5-2-1967]
1 per 4 permanent seats or the floor
area equivalent
Bank, savings-and-loan association See "Offices"
Boat club [Added 2-13-1990] 1 per mooring or slip
Bowling alley 4 per alley
Community shopping center [Added
9-24-1968]
1 per 125 square feet of gross floor
area
Contractor showroom [Added
3-22-2012]
1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
area
Counter-service restaurant [Added
6-26-1973]
1 per 50 square feet of gross
building area
Day-care center [Added
2-13-1990; amended 10-7-1997]
1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
area
Day camp [Added 10-7-1997] 10 per acre
Filling station or repair garage
[Amended 6-9-1992]
1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
area, plus 5
Fitness center [Added 10-7-2003]
Over 5,001 square feet 1 per 150 square feet of gross floor
area
Under 5,000 square feet 1 per 100 square feet of gross floor
area
Funeral home 1 per 100 square feet of floor area
§ 322-61 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-62
1:886
Use Required Number of Spaces
Game center or game room [Added
4-14-1981]
1 per 50 square feet of floor area
Golf driving range [Added
6-8-1993]
2 per tee
Health Spa [Added 3-22-2012] Same as "fitness center"
Home occupation [Added
6-24-1989; amended 2-13-1990]
1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Hospital [Amended 10-21- 1986] 1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
area
Hotel, motel [Amended
9-10-1985]
1.25 per guest bedroom
Indoor tennis, basketball,
badminton, volleyball, handball or
similar use not otherwise classified
[Added 9-7-1971; amended
6-8-1976]
Parking area reservation equivalent
to the total ground coverage of the
use, with a minimum of 4 improved
spaces per court
Junkyard [Added 6-27-1989] 1 per 500 square feet of gross floor
area
Manufacturing or industrial
establishment [Amended
2-19-1974; 10-21-1986]
1 per 500 square feet of gross floor
area
Microbrewery [Added 3-22-2012] 1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
area
Miniature golf [Added 6-8-1993] 4 per hole
Mini-storage warehouse [Added
10-21-1986]
1 per 500 square feet of gross floor
area
Motor vehicle showroom [Added
10-21-1986]
1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
area
Nightclub [Added 6-26-1973;
amended 3-22-2012]
1 per 25 square feet of gross floor
area
Offices or office building [Amended
11-20-1973]
1 per 150 square feet of the
aggregate gross floor area of the use
or building
Power equipment shop [Added
3-22-2012]
1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
area
Propane exchange [Added
7-13-2004]
2 per site
Public art gallery, library or museum See "Auditorium," etc.
Regional shopping center [Added
5-23-1987]
1 space per 166 square feet of gross
floor area
§ 322-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-62
1:887
Use Required Number of Spaces
Research laboratory [Added
10-21-1986]
1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
area
Restaurant [Amended 6-26-1973] 1 per 100 square feet of gross
building area
Retail store or personal service
store [Amended 10-7-2003]
1 per 100 square feet of gross floor
area1
Rifle range [Added 9-7-1971] 4 per range
School 1 per employee plus 1 per each 8
students in the 12th grade or above
or the parking requirement for the
auditorium or gymnasium
component of the use, whichever is
the greater
Shipping center [Added
3-22-2012]
1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
area
Skating rink [Added 9-7-1971;
amended 12-6-1994]
1 per 125 square feet of gross floor
area, including outdoor facilities
Studio or shop for custom work 1 per 150 square feet of floor area
Subregional shopping center
[Added 9-24-1968]
1 per 143 square feet of gross floor
area
Tavern, bar or inn [Added
6-26-1973]
1 per 100 square feet of gross
building area
Theater [Added 5-2-1967] 1 per 3 permanent seats
Theater, multiplex [Added
4-25-1989]
1 per 3 seats, plus 1 per 200 square
feet of gross floor area not solely
used for auditoriums or corridors
Trucking station Sufficient parking spaces for all
trucks stored or being serviced at
any 1 period of time, plus 2 per 3
employees on duty or on the
premises at any 1 time
Video rental store [Added
7-14-1987]
1 per 100 square feet of gross floor
area
Vocational school [Added
3-22-2012]
1 per 100 square feet of gross floor
area
Warehouse [Amended
10-21-1986]
1 per 500 square feet of gross floor
area
Wholesale business [Amended
10-21-1986]
1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
area
§ 322-62 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-63
1:888
§ 322-63. Truck-loading space schedule.
Every building or structure, lot or land used for nonresidential purposes
shall be provided with off-street truck-loading spaces in accordance with the
following schedule:
Square Feet of Floor Area Required Number of Spaces
Under 40,000 1 space
40,000 or more 1 additional space for every 40,000
square feet in addition to the first
40,000 square feet
§ 322-64. Access driveway requirements.
§ 322-65. Design requirements.
A. Access driveways for parking garages, public parking areas, filling
stations, repair garages or trucking stations may have separate or
combined entrances and exits.
B. Every entrance or exit driveway shall have a minimum unobstructed
width of 10 feet. Every combined entrance and exit driveway shall have
a minimum unobstructed width of 20 feet. Larger widths may be
required on some sections of driveway in accordance with the
provisions of § 322-65. [Amended 10-21-1986151]
A. The schedule of minimum parking setbacks for uses other than one- or
two-family dwellings shall be as follows: [Amended 2-13-1990;
10-7-1997; 9-27-2007; 1-23-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
District
Front Lot Line
(feet)
Side or Rear
Lot Line*
(feet)
Residential
District* (feet)
CF 100 100 100
R-43 60 60 N/A
R-21 50 50 N/A
R-15 45 45 N/A
R-10 40 40 N/A
RM-7 25 25 N/A
R-6 100 50 N/A
PRD 100 50 N/A
RC 60 60 N/A
RM-GA 30 30 N/A
151. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original § 54-11E(3) of the 1964 Code, dealing
with corner clearances, which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 322-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-65
1:889
District
Front Lot Line
(feet)
Side or Rear
Lot Line*
(feet)
Residential
District* (feet)
PB 25 6 10
OB 50 6 10
SCB 6 6 10
NB 6 6 10
CB 6 6 10
WSI 25 6 25
LI 50 6 100
HI 80 6 100
NOTES:
See § 322-19 for setbacks from environmentally sensitive land and
§ 322-20 for buffer requirements.
*Certain uses may be subject to greater setbacks. (See § 322-82 and
Article XIV.)
B. The physical improvements of off-street parking and truck-loading
areas shall include:
(1) Paving in accordance with the Type A specification of the Town of
Smithtown Subdivision Regulations,152 or equivalent, for
nonresidential parking and a stabilized, all-weather surface for
residential parking.
(2) Drainage facilities complying with the standards and design
requirements of the Town of Smithtown Subdivision Regulations.
(3) Adequate lighting in public parking areas to assure the general
safety and convenience of the public.
(4) Appropriate planting and fencing for the protection of adjacent
properties, particularly along zone district boundary lines as
provided for in § 322-20.
C. All access driveways within parking areas shall have a minimum width
of 24 feet when the parking spaces are at an angle of 90° with the
driveway, 18 feet when the parking spaces are at 60° and 12 feet when
the parking spaces are at 45°. [Amended 5-23-1967]
D. Driveways and turning areas shall have adequate radii to assure ease of
mobility, ample clearance and convenient access and egress.
E. Center-line gradients of all access driveways shall not exceed 8%.
152. Editor's Note: See Ch. 248, Subdivision of Land.
§ 322-65 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-65
1:890
§ 322-66. (Reserved)153
F. Accessory off-street parking areas shall be marked off into parking
spaces with a minimum width of nine feet and a minimum length of 18
feet or, in the case of parking spaces for trucks or special equipment,
parking spaces of a minimum size to be determined by the Engineer
based on the nature of the parked vehicle. [Amended 9-24-1968]
G. Truck-loading spaces adjacent to tailgate level loading docks and/or for
retail, wholesale, storage, distribution and manufacturing buildings
exceeding 5,000 square feet gross floor area or on one-acre sites or
larger shall be at least 65 feet long by 12 feet wide by 14 feet in height.
Driveways, aisles, parking areas and truck maneuvering areas shall be
provided, constructed and maintained so as to permit trucks having
greater than 10,000 square feet, straight maximum truck permit, New
York State, to enter and exit the site to and from public streets while
moving in forward gear and without having to shift into reverse gear
more than once. Turning vehicle templates approved by AASHTO shall
be used in the site plan review procedure pursuant to Article XIII to
determine the sufficiency of the site design. [Amended 10-21-1986]
H. Curbs shall have a radius of at least three feet where a parking space
intersects with an aisle and/or driveway. [Added 10-21-1986]
I. The required parking space shall be kept free of charge to users of the
site. Parking spaces shall have continuous unobstructed access to and
from aisles, driveways and public streets at all times for residential
users and during business hours for nonresidential uses. Driveways,
aisles and parking spaces shall not be encroached upon by charity drop
boxes, truck-loading spaces or maneuvering areas, outdoor storage or
any other object which would prevent their use in accordance with the
intent of this article. Refuse bin enclosures shall not encroach upon
more than one parking space per site. [Added 10-21-1986; amended
11-24-1992]
J. On all sites larger than two acres, planting islands shall be provided in
parking areas at the ends of rows of parking spaces in order to
channelize traffic and provide for a high standard of aesthetic
character. The length of rows shall not exceed 20 spaces. Each island
shall have a minimum length of 18 feet and a minimum width of nine
feet. [Added 10-21-1986]
K. The parking requirement of any site being retrofitted to comply with the
Americans with Disabilities Act shall be reduced to the extent necessary
to comply with the Act. [Added 11-24-1992]
153. Editor's Note: Former § 322-66, Exemptions and waivers, was repealed 11-24-1992.
§ 322-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-66
1:891

ARTICLE X
Signs
[Amended 6-25-1985; 12-22-1987; 8-28-1990; 3-7-1995; 5-8-2007;
9-11-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007]
§ 322-67. Declaration of policy.
The purpose of this article is to preserve, protect and promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the community by regulating and establishing
standards for the erection of signs in the public view within the Town.
The Town Board finds that the character, quality and appearance of the
Town and the quality of life of its residents are substantially affected by
the location, number, height, size, construction and general design and
maintenance of signs located therein. The Town Board further finds that
regulating and establishing standards for the erection of such signs is
reasonable and necessary to achieve the purpose of this article. Therefore,
the regulations of sign usage contained herein are intended to:
§ 322-68. Compliance required.
No sign shall be erected, altered or maintained except in conformity with
this chapter. Any person who causes or permits a sign to be erected, altered
or maintained in a manner other than in conformity with this chapter shall
be in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties provided
herein.
§ 322-69. Permitted signs.
A. Promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
B. Prevent physical and visual obstructions and distractions to vehicular
and pedestrian traffic.
C. Prevent confusion with regard to traffic and safety lights, signs and
signals.
D. Improve business identification and sign comprehension.
E. Enhance visibility, and natural and scenic beauty.
F. Enhance the aesthetic character of buildings, sites, districts and the
Town as a whole.
G. Prevent and reduce visual clutter.
H. Protect the established character of adjoining properties, both private
and public.
I. Prevent the depreciation of adjoining properties, both private and
public.
A. All permitted signs shall conform to the Schedule of Sign Regulations
located at the end of this chapter, except as otherwise provided herein.
§ 322-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-69
1:893
B. Ground signs. A "ground sign" shall mean a freestanding sign,
commonly made of wood or metal, or other durable materials, attached
to a structure intended and designed to support the sign and which is
embedded in the ground or anchored in concrete.
(1) No permanent ground sign shall be permitted unless the principal
building is set back more than 20 feet from the street. Not more
than one permanent ground sign shall be permitted per site, except
that sites over five acres shall be permitted two such signs.
(2) The sign area shall be measured by using a single polygon that
encloses the entire structure, including supports where such
supports total more than 150 square inches in cross-section area.
(3) The area of all sign faces shall be used in computing the sign area
unless the faces are parallel and less than 24 inches apart.
[Amended 8-14-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
(4) The height shall be measured from the center line of the street in
front of the sign.
(5) Any sign greater than 12 square feet shall be set back at least 75
feet from the nearest residential lot.
C. Wall signs. A "wall sign" shall mean a sign painted on, applied on or
otherwise attached to the wall or to the eave of a pitched roof of a
building.
(1) One wall sign shall be permitted for each establishment that fronts
a street and is located on the first floor. Wall signs must face public
streets, except that establishments in the CB District shall be
permitted to have a second wall sign facing parking lots in the rear
of the establishment. The vertical dimension of the second wall sign
shall be not more than one foot. No wall sign shall be permitted
above another wall sign.
(2) The sign area shall be measured by using a single polygon that
includes all of the symbols, artwork and background that are
different in color and/or material from the rest of the building.
(3) The sign height shall be measured from the approved grade at the
base of the building.
(4) The sign shall project not more than 12 inches from the wall to
which it is attached. The sign shall be set back at least one foot
from the sides of the establishment. No sign shall project beyond
the limits of the lot.
(5) No wall sign shall obscure any portion of any window, or project
above the wall to which it is attached.
§ 322-69 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-69
1:894
§ 322-70. Prohibited signs.
(6) In addition to a wall sign, the bottom flap of a vinyl or fabric awning
may be used as a sign, provided that the awning conforms to the
following specifications:
(a) Height above grade: 12 feet maximum.
(b) Clearance above grade: seven feet minimum.
(c) Set back from all property lines: one foot minimum.
(d) Setback from curb, parking and driveways: two feet minimum.
(e) Projection from wall: four foot maximum.
(f) Pitch: constant, six on 12 minimum.
(g) Flap width: eight-inch maximum.
(h) Illumination: none.
D. Window signs. A "window sign" shall mean a sign consisting of decals,
card stock or similar material affixed to a window and/or a sign inside a
building and which is plainly visible from the outside.
E. Temporary signs. A "temporary sign" shall mean a sign, commonly
made of wallboard or vinyl, or other inexpensive materials, that is not
permanently affixed or attached to a building, structure or the ground,
and is ordinarily used on a temporary basis.
A. Any sign not expressly permitted is prohibited. Prohibited signs shall
include, but not be limited to, the following and all similar signs:
(1) Any sign which poses a hazard to public safety.
(2) Any sign which creates a physical or visual obstruction for
motorists, pedestrians, or bicyclists; or which conflicts with or
resembles an official traffic control or safety device or sign; or any
sign that is not in compliance with corner clearance requirements
under § 322-16 herein.
(3) Mobile or portable signs, which are freestanding signs designed
and constructed primarily not to be attached to a building, a
structure or the ground.
(4) Revolving or moving signs, including signs which have the
capability of motion in whole or in part.
(5) Flashing or intermittently illuminated signs.
(6) Any sign that produces or is capable of producing any sound or
emitting any vapor, gas, or dust.
(7) Pinwheels, pennants, banners, balloons or other similar devices.
§ 322-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-70
1:895
§ 322-71. Sign illumination.
§ 322-72. Miscellaneous provisions.
(8) Any sign placed or posted on, within, or encroaching upon or over
any Town property and/or including the property within any portion
of the entire width of the right-of-way boundary lines of any Town
street or highway; or on any appurtenance therein, except as
otherwise permitted or authorized herein.
(9) Any sign on any tree, roof, or on another sign.
(10) Any sign that requires a permit or approval from any federal, state
or local governmental authority and which does not have such
permit or approval.
(11) Any sign that promotes a commercial subject matter neither
located nor to be provided at or from the site upon which the sign is
located; or any temporary sign, not including a window sign, in any
district other than Residence, PB or CF that promotes a
commercial subject matter located or to be provided at or from the
site upon which the sign is located; or any sign that identifies an
establishment which has ceased to operate at or from the site upon
which the sign is located.
(12) Any sign that is dilapidated or otherwise not in a good state of
repair.
A. Externally illuminated sign. An "externally illuminated sign" shall mean
a sign illuminated by spotlights.
B. Internally illuminated sign. An "internally illuminated sign" shall mean
a sign illuminated by an interior lighting source emitting light through a
translucent material.
C. No red or green lights or illuminated portions of signs shall be within
100 feet from the point of intersection of the nearest street lines.
D. Where illumination of signs is permitted, such illumination may only be
between sunset and the close of business.
E. Illumination shall be of even intensity at all times; and such illumination
shall measure no greater than 1,000 lumens.
F. Spotlights shall be shielded to prevent glare, and finished to blend in
with the surrounding environment.
A. In addition to signs permitted pursuant to § 322-69, every site shall be
permitted to use such signs as are required by law or by any
governmental authority.
B. Signs erected by governmental authorities, excluding signs erected
pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental function, law or
§ 322-70 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-72
1:896
§ 322-72.1. Permits; fees; removal.
regulation, shall comply with this chapter unless otherwise exempt
under law or specifically waived by the Town Board.
C. In addition to signs permitted pursuant to § 322-69, every site with a
building shall display the street number(s) in characters three to six
inches in height to expedite emergency responses.
D. Any sign within the Nissequogue River Corridor that requires approval
by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation must
have such approval prior to the issuance of a required Town permit.
E. Any sign within 500 feet of a state park or parkway that requires
approval from the New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and
Historic Preservation must have such approval prior to the issuance of a
required Town permit.
F. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the use,
in any district, of a sign indicating that the premises upon which the
sign is located are available for sale or rent.
A. No sign may be erected or altered unless and until a permit authorizing
same is issued by the Building Director, except as otherwise provided
herein. No sign permit shall be issued for a site not in conformity with
any approved site plan.
(1) The sign permit shall not be transferable to another location than
that for which it is issued.
(2) The permit fee shall be $3 per square foot, but not less than $50.
(3) A permit sticker shall be affixed to the face of the sign. Failure to
display a current permit sticker on the face of the sign shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
(4) The permit must be renewed and the sign shall be inspected every
three years. The fee for the renewal of a permit shall be equal to
that of the issuance of the original sign permit.
B. A sign permit may be revoked by the Building Director for a sign that
has been altered such that the sign would require a new permit; or such
that the sign would be rendered prohibited. Notice of any such
condition shall be in writing and shall be served upon the owner or any
other person responsible for the sign, either by personal service or by
posting same at a conspicuous location at the subject site and sending a
copy thereof to such person by certified mail. Upon the failure to
correct the condition within 10 days after such written notification, or
to establish, within said time period, that no such condition exists, the
sign permit may be revoked.
C. The Director of Public Safety or the Building Director may require the
repair, removal or other remedial measure with respect to a sign on
§ 322-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-72.1
1:897
§ 322-72.2. Amortization.
Any sign, other than a temporary sign, lawfully existing prior to the effective
date of this article, which, by virtue hereof, does not conform to the
requirements of this article, shall be permitted to remain in place for a
period of up to two years from the effective date hereof, until expiration of
any permit therefor; provided that any such sign is maintained in good state
private property that poses a hazard to public safety. Notice of such
requirement and the reasons therefor shall be in writing and shall
be served upon the owner or any other person responsible for the
sign, either by personal service or by posting same at a conspicuous
location at the subject site and sending a copy of same to such person
by certified mail. Upon the failure to correct the condition within 10
days after such written notification, or to establish, within said time
period, that no such hazardous condition exists, either director may, but
shall not be required to, cause the repair, removal or other remedial
measure with respect to any such sign. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the Director of Public Safety or the Building Director may require or
cause the immediate repair, removal or other remedial measure with
respect to any such sign, with or without notice to the owner or any
other person responsible for the sign, if either director determines
that said sign poses an immediate hazard to public safety. Nothing
contained herein, however, shall require either director to make any
such determination or to so act in accordance therewith. In any
instance in which any such sign is repaired, removed or otherwise
remediated by the Town, pursuant to this paragraph, in addition to
any other fine or penalty provided under this chapter, the Town shall
assess all costs incurred for such service against the owner or any other
person responsible for the sign, said costs to be recoverable in a civil
action in the name of the Town of Smithtown.
D. Any person who causes or permits any sign to be placed or posted on,
within, or encroaching upon or over any Town property and/or
including the property within any portion of the entire width of the
right-of-way boundary lines of any Town street or highway, or on any
appurtenance therein, other than in conformity with this chapter, shall
be in violation of this chapter. Any such sign shall be subject to
immediate removal and destruction, without notice, as authorized by
the Director of Public Safety, the Building Director, and/or the
department head responsible for the maintenance thereof. In lieu of the
administration and enforcement provisions under Chapter 322 Article
XV of the Town Code, in any action for an alleged violation of this
paragraph, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that a person whose
name, telephone number, or other identifying information appears on
any such sign shall be in violation hereof, for which such person shall be
subject to a civil penalty, for each such violation, in a sum of not more
than $50 for the first violation and not more than $100 for each
subsequent violation, said penalties to be recoverable in a civil action in
the name of the Town of Smithtown.
§ 322-72.1 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-72.2
1:898
of repair. Such sign and sign assemblages shall be brought into compliance
with current requirements or shall be dismantled and removed from their
location prior to the expiration of such period. The failure to comply with
the provisions of this section shall be a violation of this chapter.
§ 322-72.3. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remaining portions hereof, but shall be confined to the clause, sentence,
paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in
which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 322-72.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-72.3
1:899

ARTICLE XI
Nonconforming Uses, Lots and Structures
[Amended 4-5-1966; 1-23-1973; 11-12-1974; 10-9-1984; 6-25-1985;
2-13-1990; 9-13-1994; 5-8-2007; 6-24-2010]
§ 322-73. Nonconforming uses.
The intent of these provisions is to encourage bringing lawfully
nonconforming uses into conformity with the land use provisions of this
ordinance.
A. Except as provided for in § 322-73G, any use that lawfully existed prior
to the adoption of this ordinance, but is not permitted by this ordinance,
may be continued, provided that a certificate of existing use is
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
B. Except as provided for in § 322-73G, any use that was in full compliance
with this ordinance, but is not permitted by this ordinance because of
an amendment hereto, may be continued, provided that within 90 days
of the effective date of the amendment a certificate of existing use is
issued.
C. Lawful nonconforming uses shall not be changed to any use except to a
permitted or special exception use in conformity with this ordinance
unless the Board of Zoning Appeals approves a variance for such
change.
D. Any lawful nonconforming use that is abandoned for more than 12
consecutive months shall not be resumed.
E. Any structure used for a lawful nonconforming use shall not be
repaired, reconstructed, or structurally altered to an extent exceeding
75% of the fair market value of the structure. No expansion of the
amount of land or structure used for a nonconforming use shall be
permitted unless the Board of Zoning Appeals grants a use variance.
This shall not include cosmetic exterior renovations or historic
restoration as approved by the Board of Site Plan Review.
F. Structures used for a nonconforming use shall not be expanded, and the
portion of a lot used for a nonconforming use shall not be expanded.
Site improvements, such as paving areas not previously paved, shall not
be permitted.
G. All outdoor storage not in compliance with an approved site plan shall
be permanently discontinued by January 1, 2017. [Amended
9-22-2016]
H. Any special exception use that was made nonconforming by an
amendment to this ordinance after the special exception was approved
shall be brought into compliance with the new requirements within one
year of the amendment unless the Board of Zoning Appeals grants a
variance.
§ 322-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-74
1:901
§ 322-74. Nonconforming lots.
§ 322-75. Nonconforming structures.
§ 322-76. Compulsory termination.
A. Any structure on a lot that does not conform to the minimum area or
frontage dimensions described in § 322-9B shall not be enlarged or
expanded except in conformity with all other dimensional requirements
of this ordinance.
B. A nonconforming lot may be used or a building or structure may be
erected on such lot for use in accordance with all other applicable
provisions of this chapter, upon approval of the Board of Appeals,
provided that, at all times subsequent to the effective date of any
ordinance making such lot nonconforming, such lot has been separately
owned in good faith and:
(1) Does not or did not adjoin any lot or land in the same ownership;
and
(2) Does not or did not adjoin any lot under the same practical or
effective ownership, whether or not the incidents of title are or
were the same.
A. Nonconforming structures used only for conforming uses and which
were lawfully constructed prior to the adoption of this ordinance or an
applicable amendment thereto shall not be expanded except in
compliance with the dimensional requirements of this ordinance.
B. Nonconforming structures that were lawfully constructed or expanded
pursuant to a variance shall not be expanded except in compliance with
the dimensional requirements of this chapter. [Amended 9-6-2016]
C. Any variance to expand a lawful nonconforming structure that is used
for only a conforming use shall be deemed to be an area variance.
A. The Town Board may on its own motion hold a public hearing to
consider compelling the termination of a nonconforming use if the
Board determines that the use is detrimental to the value of adjacent
property or to the future development of surrounding land; is causing
undue noise, dust, vibration, odor, smoke, glare, electrical interference,
fire hazard, or any other hazard or nuisance; introduces any odorous,
hazardous, noxious or toxic fumes into the air; is detrimental to the
public health or safety; or is tending to deteriorate or blight the
neighborhood.
B. In ordering the compulsory termination of a nonconforming use, the
Town Board will establish a definite and reasonable amortization period
during which the nonconforming use may continue while the
investment value decrement resulting from the termination is
§ 322-74 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-76
1:902
§ 322-77. Certificates of existing use.
§ 322-78. and § 322-79. (Reserved)
amortized. The rate of amortization shall be in accordance with
reasonable economic practice.
A. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have original jurisdiction to
authorize the Building Director to issue certificates of existing use. The
Board shall not authorize the issuance of a certificate unless it finds
that the use was in full compliance with all relevant regulations at the
time the ordinance was adopted or amended so as to make the use
nonconforming, and that the use was not abandoned for more than 12
consecutive months. The Board's decision shall describe in detail the
nature and extent of the lawful nonconforming use.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, a certificate of existing use
for any home professional office/home occupation shall not be
transferable by deed, devise, lease, bequest, assignment or conveyance
of any kind by anyone who takes title to the property after January 1,
1985, and shall terminate upon any such attempted transfer.
§ 322-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-78
1:903

ARTICLE XII
Board of Appeals
§ 322-80. General provisions. [Amended 8-25-1987; 3-29-2007;
6-24-2010]
§ 322-81. Procedure. [Amended 10-20-1964; 2-23-1965; 2-25-1969;
3-4-1975; 4-22-1975; 6-8-1976; 9-8-1981; 12-22-1981; 4-20-1982;
1-25-1983; 6-25-1985; 10-21-1986; 8-25-1987; 1-3-1989; 7-9-1991;
10-6-1992; 3-8-1994; 9-13-1994; 2-22-1999; 5-8-2007; 6-24-2010]
A. The Town Board shall appoint a Board of Appeals consisting of five
members, shall designate its Chairperson and may provide for
compensation to be paid to experts, clerks and a secretary and provide
for such other expenses as shall be necessary and proper not exceeding
the appropriation made by the Town Board for such purpose.
B. The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
(1) To grant or deny use variances;
(2) To grant or deny area variances;
(3) To interpret on appeal the meaning of provisions of this ordinance;
(4) To interpret on appeal the location of boundaries of districts
depicted on the Building Zone Map;
(5) To decide on applications for special exception uses as indicated in
the Table of Use Regulations;
(6) To decide on applications for certificates of existing use;
(7) To vary the requirements of the County Commissioner of Public
Works regarding the approval of building permits, curb cuts, and
subdivision plats pursuant to § 239-k of the General Municipal Law;
(8) To reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the administrative
officer having charge of the issue of permits for buildings pursuant
to § 280-a of the Town Law;
(9) To call upon any department, agency or employee of the Town for
such assistance as shall be deemed necessary and as shall be
authorized by the Town Board; and
(10) To impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions in the
granting of applications as are directly related to and incidental to
the proposed use of the property.
C. The Board of Appeals shall adopt such rules of procedure, not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Town Law and local ordinances,
as it may deem necessary to the proper performance of its duties and
the proper exercise of its powers.
§ 322-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-81
1:905
A. Applications for appeals or special exception uses shall be submitted in
the form required by the Board and filed in the office of the Board.
(1) There shall be submitted with the application an affidavit to be
executed by all owners of record, contract vendees, lessors,
lessees, sublessors, sublessees, contract lessors, contract lessees,
contract sublessors, contract sublessees, holders of beneficial
interest, contract holders of beneficial interest, holders of
encumbrances and contract holders of encumbrances. Lending
institutions licensed or franchised by the State of New York, public
corporations and lessees, contract lessees, sublessees and contract
sublessees of less than a whole interest in the land are excluded
from the provisions of this subsection.
(2) If the affiant is an individual, he/she shall set forth his/her name
and street address.
(3) If the affiant is a partnership, it shall set forth the name, street
address and the nature of interest of each partner.
(4) If the affiant is a corporation, it shall set forth the name and street
address of each office, director and stockholder. It shall also set
forth the name and street address of all persons to whom corporate
stock has been pledged or with whom any agreement has been
made to pledge said stock.
(5) All affiants shall set forth the name and address of all persons,
individuals, partnerships and/or corporations who are the holders
of any instruments creating an encumbrance upon the property
which is the subject of the application and shall also state the
nature of the encumbrance.
(6) All affiants shall state that, to the best of their knowledge, no
person mentioned in their affidavit is a Town officer or employee or
is related to a Town officer or employee, or if such is not the case,
the affiant shall state the exceptions in full detail.
(7) In the event that there is any change in any matter set forth in any
affidavit submitted hereunder prior to the time a certificate of
occupancy is granted to the subject premises, the affiant affected
by such change shall file a supplemental affidavit within 48 hours
after such change has occurred, giving the full details thereof. The
other party affected by the change, if any, shall, within 48 hours
after such change has occurred, also file an affidavit in compliance
with the requirements of this subsection and shall thereafter be
subject to all requirements set forth in this subsection.
(8) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any applicant
who is an individual or a tenant by the entirety seeking an area
variance or an interpretation of any provision of this chapter with
respect to residential property. Anything to the contrary
notwithstanding, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power
§ 322-81 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-81
1:906
to require full compliance with this subsection in any case wherein
the required disclosure would be appropriate.
B. The Board of Appeals shall fix a time and place for a public hearing
thereon and shall provide for the giving of notice thereof as follows:
(1) By publishing a notice in a paper of general circulation in the Town
in accordance with the provisions of Town Law.
(2) By requiring the applicant to erect a white-with-red-lettering sign
or signs, measuring not less than 30 inches high and 40 inches
wide, which shall be prominently displayed on the premises, facing
each public street on which the property abuts, giving notice that
an application for an appeal or special exception use is pending and
the date, time and place where the public hearing will be held. The
sign shall not be set back more than 10 feet from the property line
and shall not be less than two nor more than six feet above the
grade at the property line. The sign shall be made of fourteen-ply
pressed board or other durable material. It shall be displayed for a
period of not less than five days immediately preceding the public
hearing date or any adjourned date. The filing of an affidavit, by the
applicant, that this requirement has been complied with shall be
deemed sufficient proof of compliance therewith.
(3) By requiring the applicant to mail notices by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owners of all properties within 200 feet of
the exterior limits of the subject property, as shown on the latest
assessment roll. Proof of receipt shall be submitted to the Board at
the time of the hearing. Such notice shall be given not less than 14
days prior to the date of the hearing.
(4) By mailing notices to the Long Island State Park Commission if any
state park or parkway is within 500 feet of the property affected.
(5) By mailing notices to the Suffolk County Planning Commission if
within 500 feet of the subject property there is a state park or
parkway; the boundary of a village or Town; the boundary of any
existing or proposed county, state or federal park; the right-of-way
of any existing or proposed county or state parkway, thruway,
expressway, road or highway; the existing or proposed right-of-way
of any stream or drainage channel owned by the county or for
which the county has established channel lines; the existing or
proposed boundary of any other county, state or federally owned
land; or the Long Island Sound or any estuary of the Sound, in
accordance with §§ A14-14 through A14-23 of the Suffolk County
Administrative Code.
(6) If the application is a use variance or a special exception, by
mailing notices to the Clerk of the adjacent municipality if any such
municipality is within 500 feet of the site. Such notice shall be
given not less than 10 days prior to the hearing.
§ 322-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-81
1:907
C. The Director of Planning shall prepare an advisory report on the
proposed use unless he makes a determination that no planning issue is
involved. The report shall be part of the record. The report may
evaluate the application with respect to the needs and growth pattern
of the Town, the Comprehensive Plan and the adequacy of the site area
and plan. It may also include recommendations on the arrangement of
buildings, parking areas, and other pertinent features of the site plan.
D. The Board shall not consider an application to review an earlier
decision concerning the same property, except as a rehearing pursuant
to § 267-a of the Town Law, unless there has been a significant change
in the proposal or applicable laws.
E. For applications to legalize an existing use or structure, the premises
shall be brought into compliance with the decision rendered by the
Board and Town Code within 30 days of the decision. For applications
for a proposed use or structure, the applicant shall apply for the
appropriate permits within 12 months of the decision and obtain a
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance or be in compliance
with the decision and Town Code within 12 months of the issuance of
the permit. At the time of decision, the Board may modify these time
limits when the Board finds that such modification does not hinder the
purposes of this ordinance. After the decision, the Board may extend
these limits upon written request if the Board finds that such extension
will not hinder the purposes of this ordinance.
F. Unless modifications are required by the Building Director or the Board
of Site Plan Review, the site shall be developed and maintained in
accordance with the plans submitted with the application to the Board
of Zoning Appeals.
G. The fee for application to the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be the sum
of the fees listed in the table below. All fees in the table are per request.
Fees associated with applications to legalize existing uses or structures
shall be 50% more than the fees that are otherwise applicable.
[Amended 6-2-2015; 12-11-2018]
(1) Fees for one-family residential uses.
Type Fee
Use variance $1,500
Area variance $200
Interpretation $750
Special exception $1,000
Certificate of existing use $1,000
Request for rehearing $100
Rehearing Same as original application fee
§ 322-81 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-81
1:908
§ 322-82. Special exception uses. [Amended 7-12-1966; 5-2-1967;
10-29-1968; 6-9-1970; 7-7-1970; 10-26-1971; 6-26-1973; 3-4-1975;
6-24-1975; 6-8-1976; 5-20-1978; 10-31-1978; 6-26-1979; 7-10-1979;
8-19-1980; 9-8-1981; 12-22-1981; 4-20-1982; 1-25-1983; 6-25-1983;
7-12-1983; 10-9-1984; 12-4-1984; 2-5-1985; 6-25-1985; 1-7-1986;
10-21-1986; 10-28-1986; 9-6-1988; 4-25-1989; 6-20-1989;
8-22-1989; 2-13-1990; 8-14-1990; 12-4-1990 by L. L. No. 8-1990;
12-10-1991; 6-9-1992; 3-8-1994; 8-9-1994; 9-13-1994; 12-6-1994]
Type Fee
Extension of approval (6
months)
$150
Any other request $300
(2) Fees for uses other than one-family residential uses.
Type Fee
Use variance $3,000
Area variance $500
Interpretation $2,000
Special exception $3,000
Certificate of existing use $2,000
Request for rehearing $300
Rehearing Same as original application fee
Extension of approval (6
months)
$300
Any other request $600
H. No fee shall be required for any government entity.
A. No special exception use for which the Board of Appeals has original
jurisdiction according to the Table of Use Regulations154 shall be
established or modified without prior approval by this Board. No
premises on which a special exception use exists shall be modified
without prior approval by the Board.
(1) Such use shall be one which is specifically authorized as a special
exception use in the district within which the subject site is located.
(2) Every decision by the Board of Appeals granting a permit for a
special exception use shall clearly set forth the nature and extent of
such authorized use and any special conditions or safeguards to
which it shall be subject as a result of the Board's findings.
Violations of any such limitations or special conditions and
154. Editor's Note: The Tables of Use Regulations for various districts are located at the end of
this chapter.
§ 322-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-82
1:909
safeguards shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, punishable
under the provisions of § 322-105.
(3) A special exception use for which a permit is granted by the Board
of Appeals pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be
construed to be a conforming use.
(4) Any special exception use approved prior to an amendment of any
of the general standards or specific conditions shall be deemed
nonconforming with respect to the amendment only.
B. Compliance required. No special exception use shall be approved
unless the Board of Zoning Appeals determines that the use is in full
compliance with the general standards required for all special
exception uses as described in § 322-94G and the special standards for
certain special exception uses as described in § 322-82C. [Amended
6-24-2010]
C. Special standards for certain special exception uses. [Amended
6-24-1997; 7-8-1997; 10-7-1997; 10-28-1997; 12-9-1997;
1-27-1998; 5-11-1999; 5-25-1999; 4-9-2002; 7-22-2003;
7-13-2004; 11-23-2004; 7-11-2006; 7-25-2006; 5-8-2007;
9-11-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007; 6-24-2010]
(1) Animal boarding; kennel; veterinarian; animal hospice; animal
hospital. The following requirements shall be met:
(a) Outside pens or exercise runs shall be maintained in the WSI
Zone only, provided that such runs are located at least 100 feet
from all property lines and at least 200 feet from any residence
district. Such runs shall be enclosed on all sides by a wall or
solid fence between five and six feet in height.
(b) In the WSI District, side yard requirements shall be increased
to 50 feet, unless the proposed building will comply with
Subsection C(1)(c) below.
(c) In the NB, CB, and SCB Districts, all treatment rooms, cages,
pens, runs and kennels shall be maintained within a completely
enclosed soundproof building. Structural plans and
specifications shall bear the certification of an acoustical
engineer verifying that the proposed structure will achieve the
required sound transmission loss, pursuant to Chapter 207,
Noise, of the Town Code.
(d) Appropriate equipment shall be provided to absorb odors and
adequate service provided for the removal of refuse.
(2) Arena; assembly hall. The following requirements shall be met:
(a) No structure shall be built within 100 feet of any residence
district.
§ 322-82 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-82
1:910
(b) In the WSI District, the proposed use shall be located on a site
with an area of not less than five acres.
(3) Parking in a residence district adjacent to and for a use located in a
business or industrial district. The following requirements shall be
met:
(a) The parking shall be on the same lot as the principal use, and
the lot shall have been in existence since the date that the
district boundary line that divides the lot was created.
(b) The residential portion of the lot shall be unusable for
residential purposes by reason of size, shape or the lack of
suitable potential access.
(c) The parking shall not extend more than 50 feet into the
residence district.
(d) A densely planted buffer zone shall be maintained on site along
the edges of the parking that faces a residence district, except
where facing other lots that are used principally for
commercial purposes. The depth of this buffer shall be at least
equal to the depth of the extension of the parking into the
residence district or shall be 15 feet, whichever is greater.
(e) The principal building shall conform to the floor area ratio,
building coverage, height and parking requirements for the
district in which the building is located.
(f) In the St. James Central Business District, the parking shall not
extend more than 150 feet from Lake Avenue.
(4) In the PB District, for buildings having a gross floor area larger
than 2,500 square feet, the following requirements shall be met:
(a) The building shall be similar in appearance to other residences
within 200 feet regarding placement, orientation, size, bulk,
building material, style and roofline.
(b) The premises shall meet all regulations set forth in § 322-9C
and Article IX.
(5) Day camp. The following requirements shall be met:
(a) The proposed use shall be on a site of no less than five acres
with no less than 300 feet of street frontage.
(b) There shall be no more than one camper or student for every
2,000 square feet of site area.
(c) All buildings, structures and areas of organized activity, such
as baseball diamonds, basketball courts, riding areas,
swimming pools, etc., shall be located at least 100 feet from all
property and street lines.
§ 322-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-82
1:911
(d) Off-street parking areas shall be located at least 50 feet from
any property line.
(e) No more than one permanent family dwelling unit shall be
permitted on the subject premises, and said dwelling unit must
comply with all the regulations and provisions of this chapter
and other applicable ordinances of the Town of Smithtown as
they pertain to the zoning district in which the subject
premises is located.
(f) No outdoor floodlighting or loudspeaker systems shall be
permitted.
(g) Only one sign, not larger than four square feet in area, shall be
permitted.
(h) Landscaping and fencing shall be provided as required by the
Board of Appeals.
(6) Nightclub. The following requirements shall be met: [Amended
3-22-2012; 5-9-2017]
(a) No nightclub site shall be permitted within 200 feet of any
residence district.
(b) No outdoor loudspeaker shall be permitted.
(c) No outdoor dining, drinking, smoking, or waiting area shall be
permitted.
(7) Filling station. The following requirements shall be met:
(a) The site shall be at least 500 feet from any church, school,
library, playground or similar place of public assembly. The site
shall not be within the Local Waterfront Area or within 1,200
feet of the Nissequogue River or its tributaries. Sites shall be
at least 1,200 feet from any existing filling station. [Amended
8-13-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
(b) The use shall be on a site of not less than 20,000 square feet,
with no less than 150 feet of street frontage on any public road.
(c) The gross floor area shall not exceed 1,500 square feet, and the
building shall not be more than one story in height.
(d) A densely planted buffer area at least 50 feet deep shall be
maintained adjacent to residence districts or uses.
(e) Pump islands shall be at least 25 feet from all property lines
and buildings. Except as otherwise provided pursuant to
§ 322-82C(13), no fuel shall be stored above ground.
(f) Outdoor storage or display of merchandise and outdoor repair
work shall not be permitted at any time. No overnight outdoor
§ 322-82 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-82
1:912
storage or parking of vehicles shall be permitted. [Amended
8-13-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
(g) The premises shall not be used for the sale, rent or display or
vehicles, boats or similar articles.
(h) Signage shall comply with the dimensional requirements of
Article X of this chapter.
(i) No retail sales over 1,250 square feet in area shall be
permitted: [Amended 8-13-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
[1] Accessory convenience sales, provided that the following
conditions are met:
[a] No repair bays are on site.
[b] The gross floor area for a filling station with accessory
convenience sales, as defined by § 322-3B, shall not
exceed 1,250 square feet in gross floor area.
[c] The parking shall be sufficient for the use but in no
case less than the requirement for a retail store of the
same floor area.
(8) Horsemanship school or stable. The following requirements shall
be met:
(a) The proposed use shall be on a site of not less than five acres,
with no less than 300 feet of street frontage. In determining
the area, no portion of the premises less than 150 feet in width
shall be included.
(b) The number of horses stabled on the site shall be no more than
three for each acre of lot area.
(c) The property shall not be used for a livery stable, dude ranch
or amusement park, nor shall any horse or pony rides be sold
or advertised for sale.
(d) The site plan for the proposed use shall show the location of
existing and proposed structures, riding areas, driveways and
parking areas.
(e) Stables shall be located at least 60 feet from front, side and
rear property lines; provided, however, that in cases involving
structures existing at the effective date of this chapter, the
Board of Appeals may permit modifications of these
restrictions.
(f) No living quarters other than one one-family dwelling shall be
constructed or maintained on the premises, and no living
quarters shall be permitted in any building in which the horses
are stabled.
§ 322-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-82
1:913
(g) No outdoor floodlighting or loudspeaker system shall be
permitted.
(h) Only one sign, not larger than four square feet in area, shall be
permitted.
(i) Landscaping and fencing shall be provided around the
perimeter of the premises as required by the Board of Appeals.
(j) Special exception uses authorized under this category shall be
limited to a lifetime of not more than five years. No
authorization or renewal of a previous authorization shall be
granted by the Board of Appeals pursuant to this chapter if the
Board finds that the development of land adjacent to the site
has advanced to a degree where the health, safety or general
welfare of the public is endangered by the proposed use.
(9) Day-care center and nursery school. The following requirements
shall be met:
(a) In residence districts, the use shall be located only on a
lawfully existing day camp or on a site of at least one acre in
area, of a hospital, nursing home, church or school.
(b) A passenger loading/discharge zone of adequate size shall be
provided in a suitable on-site location so that pedestrians will
not have to cross drives or aisles in order to reach their
destinations.
(c) The outside recreation area shall be set back from hazardous
uses so as to comply with the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development standards for siting urban
development with respect to hazardous commercial/industrial
facilities.
(d) The building and outdoor play area shall not be permitted in
the required front yard or within 50 feet of any residential lot.
(e) The outdoor play areas shall be adequately protected from
traffic and shall be set back at least 10 feet from all parking
areas.
(f) The use of the outdoor play area shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m. unless otherwise modified by the Board.
(10) (Reserved)
(11) Membership club, nonprofit. The following requirements shall be
met:
(a) In residential districts:
[1] Membership clubs shall be on a site of not less than two
acres with not less than 200 feet of the street frontage.
§ 322-82 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-82
1:914
[2] All buildings and structures shall be located at least 60
feet from the front, side or rear property lines. The Board
of Appeals may permit modification of this restriction
involving existing structures.
[3] The total building area shall not exceed 10% of the total lot
area.
[4] Off-street parking areas shall be located at least 30 feet
from all property lines and shall be screened from adjacent
properties by appropriate landscaping.
[5] No living quarters other than one dwelling unit for the
caretaker or manager and his family shall be permitted.
[6] No outdoor floodlighting or loudspeaker system shall be
permitted.
[7] Only one sign, not larger than four square feet, shall be
permitted. No banners or attention-getting devices shall
be permitted.
[8] The exterior of the building shall be designed, if new, or
maintained, if existing, to present the general appearance
of a residence, and the site shall be landscaped in the same
manner.
(b) In nonresidential districts:
[1] Membership clubs shall be on a site of not less than one
acre of land with not less than 100 feet of street frontage.
[2] No outdoor floodlighting or loudspeaker systems shall be
permitted.
(12) (Reserved)155
(13) 156Propane exchange. The following requirements shall be met:
(a) This land use shall be permitted only as an accessory use to
filling stations, fuel storage and distribution, and nurseries.
(b) The site shall be at least 500 feet from any church, school,
theater, recreation area or similar place of public assembly.
(c) All cylinders shall be stored in sturdy metal cages finished in a
dark color so as to be inconspicuous. Bollards which meet the
design requirements of the Board of Site Plan Review shall be
constructed to protect the cages from vehicles.
155. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(12), Adult retail shop or adult entertainment, was
repealed 5-30-2000. See now § 322-30.2. Former Subsection C(12), Mini storage
warehouses, was repealed 4-4-2017.
156. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(13), Nursery school, was repealed 10-7-1997. See now
Subsection C(9).
§ 322-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-82
1:915
(d) The maximum storage capacity on the site shall not exceed 200
gallons.
(e) All cylinders shall be set back at least 50 feet from highways,
residence districts, and lots used for residence, and six feet
from adjacent lots, parking areas and driveways.
(14) Repair garage. The following requirements shall be met:
(a) The proposed use shall be on a site of not less than 20,000
square feet, with no less than 100 feet of frontage on each
public street. The gross floor area shall not exceed 25% of the
lot area.
(b) The site shall not be within 500 feet of any church, school,
library, playground or any other similar place of public
assembly.
(c) The sale of fuel, either wholesale or retail, shall not be
permitted.
(d) A densely planted buffer zone, at least 50 feet deep, shall be
maintained adjacent to any residence district.
(e) Outdoor storage or display of vehicle parts, dismantled
vehicles, tires and similar accessories and outdoor repair work
shall not be permitted at any time. Overnight outdoor storage
and parking of vehicles shall be limited to an area less than
3,500 square feet, which shall be enclosed by a six-foot-high
opaque fence.
(f) Premises shall not be used for the sale, rent or display of motor
vehicles, mobile homes, boats or similar articles.
(g) The only sale or service permitted shall be for commodities
related to automotive needs unless such sale or service is
licensed as a coin-operated machine under § 322-28 of this
chapter.
(h) In the WSI and HI Districts, the sale of motor vehicle parts
shall be permitted as an accessory use, provided that the floor
area used for the sale display and storage of parts shall not
exceed 49% of the floor area used for the repair of vehicles.
(15) Outdoor storage. [Added 9-22-2016]
(a) The area of outdoor storage shall not exceed the gross floor
area.
(b) The minimum setback from streets, parks, parkways, and
residence districts shall be 100 feet. This area shall be densely
planted with trees and shrubs to screen the outdoor storage
from views off-site.
§ 322-82 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-82
1:916
(c) The maximum height of outdoor storage shall not exceed six
feet; except for vehicles, which shall not exceed 14 feet, and
storage containers and shipping containers, which shall not
exceed 10 feet.
(d) All outdoor storage shall be enclosed by a six-foot-high solid
wood fence on the perimeter of the outdoor storage area.
(e) No loading or unloading shall be conducted between 6:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
(16) Swimming or boat club. The same requirements as stated for
membership club, nonprofit, shall be met, except that:
(a) Swimming or boat club shall be on a site of not less than two acres
with no less than 100 feet of street frontage.
(b) All buildings, structures and areas of organized activity, such
as picnic areas or terraces, game courts, swimming pools, etc.,
shall be located at least 100 feet from all property or street
lines.
(c) All areas of organized activity shall be screened by landscaping
from adjacent properties.
(d) Boat berth facilities shall not have an aggregate berth width in
excess of the length of the available water frontage.
(17) Theater; multiplex theater; outdoor theater. The following
requirements shall be met:
(a) Indoor theater of less than 100 seats: the same dimensional
and buffer requirements as required in the Shopping Center
Business District (SCB) as noted in §§ 322-9B and 322-20.
(b) Indoor theater with more than 100 seats and not a multiplex
theater.
[1] No structure shall be built within 100 feet of any
residential district.
[2] In the WSI District, the proposed use shall be located on a
site with an area of not less than two acres.
[3] In the WSI District, off-street parking areas shall be
located at least 30 feet from the front property line.
(c) Outdoor theater: the same requirements as stated for "arena;
assembly hall."157
157. Editor's Note: See § 322-82C(2). Former Subsection C(17)(d), Multiplex theater, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 4-4-2017.
§ 322-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-82
1:917
(18) Trucking station. The same requirements as stated for filling
station shall be met, except that the requirement set forth in
Subsection C(7)(c), (f) and (g) above shall not be applicable to a
trucking station, and, in addition, the Board of Appeals shall
provide for the adequate muffling of such noises as diesel engine
starters and the overnight operation of refrigeration units so that
they shall not create a nuisance on adjacent properties.
(19) Temporary living quarters for parent. The following requirements
shall be met:
(a) The residents of the proposed use shall be members of the
immediate family of the residents of the main dwelling.
Members of the immediate family shall include: parents,
children, siblings, grandparents or grandchildren related by
blood, adoption, marriage or foster parent-child relationship.
(b) There shall be not more than one separate temporary dwelling
unit per residence. The floor area of the temporary dwelling
unit shall not exceed the greater of:
[1] Six hundred square feet; or
[2] Four percent of the lot up to 1,000 square feet.
(c) (Reserved)158
(d) The floor plan submitted with the application shall show that it
is economical and practical to convert the use back to a single
family residence and the applicant shall file with the deed in
the Suffolk County Clerk's office a covenant agreeing to comply
with all of the special exception requirements.
(e) The proposed use shall be for an initial three year period,
renewable every three years by the Building Director, who
shall inspect the premises to determine if the residents and
physical conditions of the premises are the same as approved.
Special exception approval shall terminate upon such change,
the separate cooking facilities shall be removed and access to
the main residence shall be restored.
(20) Parking garage. The following requirements shall be met:
(a) The proposed use shall be on a site of not less than five acres
with not less than 300 feet of street frontage.
(b) The proposed garage shall result in a total floor area which in
no case shall exceed the total floor area which could be
permitted, in the Board's judgment, if the land were developed
158. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(19)(c), prohibiting separate entries and location
below grade, was repealed 10-2-2012.
§ 322-82 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-82
1:918
without a parking garage and if the development conformed to
all other requirements in this chapter.
(c) The garage shall not be located less than 50 feet from any
property line, 100 feet from any residence district or within
any required yard.
(d) No structure on the site shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(21) (Reserved)
(22) Harboring or stabling of horses or ponies in the R-15, R-10 and
R-10S Districts. The following requirements shall be met:
(a) The use shall be permitted only if § 322-12I is complied with.
(b) A signed affidavit shall be submitted to the Board to the effect
that, at the termination of the use, the fenced runs, barns,
stables or other accessory buildings for horses or ponies shall
be removed and the grounds shall revert to its original use.
(c) The proposed use shall be for an initial three-year period,
renewable every three years by the Building Director. At such
time the Building Director will conduct an inspection of the site
to determine that the lot area and stabling facilities are
adequate to assure that no adverse effects have occurred to
adjoining properties, i.e., noise, smell, vermin, poor property
maintenance or hazardous health conditions.
(d) Each renewal application shall be subject to a filing fee of
$100.
(23) Accessory apartment dwelling units. The following requirements
shall be met:
(a) The apartment dwelling units shall not be located on the first
floor of the building.
(b) No apartment dwelling shall consist of more than two
bedrooms.
(c) A suitable means of access to the dwelling unit shall be
provided, which shall be sufficiently safe and attractive for
pedestrian use.
(d) A smoke detector, fire alarm or sprinkler system shall be
provided.
(e) There shall be adequate provision for off-street parking
according to good practice, but not less than the requirements
specified in this chapter, unless the Board determines that
there is adequate available off-street parking in a public
parking lot that is located within 200 feet walking distance of
the access to the apartment dwelling unit. Notwithstanding
§ 322-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-82
1:919
§ 322-82B(8), the Board of Appeals may permit a reduction
in the number of parking and truck-loading spaces, provided
that the Board finds that the general standards described in
§ 322-83B are met, the building and site design conform to the
development plan for the central business district in which the
site is located and that the number of parking stalls shall not
be less than 60% of the requirements for the uses as described
in Article IX.
(f) Accessory apartment dwelling units shall only be permitted on
premises containing only the following uses: a retail store or
shop, personal shop, office, bank, funeral home, restaurant,
tavern, bar, inn or shop for custom work and making articles
sold on the premises.
(g) Permission for the proposed accessory use shall be for an
initial three-year period, renewable every three years by the
Board of Appeals, which shall determine whether or not the
use is in compliance with these requirements. A covenant in
recordable form shall be submitted to the Board of Appeals by
the property owner, agreeing to remove the residential use
upon termination of the permit. Upon the property owner's
failure to renew within 60 days of the termination of the threeyear
period, the permission of the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall automatically terminate.
(24)Home occupation. Except for home occupations and home
professional offices, as defined in § 322-3, that were in existence
prior to October 1984, and which were in compliance with the
provisions of the Building Zone Ordinance at that time, the
following requirements shall be met:
(a) The home occupation is to be an accessory use so located and
conducted that the use would not be evident to neighbors.
(b) Nuisances and hazards.
[1] The use shall not create any undue noise, dust, vibration,
odor, smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard or
any other hazard or nuisance.
[2] The use shall require no electrical or mechanical
equipment which creates visible or audible interference in
radio or television receivers or causes fluctuations in line
voltage outside the dwelling unit or which creates noise
not normally associated with residential uses.
[3] The use shall not introduce any odorous, hazardous,
noxious or toxic fumes into the air.
(c) Signage shall be in compliance with the regulations described
in Article X of this ordinance.
§ 322-82 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-82
1:920
(d) There shall be no outdoor storage of supplies or finished
products or any equipment used in the home occupation.
(e) There may be one separate outside entry or exit constructed
specifically for or used exclusively by the office portion of the
home.
(f) The home occupation use may not exceed 400 square feet of
the floor area of the residence.
(g) The conduct of any home occupation shall not cause the use of
either on-street parking facilities or publicly or privately
owned parking fields, nor shall it cause the use of more than
two on-site parking spaces.
(h) To the extent that there is any sale or purchase of any product
as a primary function of the home occupation, no shipping of
materials or delivery of that product utilizing any commercial
truck, van or other such vehicle shall occur on or from the
premises or adjacent to the premises; nor shall there be
utilized any commercial truck, van or other such vehicle for the
purpose of pickup or delivery of materials or the product
produced by the home occupation by the applicant and/or his
clients or customers.
(i) There shall be only one home occupation use allowed per
residence.
(25) Outdoor dining area. The following regulations shall be met:
(a) The outdoor dining area shall not be located within 150 feet of
any residence district, unless the principal building is situated
between the proposed use and the residence district.
(b) The outdoor dining area shall be set back from the curbline at
least 10 feet in the CB District and 40 feet in other districts.
(c) If the outdoor dining area exceeds 1,000 square feet, parking
shall be provided at the same rate as the principal use.
(d) The outdoor dining area may be covered. No fences or walls
higher than four feet shall be permitted. [Amended
10-2-2012]
(e) From October 31 to April 1 all furniture shall be stored indoors.
(f) The outdoor dining area shall not be used between 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. The Board may permit the use to operate later
into the night only if the Board finds that the use will not
impact any residential uses.
(g) Outdoor entertainment or loudspeakers shall not be permitted.
§ 322-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-83
1:921
§ 322-83. Variances. [Amended 1-23-1973; 11-12-1974; 2-13-1990;
11-24-1992; 6-24-2010]
A. Use variances. Pursuant to § 267-b(2) of the Town Law, no use variance
shall be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals without a showing by
the applicant that applicable zoning regulations and restrictions have
caused unnecessary hardship. In order to prove such unnecessary
hardship the applicant shall demonstrate to the Board that for each and
every permitted use under the zoning regulations for the particular
district where the property is located:
(1) The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that
lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by competent
financial evidence:
(2) That the alleged hardship relating to the property in question is
unique, and does not apply to a substantial portion of the district or
neighborhood;
(3) That the requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
(4) That the alleged hardship has not been self-created.
B. Area variances. Pursuant to § 267-b(3) of the Town Law, in making its
determination, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall take into
consideration the benefit to the applicant if the variance is granted, as
weighted against the detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the
neighborhood or community by such grant, and:
(1) Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the character
of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby properties will be
created by the granting of the area variance;
(2) Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved by
some method, feasible for the applicant to pursue, other than an
area variance;
(3) Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
(4) Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or
impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the
neighborhood or district; and
(5) Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Board, but
shall not necessarily preclude the granting of the area variance.
C. The Board shall grant the minimum variance that it shall deem
necessary and adequate and at the same time preserve and protect the
character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
§ 322-83 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-83
1:922
D. In cases where the lot does not meet the area and/or frontage
requirements, the Board shall not grant more than three variances.
E. The Board may authorize the change of a certificate of existing use so
as to permit a use not otherwise permitted, provided that the Board
determines that the change would be beneficial to the community.
F. In cases where the appeal is in the form of a request for an
interpretation of a word or words, the Board shall consider the intent of
the provision in question and also the definition of terms as described in
the Town Code, professional publications, and standard references.
G. In cases where the appeal is in the form of a request for a determination
of the precise location of a district boundary line, the Board shall
consider public records on file in the Town.
H. Development in flood hazard zones.
(1) In passing upon such applications, the Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards and specified
in other sections of this chapter and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the Town.
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area.
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(j) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated
with conducting search and rescue operations during periods
of flooding.
§ 322-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-83
1:923
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site.
(l) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and
bridges.
(2) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the
items in § 322-83H(1)(a) through (l) have been fully considered.
(3) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(a) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
(b) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(4) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(a) The criteria of Subsection H(6) of this section are met.
(b) The structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create
no additional threat to public safety.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(6) Variances shall be issued only upon receiving written justification
of:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of a public or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
§ 322-83 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-83
1:924
(7) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a Clerk to the Board that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from lowest-floor elevation.
§ 322-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-83
1:925

ARTICLE XIII
Site Plan Review
[Added 6-25-1985; amended 9-10-1985; 12-7-1985; 1-7-1986;
10-21-1986; 1-3-1989; 10-21-1989; 8-14-1990; 7-9-1991; 9-29-1998]
§ 322-84. Declaration of policy.
The Town Board hereby finds that all forms of private and public
developments within the Town, exclusive of the incorporated villages,
should proceed along the lines of good order and with due regard for
the public interest, including but not limited to the public health, safety
and welfare. The quality of a site's design can have a significant effect
on the value of the surrounding properties and, subsequently, municipal
tax revenues. Poor site design can not only destroy the proper balance
in relationship between the taxable value of real property and the cost of
municipal services provided, but can also diminish the numerous positive
benefits that land use and development usually provide to the property
owner. Accordingly, a reasonable degree of control should be exercised over
the character of private and public land use and development, including
but not limited to the exterior design of new or renovated structures and
portions thereof, the construction and location of parking areas, with or
without new building construction, changes in the use of existing structures
and the use of open land.
§ 322-85. General provisions. [Amended 12-9-2003; 7-26-2005]
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to encourage good site design
so as to:
(1) Protect the established character of the adjoining properties, both
public and private, and of the neighborhoods in which they are
located.
(2) Prevent the depreciation of the value of adjoining properties, both
public and private, and of the neighborhoods in which they are
located.
(3) Lessen and, where possible, prevent traffic congestion on the
streets and highways upon which the site fronts or which provide
vehicular or pedestrian access thereto.
(4) Prevent the overcrowding of land or buildings.
(5) Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, and to provide
adequate light, air and convenience of access.
(6) Promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
community in which said proposed sites are located.
B. Site plan required. Except as provided in § 322-85C and D, the following
activities shall not be permitted except in conformity with a site plan
approved pursuant to the provisions of this chapter:
§ 322-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-85
1:927
(1) The construction, demolition, or enlargement of buildings or parts
thereof.
(2) Any modification to the exterior materials, finishes, colors,
appurtenances or design of any building or structure.
(3) The installation, construction, or alteration of any structure,
including but not limited to curbs, drainage facilities, paving,
fences, lighting, signs, walls and canopies.
(4) Any modification to the size or shape of the site.
(5) Any outdoor storage, parking or display of equipment, supplies,
vehicles or materials.
(6) Any change in land use which requires an increase in parking,
landscaping or buffer requirements.
(7) The filling, excavation and regrading of the land or water bodies.
(8) The removal of any vegetation, including but not limited to trees,
shrubs, vines and groundcovers.
C. Exclusions. Site plan approval shall not be required for any of the
following:
(1) Single- and two-family dwellings, including accessory uses, except
for home occupations, in the R-43, R-21, R-15, R-10, R-10S and
RM-7 Districts.
(2) Interior alterations not involving a change of use, provided that the
property has a valid and subsisting certificate of occupancy.
(3) Emergency repairs or demolition deemed necessary by the
Building Official to protect the public health or safety. [Amended
3-8-2011]
(4) The installation or pruning of plants or the replacement of dead or
diseased plants with specimens of the same species and size as
originally approved.
(5) Routine property maintenance or repair not involving a change of
material or design, such as painting, roof repairs and repaving
previously paved surfaces.
D. Exemptions. Site plan approval shall not be required for the following
proposed projects, provided that the requirements of § 322-87B are
satisfied. In order to be considered for any such exemption, the
applicant must submit an application for site plan exemption pursuant
to § 322-88C. [Amended 3-8-2011]
(1) A one-time structural addition per site, the size of which shall not
exceed 25% of the gross floor of the building, up to a maximum of
5,000 square feet, provided that any such addition does not involve
§ 322-85 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-85
1:928
§ 322-86. Board of Site Plan Review.
There is hereby created a Board of Site Plan Review. The Board of Site Plan
Review shall consist of five members, who shall be members of the Town
Board. The Board of Site Plan Review shall have the following powers and
duties:
the removal of more than six trees as defined in Chapter 285
of the Code of the Town of Smithtown, provided that none of
the trees to be removed is larger than six inches in diameter
measured three feet from ground level, and further provided that
the structural addition utilizes exterior materials, the composition,
color and finish of which match and/or are consistent with the main
structure. [Amended 2-23-2012]
(2) A one-time paving of a previously unpaved area per site, the size of
which shall not exceed 50% of the site area, up to a maximum of
40,000 square feet, provided that any such paving does not involve
the removal of more than six trees as defined in Chapter 285 of the
Code of the Town of Smithtown, provided that none of the trees to
be removed is larger than six inches in diameter measured three
feet from ground level. [Amended 2-23-2012]
(3) A change in use pursuant to the § 322-8B Table of Use Regulations.
(4) Alterations to the exterior of a building, provided that there is no
increase in building coverage or floor area and that the alterations
comply with any previous applicable approval by the Board of Site
Plan Review.
(5) The repair of fire damage, in kind, in place, provided that the
affected floor area does not exceed 3,000 square feet of the site.
(6) The demolition or removal of not more than 15,000 square feet of
gross floor area of buildings. [Amended 2-4-2020 by L.L. No.
4-2020]
(7) The installation of plants or the construction or modification of
accessory structures such as access for the disabled, fences, lights,
generators, walls, swimming pools, garages, sheds, decks, patios,
awnings, berms, solar panels.
(8) Boundary line modifications to a site.
A. To examine and review all site plans and elevation drawings submitted
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
B. To apply, in its examination and review, the objectives and standards
established under §§ 322-85A and 322-87 and, based thereon, to
approve or disapprove such site plans and elevation drawings or to
require changes therein as a condition of approval.
§ 322-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-86
1:929
§ 322-87. Compliance and standards.
C. To require modification of any proposed site improvements that, in its
judgment of the particular circumstances of a site, are inappropriate
and not requisite in or consistent with the standards set forth in this
chapter. In so doing, however, the Board may not violate the provisions
of the Building Zone Ordinance; nor may it usurp the authority or
override the decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(1) Any proposed change or revision to a site that is occupied by a use
for which a special exception has been granted must first be
approved by the board that granted the special exception.
(2) The Board may allow or require landscaping to be installed in place
of specified parking spaces, as shown on the plan, and require that
the applicant attach to the deed a recorded covenant to run with
the land specifying that should the Town determine the need for
additional parking, the landscaping shall be removed and the
parking spaces installed.
D. To waive requirements the Board previously imposed as a condition of
approval, provided that the waiver does not result in a violation of this
chapter, that the Board determines that the waiver will not hinder the
intent of § 322-85A, that the applicant has a practical difficulty in
carrying out the condition and that the Board determines that the
waiver would promote the public good. [Amended 12-19-2000]
E. To increase building setbacks and reduce building coverage and floor
area when, in the Board's judgment, the increase or reduction is
necessary to protect significant natural or cultural resources or reduce
traffic impacts on highways that are congested and/or hazardous.
F. To require, as a condition of approval, that any new or altered building
for which site plan approval is sought must be within 400 feet of a fire
hydrant. [Amended 3-8-2011]
A. The Board's review of the application and plans shall include but not be
limited to verifying and/or considering the following:
(1) Compliance with Town Law 274-a and, where applicable, General
Municipal Law § 239-m.
(2) Compliance with the State Environmental Quality Review Act
(SEQRA), Article 8 of the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law.
(3) Compliance with all other applicable federal, state and local laws,
rules and regulations.
(4) Compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(5) Consistency with the Town's Local Waterfront Revitalization
Program (LWRP).
§ 322-86 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-87
1:930
(6) Compliance with the Tree Preservation and Land Clearing
Ordinance, Chapter 285 of the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
(7) Minimum construction standards and specifications:
(a) Grading: the Regrading and Excavating Ordinance, Chapter
154, Article I, of the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
(b) Drainage: the Subdivision Regulations, Chapter 248 of the
Code of the Town of Smithtown.
(c) Paving: Type A as specified in the Subdivision Regulations,
Chapter 248 of the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
(d) Sidewalks, driveway aprons and curb cuts: the specifications of
the governmental agency having jurisdiction over the same,
i.e., State Department of Transportation, County Department
of Public Works or Town Superintendent of Highways.
(e) Street trees: The Subdivision Regulations, Chapter 248 of the
Code of the Town of Smithtown.
(f) Groundwater and surface water protection: The Suffolk County
Sanitary Code and all applicable state and federal laws.
(8) Design considerations:
(a) The suitability of the terrain, soils, hydrology, vegetation and
the existing and proposed structures and uses on and off of the
proposed development.
(b) The location, arrangement, size, design and general site
compatibility of buildings, structures, lighting and signs.
(c) The appropriateness of line, form, mass, rhythm, style and
material, including finishes and colors, and the visual impact
that the proposed development would have on the established
character of the district, especially historically and/or
architecturally significant sites.
(d) The adequacy, safety and convenience of pedestrian traffic
access and circulation, including walkways, handicap ramps
and pedestrian/vehicle conflict points.
(e) The adequacy, safety and convenience of vehicular traffic
access and circulation, including driveways, curb cuts,
intersections, pavement surfaces and traffic controls.
(f) The sufficiency, convenience and appearance of off-street
parking and loading areas, including maneuvering areas.
(g) The adequacy of fire lanes and other safety zones and the
provision of fire hydrants.
§ 322-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-87
1:931
§ 322-88. Application.
(h) The adequacy of water supply, stormwater drainage, refuse
and sewage disposal facilities.
(i) The adequacy and impact of the proposed development in
areas with susceptibility to flooding and/or erosion.
(j) The adequacy of fences, walls, street trees and other plant
materials and amenities and land use and visual and noise
buffers, including the maximum retention of existing natural
features such as land forms, water bodies and vegetation.
(9) Compliance with Chapter 153, Stormwater Management and
Erosion and Sediment Control, of the Code of the Town of
Smithtown. [Added 5-17-2012]
(10) Before the Board may approve a site plan containing residential
units, such site plan shall also show, when required by the Board, a
park or parks suitably located for playground or other recreational
purposes or a sum of money in lieu thereof in conformity with
§ 274-a of the Town Law. [Added 11-3-2015]
B. In order to qualify for an exemption pursuant to § 322-85D, a proposed
project must not be a prior-built action (except for a change in use not
involving any exterior change,) and must: [Amended 12-19-2000;
3-8-2011; 5-17-2012]
(1) Comply with § 322-87A(7) and all other applicable provisions of this
chapter.
(2) Be consistent with all duly adopted local plans, rules and
regulations of the Town.
(3) Conform with any required variance, special exception or LWRP
determination.
(4) Conform with a New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (NYSDEC) permit for tidal wetlands, freshwater
wetlands or any other similar permit issued by the NYSDEC.
(5) Comply with the materials and design specifications published by
the Department of Planning and Community Development, as
adopted by the Town Board.
(6) Comply with all other applicable federal, state and local laws, rules
and regulations.
A. Site plan application. A complete site plan application for any building,
structure and use shall consist of a completed application. [Amended
3-8-2011]
§ 322-87 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-88
1:932
(1) Thirteen copies of a site plan prepared by competent professionals
duly licensed to prepare such drawings. The drawings shall be
submitted in all cases except as provided for in §§ 322-85C and
322-85D. Drawings shall be to a scale of one of the following: one
inch equals 10 feet, one inch equals 20 feet, one inch equals 30
feet, one inch equals 40 feet, one inch equals 50 feet or one inch
equals 60 feet. The site plan shall show the following information:
(a) Property lines and related street, right-of-way and easement
lines as determined by survey.
(b) The location of existing and/or proposed buildings and
structures.
(c) The layout of existing and/or proposed off-street parking areas,
showing the details of aisles, driveways and all parking spaces.
(d) The existing topography of the site and adjacent properties, as
revealed by contours or key elevations, as may be required by
the Town Engineer.
(e) The proposed final grades, including detailed information
relative to the methods to be used during and after
construction to retain, stabilize and/or refurbish regraded
areas, i.e., sod, retaining walls, etc.
(f) Existing and proposed stormwater drainage facilities,
sidewalks, curbs and curb cuts and similar structures.
(g) Existing and proposed street trees, landscaping and fences.
(h) Existing and proposed outdoor lighting structures, sign
locations and telephone and electric utility poles.
(i) The distance to an established street intersection.
(j) The names of current property owners, as well as those of
contract vendees, and the names of owners and establishments
on adjoining properties.
(k) The type, size and locations of all refuse storage and disposal
facilities, including screening.
(l) Existing and proposed utilities (i.e., water and sewer lines, fire
hydrants, etc.) as may be required by the Planning Director.
(2) Thirteen copies of building plans, which shall include:
(a) The front, side and rear elevations.
(b) Proposed exterior building materials.
(c) The relation of the proposed building to adjacent buildings.
§ 322-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-88
1:933
(d) Applications submitted for home occupations shall include a
floor plan, drawn to scale, of the entire house as well as the
proposed work area.
B. Revised site plan application. A proposed change or revision of either
the structure or the site shall be submitted with a revised application
form and 13 copies of the proposed revised site plan and building plans
pursuant to this § 322-88. [Amended 3-8-2011]
C. Site plan exemption application. A complete site plan exemption
application shall consist of a completed application form, five copies of
the original approved site plan along with the proposed changes
accurately described and depicted. If the site was developed prior to
1968, a site plan exemption application shall consist of five copies of an
accurate description of the proposed project including, where
necessary, drawings which accurately depict same.
D. Fees. Each site plan or exemption application submitted pursuant to the
provisions of this article of the Building Zone Ordinance shall be
accompanied by a filing fee. [Amended 2-22-1999; 3-8-2011;
5-17-2012; 6-2-2015; 12-11-2018]
(1) The minimum fee for a new site plan shall be $700 per acre or any
fraction thereof, plus $0.50 per square foot of the gross floor area.
(2) The minimum fee for a revision of a site plan for which a building
permit or certificate of occupancy has been issued shall be $700
per acre to be modified or any fraction thereof, plus $0.50 per
square foot of the proposed change.
(3) The fee for any nonprofit organization shall be $250 for a new or
revised site plan application, plus $0.50 per square foot of gross
floor area.
(4) The fee for an addendum shall be $300 per acre of the site to be
modified.
(5) The fee for a waiver shall be $1,000 per item requested to be
waived.
(6) Except as otherwise provided herein, the fee for an exemption
application shall be $700 plus $0.50 per square foot of the
proposed change. Upon disapproval of same, the applicant shall be
permitted to submit one amended application without incurring an
additional fee. The fee for any nonprofit organization shall be $250.
The fee for any facade alteration in the CB District that restores the
exterior to its pre-1950 materials, finishes, and design shall be $15
per acre of site area.
(7) Where applicable, the filing fee may include certain fees as
required pursuant to Chapter 151, Article I, and Chapter 153,
Article III, of the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
§ 322-88 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-88
1:934
§ 322-89. Procedure.
(8) An additional charge of 50% of applicable fees shall be required for
any application to legalize a structure that was built prior to
receiving site plan approval.
(9) The fee for any type of telecommunication application to the Board
of Site Plan Review shall be $3,000.
(10) No application fees shall be required for government agencies.
(11) The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be $1,500
plus escrow.
A. Procedure for site plan approval. Except as provided for in § 322-85C
and D, no use, site, building or structure shall be established, changed,
expanded, constructed, erected, converted, altered, modified or
regraded except in accordance with a site plan approved in accordance
with the provisions of this article. No building permit, sign permit,
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance shall be issued for
any activity requiring site plan approval until the site plan is approved.
(1) The Board shall either approve, approve with modifications or
disapprove a site plan within 62 days of the Planning Department's
receipt of a complete site plan application. For purposes of this
section, an application shall not be considered complete until either
SEQRA findings or a SEQRA negative declaration is issued by the
lead agency.
(2) If any of the departments having reviewing responsibilities under
Subsection A(5) of this section determines that the site plan does
not comply with the specifications of the Town Code, it shall notify
the applicant thereof in writing. The letter shall be sent by certified
mail and shall state the manner in which the proposed site plan
application does not comply with the Town Code. A copy of this
letter shall be sent to all departments having reviewing
responsibilities under Subsection A(5) below. If the applicant does
not submit revised plans within 62 days of submission of the
application, the application shall be deemed denied unless the
Board and the applicant agree to an additional specified amount of
time to submit the revised plans.
(3) The Planning Director, the Town Engineer, the Building Director,
the Director of Traffic Safety and the Environmental Protection
Director shall review the site plan application to determine
whether the proposed site improvements conform to this chapter,
the Town codes and all other applicable regulations and standards,
including but not limited to those listed in § 322-87, and shall make
a recommendation to the Board. [Amended 5-8-2007]
(4) If the Board approves the site plan, the Building Director shall
review the building permit application for conformity with the
§ 322-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-89
1:935
§ 322-90. Appeals; revisions; recourse.
approved site plan and applicable building codes. [Amended
5-8-2007]
(5) No modifications to the design shall be made during the course of
construction unless the applicant receives approval by the Planning
Director, Building Director, Town Engineer, Director of Traffic
Safety and Environmental Protection Director for addendum. Said
officials shall require the submission of a revised application for
any modifications involving an increase of floor area, impermeable
surface area or building height. [Amended 5-8-2007]
B. Procedure for site plan exemption approval. An application for a site
plan exemption shall be reviewed by the Planning Director, the Town
Engineer, the Building Director and the Environmental Protection
Director. In making a determination on the application, said officials
shall verify that the requirements of § 322-87B have been satisfied.
[Amended 5-8-2007]
(1) A decision to approve or disapprove an application for a site plan
exemption shall be made within 30 days of the submission of a
completed application. Approval of the application shall be
obtained only upon the approval of all of said Town officials. A lack
of approval by any or all of said Town officials shall be deemed a
disapproval of the application.
(2) Upon the written request of one or more of said Town officials for
clarification or additional information with respect to the
application, the applicant shall have 30 days in which to provide
same and which shall extend the approval process by said thirtyday
period. upon the applicant's failure to so respond within such
time, the application shall be deemed disapproved.
(3) No modifications to the design shall be made during the course of
construction unless the applicant receives approval by the Planning
Director, Building Director, Town Engineer and Environmental
Protection Director for addendum. Said officials shall require the
submission of a revised application for any modifications involving
an increase of floor area, impermeable surface area or building
height.
A. The decision of the Board of Site Plan Review shall be administratively
final. Any proposed change or revision in the site plan must, absent a
provision herein to the contrary, receive the approval of the Board.
B. A decision on a site plan exemption application is not administratively
final. Upon the disapproval of an exemption application, the applicant
may apply for site plan approval pursuant to this article.
§ 322-89 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-91
1:936
§ 322-91. Expiration of site plan approval; extensions. [Amended
3-8-2011]
Approval by the Board of Site Plan Review shall automatically expire one
year after the approval date unless a valid building permit has been
obtained, or an annual extension has been granted upon the applicant's
request, prior to the expiration thereof. There shall be a fee for any such
extension. The fee for each one-year extension shall be 50% of the initial
application fee.
§ 322-92. Certificates of occupancy.
A. Certificates of occupancy.
(1) It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use or change in use of any
building, structure, premises, lot or land or part thereof hereafter
erected or altered, enlarged or moved or put into use, in whole or in
part, after the effective date of this chapter, until a certificate of
occupancy has been obtained by the owner, as provided for under
the Building Code159 and this chapter.
(2) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building,
structure, premises, lot or land unless the erection, construction,
reconstruction, structural alteration, restoration, repair or moving
of any building or structure or part thereof and the intended use
thereof are in conformity in all respects with the provisions of this
chapter.
(3) After a certificate of occupancy is issued, there shall be no
alterations to or revisions of the site, as approved, without first
obtaining approval from the Board of Site Plan Review or the Town
officials which approved the site plan exemption application, as
appropriate. Whenever any alterations or revisions are made to a
structure or a site without benefit of such approval, the certificate
of occupancy for the entire site shall be null and void.
(4) Upon the request of the owner or his or her authorized agent for a
certificate of occupancy, the Building Director shall issue the
certificate, provided that said Building Director, along with the
Planning Director and the Town Engineer, find that such building or
structure is in conformity with the approved site plan or exemption
application, if such approval was required. [Amended 5-8-2007]
B. Temporary certificates of occupancy.
(1) In cases of undue hardship, the Building Director may issue one
temporary certificate of occupancy, valid for a period of six months,
without extension, for any building, structure or use, provided that:
[Amended 5-8-2007]
159. Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Building Construction.
§ 322-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-92
1:937
§ 322-93. Failure to comply.
Failure to obtain site plan approval where required, or to obtain an
exemption therefor, shall be a violation of this chapter and shall subject the
violator to such penalties as are set forth in § 322-105.
(a) The Building Director, along with the Planning Director and the
Town Engineer, find, upon inspection of the site, that such
building or structure is in itself in conformance with the
Building Code, Subdivision Regulations, the Building Zone
Ordinance160 and all other applicable ordinances and
regulations.
(b) The Planning Director and the Town Engineer agree to approve
a temporary certificate of occupancy.
(c) The Planning Director and the Town Engineer agree on the
amount of cash deposit that must be placed into escrow to
insure the satisfactory completion by the applicant of all
required improvements within one year of the date that the
temporary certificate is issued. [Amended 3-8-2011]
(2) The temporary certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the
cash deposit has been accepted by the Planning Department.
(3) Failure of the applicant to satisfactorily complete all required
improvements within one year of issuance of a temporary
certificate shall render such escrow in default, and the Town may
use the money to pay for the completion of the required
improvements. The actual work may be performed by one of the
Town's departments or by a private contractor selected by public
bid. [Amended 3-8-2011]
(4) The cash deposit shall be placed into a trust account established for
this purpose by the Town Comptroller.
160. Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Building Construction; Ch. 248, Subdivision of Land; and this
chapter, respectively.
§ 322-92 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-93
1:938
ARTICLE XIV
Special Exceptions; Amendments; Changes of Zone
[Amended 2-23-1965; 5-21-1968; 1-11-1972; 6-8-1976; 9-8-1981;
6-25-1985]
§ 322-94. Petition procedure; notice and hearing requirements;
adoption and withdrawal; fees; standards for special exception uses.
[Amended 10-21-1986; 11-18-1986; 1-3-1989; 7-9-1991; 2-2-1993;
5-15-2001; 10-10-2006; 5-8-2007]
A. General procedure.
(1) The Town Board may, upon its own motion, amend this chapter,
including the Building Zone Map that forms a part hereof; may
receive and approve petitions for an amendment to the Building
Zone Map; and may receive and approve petitions for a special
exception use, as described under § 322-8C herein, all in
accordance with the requirements of this article.
(2) An amendment to this chapter must comply with § 264 and § 265 of
the Town Law of the State of New York. A petition for a special
exception use must comply with § 274-b of the Town Law of the
State of New York.
B. Proposed amendments on the Town Board's own motion.
(1) Where the Town Board proposes an amendment to the Building
Zone Ordinance, a complete description of the proposed text of the
amendment shall be forwarded to the Town Clerk, who shall
complete the requirements under § 322-94D herein.
(2) Where the Town Board proposes an amendment to the Building
Zone Map, a complete description of the property and a map drawn
to scale shall be forwarded to the Town Clerk, who shall complete
the requirements under § 322-94D herein.
C. Petitions to amend Building Zone Map; petitions for special exception
use.
(1) Any petition for an amendment to the Building Zone Map or for a
special exception use shall be submitted in quintuplicate to the
Town Clerk and shall be in accordance with and include the
following:
(a) A completed petition form.
(b) Each petition for a proposed change to the Building Zone Map
shall contain a map accurately drawn to scale, showing the
area of the land included in the petition, including a metes and
bounds description of the subject property. The map shall
include the distances and courses of the existing and proposed
zoning district lines; the property lines; the streets in the
§ 322-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-94
1:939
immediate vicinity; a topographical survey; and the distances
and courses to the nearest street intersection. Each petition
shall include a description of the land uses immediately
adjacent to and extending within 200 feet of all boundaries
of the subject property, together with the name(s) of the
owner(s), the zoning and the tax map number(s) of all the
property(ies) within 200 feet of the subject property.
(c) Each petition for a special exception use shall include a site
plan accurately drawn to scale which illustrates the proposed
development. The site plan shall include architectural
elevations; the distances and courses of the existing zoning
district lines; the property lines; the streets in the immediate
vicinity; a topographical survey; and the distances and courses
to the nearest street intersection. Each petition shall include a
description of the land uses immediately adjacent to and
extending within 200 feet of all boundaries of the subject
property, together with the name(s) of the owner(s), the zoning
and the tax map number(s) of all the property(ies) within 200
feet of the subject property.
(d) Each petition shall have at least one eight-inch-by-ten-inch
photograph of the subject property.
(e) A complete environmental assessment form pursuant to
Chapter 151; Environmental and Coastal Quality Review.
(f) Affidavits shall be included with each petition as described
below:
[1] An affidavit executed by all of the following, having an
interest in the entire property: all owners of record;
contract vendees; lessors; lessees; sublessors; sublessees;
contract lessors; contract lessees; contract sublessors;
contract sublessees; holders of beneficial interest;
contract holders of beneficial interest; holders of
encumbrances; and contract holders of encumbrances.
The following are excluded from the requirements of this
subsection: lending institutions licensed or franchised by
the State of New York; public corporations; and any of the
following having an interest in less than the entire
property: lessees, contract lessees, sublessees and
contract sublessees.
[2] If the affiant is an individual, he shall set forth his name
and street address.
[3] If the affiant is a partnership, it shall set forth the name,
street address and the nature of interest of, and be
executed by, each partner.
§ 322-94 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-94
1:940
[4] If the affiant is a corporation, it shall set forth the name
and street address of, and be executed by, each officer,
director and stockholder. It shall also set forth the name
and street address of all persons to whom corporate stock
has been pledged or with whom any agreement has been
made to pledge said stock.
[5] If the affiant is an LLC, it shall set forth the name and
street address of, and be executed by, each member
thereof.
[6] All affiants shall set forth the name and address of all
individuals, partnerships, LLCs and/or corporations who
are the holders of any instrument creating an
encumbrance upon the subject property and shall also
state the nature of such encumbrance.
[7] All affiants shall state that, to the best of their knowledge,
no person mentioned in their affidavit is a Town officer or
employee, or, if such is not the case, the affiant shall state
the exceptions in full detail.
[8] In the event that there is any change in any matter set
forth in any affidavit submitted hereunder prior to the time
a certificate of occupancy is issued for the subject
premises; the affiant affected by such change shall file a
supplemental affidavit within 48 hours after such change
has occurred, giving the full details thereof. Any other
party affected by the change shall, within 48 hours after
the occurrence of such change, file an affidavit in
compliance with the requirements of this subsection and
shall thereafter continue to be subject to all the
requirements set forth in this subsection.
(g) Each petition and copies thereof shall have attached thereto a
photocopy of all deeds or pending sales contracts.
(h) Each petition shall have a paper print of a recent aerial
photograph at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet attached
thereto, and on said photograph the subject property shall be
so identified.
(2) Any petition for an amendment to the Building Zone Map or for a
special exception use must comply with the requirements of
§ 322-94D herein.
D. Notice and hearings requirements.
(1) The Town Clerk shall refer all proposed amendments to this
chapter and all petitions for a special exception use to the Suffolk
County Planning Commission pursuant to § 239-l and § 239-m of
the General Municipal Law of the State of New York.
§ 322-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-94
1:941
(2) The Town Clerk shall forward all proposed amendments to this
chapter and all petitions for a special exception use to the Planning
Department for review and comment concerning consistency with
the Comprehensive Plan and the purpose of this chapter as stated
in § 322-2, and, for a special exception use, the general
requirements as stated under § 322-82 herein and the specific
requirements as stated in this article.
(3) All proposed amendments to this chapter and all petitions for a
special exception use shall be forwarded to the Department of
Environment and Waterways for review pursuant to the
requirements of Chapter 151, Environmental and Coastal Quality
Review.
(4) All petitions to amend the Building Zone Map shall be referred to
the Planning Board for scheduling of a public hearing to review any
such petition. The notice for the public hearing shall follow the
same procedures as for the hearing before the Town Board, as
stated in § 322-94E, except that the required sign(s) shall be white
with blue lettering. Subsequent to said hearing, the Planning Board
shall forward its recommendation to the Town Board.
(5) Before the Town Board approves any amendment to this chapter or
a special exception use, the Town Board shall hold a public hearing
pursuant to § 265 of Town Law of the State of New York and shall
comply with the following:
(a) The Town Board shall fix the time and place of a public hearing
on the proposed amendment or special exception use by
publishing a notice thereof once per week for two successive
weeks in one newspaper of general circulation in the Town.
Such notice shall state the location and general nature of the
petition for a special exception use or the proposed
amendment and, in the case of a Building Zone Map
amendment, it shall give the metes and bounds description
and, where available, a street address.
(b) In the case of amendment to the Building Zone Map on the
Town Board's own motion, the Town shall erect a white-withblack
lettering sign or signs, measuring not less than 30 inches
high and 40 inches wide, which shall be prominently displayed
on the premises facing each public street located on the
boundaries of the area comprising the proposed Building Zone
Map amendment. Such notice shall state that the Town Board
is considering a change of zoning classification, and shall
provide the date, time and place where the public hearing is to
be held. The sign(s) shall not be set back more than 10 feet
from the property line and shall not be less than two feet nor
more than six feet above the grade at the property line. In the
event the subject parcels run contiguously and without
interruption from street corner to street corner, it shall be
§ 322-94 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-94
1:942
sufficient to post one sign on each corner parcel and indicate
that all parcels between such signs shall be considered at the
hearing. The sign(s) shall be displayed for a period of not less
than five days immediately preceding the public hearing date
or any adjourned date.
(c) In the case of petition to amend the Building Zone Map or a
petition for a special exception use, the petitioner shall erect a
white-with-black lettering sign or signs, measuring not less
than 30 inches high and 40 inches wide, which shall be
prominently displayed on the premises facing each public
street which is located on the boundaries of the area
comprising the proposed Building Zone Map amendment or
special exception use. Such notice shall state that a petition for
a change of zoning classification or special exception is
pending and shall provide the date, time and place where the
public hearing is to be held. The sign(s) shall not be set back
more than 10 feet from the property line and shall not be less
than two feet nor more than six feet above the grade at the
property line. In the event the subject parcels run contiguously
and without interruption from street corner to street corner, it
shall be sufficient to post one sign on each corner parcel and
indicate that all parcels between such signs shall be
considered at the hearing. The sign(s) shall be displayed for a
period of not less than five days immediately preceding the
public hearing date or any adjourned date. The filing of an
affidavit, by the petitioner, that this requirement has been
complied with shall be deemed sufficient proof of compliance
herewith.
(d) In the case of an amendment to the Building Zone Map or a
petition for a special exception use, notice of any public
hearing called pursuant to this section shall be given by
mailing notice thereof, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owners of all property within 200 feet of the
exterior limits of the subject property, as shown on the latest
assessment roll. Where the request is a petition, the petitioner
shall be required to make such notification. Where an
amendment is proposed by the Town Board, the Town shall
notify the property owners within 200 feet of the exterior limits
of the subject properties, as shown on the latest assessment
rolls. Proof of service shall be submitted to or by the Board at
the time of hearing. Such notice shall be given not less than 14
days prior to the date of hearing.
(e) In the case of an amendment to the Building Zone Map or a
petition for a special exception use, notice of any public
hearing called pursuant to this subsection shall be given by the
Town Clerk, by certified mail, return receipt requested, in
accordance with § 264 of the Town Law of the State of New
§ 322-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-94
1:943
York. Such notice shall be given not less than 14 days prior to
the date of hearing.
E. Adoption, conditions, and reclassifications.
(1) The Town Board may approve a petition for an amendment to the
Building Zone Map or a special exception use and:
(a) May attach such conditions and restrictions to the use of a
parcel that is being reclassified from one zoning district to
another or the proposed special exception use as it deems
necessary to protect the public interest, within the purview of
the purpose and objectives of the Building Zone Ordinance.
(b) May require a covenant or declaration stating the conditions
and/or restrictions placed on the use of the land to be recorded
with the County Clerk and be attached to the deed by the
petitioner. Unless specifically modified by the Town Board, all
covenants must be filed before any site plan or building permit
may be approved.
(2) Upon adoption of a Building Zone Map amendment, the petitioner
shall cause monuments to be placed at points along the perimeter
of the subject property and shall also file with the Town Clerk, the
Planning Department, and the Building Official copies of an
accurate survey description and drawing of the area affected by the
amendment.
(3) Reclassification limitations.
(a) The Town Board may schedule a public hearing in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter to consider returning a
classification parcel to its original classification if the property
owner has not commenced development of the site within two
years of the date of reclassification.
(b) For the purposes of this section, commencement of
development shall include:
[1] Making a valid submission to the Board of Site Plan
Review.
[2] Obtaining a valid building permit from the Building
Department.
F. Withdrawals; automatic denials; resubmissions; new petitions; fees.
(1) If any Town department involved with the petition review process
requests information from the petitioner and the petitioner does
not submit the information within 45 days of the date of request,
the petition may be deemed withdrawn, unless the Town Board
gives the petitioner an additional specified amount of time to
submit the information.
§ 322-94 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-94
1:944
(2) Where the Town Board declines to grant a requested amendment or
special exception, the same or similar petition may be resubmitted,
but no sooner than two years after the date of the Town Board's
decision to deny the petition, except that, where the Town Board
denies the petition without prejudice, a petitioner may submit the
same or similar petition within or after two years of the date of the
Town Board's decision to deny the petition without prejudice.
(3) An approval of a special exception use is limited to the use
described in the petition, including the associated site plan. Any
alteration or change to the special exception use shall be a violation
of this chapter and requires a new petition pursuant to this article.
(4) Fees. The following schedule of fees shall apply and, unless
otherwise indicated, are based upon the acreage of the subject
property. Each petition shall be accompanied by the calculated fee
and paid to the Town Clerk simultaneously with the filing of said
petition. [Amended 6-2-2015]
Type of Petition/Application Fee
Petition for rezoning $1,000 per acre ($15,000
maximum)
Special exception for PWSF $3,000
All other special exceptions $750 per acre ($15,000
maximum)
Request to amend prior decision $900 per acre ($15,000
maximum)
G. Special exception standards. All special exception uses, whether before
the Town Board, Planning Board, or Board of Zoning Appeals, shall
comply with the following general standards, and certain special
exception uses shall also comply with the specific standards described
in this chapter.
(1) The use shall be in harmony with and promote the general
purposes and intent of this chapter, as stated in § 322-2.
(2) The plot area shall be sufficient, appropriate and adequate for the
use and the reasonably anticipated operation and expansion
thereof, but in no case less than the minimum area and frontage
requirements or more than the maximum floor area or building
coverage requirements specified in this chapter.
(3) The use will not prevent the orderly and reasonable use of adjacent
properties in adjacent use districts.
(4) The site shall be particularly suitable for the location of such use in
the district with regard to fire protection, water supply, sewerage
disposal, access, topography, soils, drainage and nearby land uses.
§ 322-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-94
1:945
§ 322-95. Airports. [Added 10-21-1986]
(5) The use shall not be unsuitably near a church, school, theater,
recreational area or other place of public assembly.
(6) The use shall conform to the definition in § 322-3 where such a
definition exists or with the generally accepted definition of such
use where it does not exist in this chapter.
(7) Access facilities shall be adequate for the estimated traffic from
public streets and sidewalks so as to assure the public safety and to
avoid traffic congestion, and, further, that vehicular entrances and
exits shall be clearly visible from the street and not within 75 feet of
the intersection of street lines at a street intersection, except under
unusual circumstances.
(8) On-site parking and truck loading space shall be adequate to
accommodate the parking generated on site, but in no case less
than the number required by the provisions of Article IX; and
further, the layout of the spaces and driveways shall be convenient
and conducive to safe operation. [Amended 4-4-2017]
(9) Adequate buffer yards and screening shall be provided, where
necessary, to protect adjacent properties and land uses.
(10) Adequate provisions will be made for the collection and disposal of
stormwater runoff from the site and of sanitary sewage, refuse or
other waste, whether liquid, solid, gaseous or of other character.
(11) If the site is in the local waterfront area, the proposed use, action
or development shall be consistent with the Local Waterfront
Revitalization Program.
(12) The proposed use and development shall not have a significant
adverse effect on the environment.
(13) The proposed development shall be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Smithtown.
A. The Town Board may, upon application and after a public hearing on
notice, as provided for in § 322-94 for special exception uses, authorize
a special exception for an airport, including a heliport, in such districts
where the use is indicated in the Tables of Use Regulations, §§ 322-8B,
322-9B and 322-10B, if said Board shall find that the proposed airport is
desirable for service to residents or commercial establishments of the
Town of Smithtown, that the proposed location is appropriate for an
airport and gives due consideration to the character of the surrounding
neighborhood and the uses in the flight paths and that the proposal is in
keeping with the purposes of this chapter as stated in § 322-2.
B. Before approving such special exception, the Town Board shall
determine that the following minimum conditions are provided:
§ 322-94 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-95
1:946
§ 322-96. Junkyards. [Added 6-27-1989]
(1) The airport shall be designated as a small airport in accordance
with Federal Aviation Agency standards for general aviation use
and not military or commercial aviation, or it shall be designed as a
heliport.
(2) Appropriate airport zoning is available to protect the airport
approaches and the surrounding community.
(3) The proposed airport or heliport meets Federal Aviation Agency
standards.
C. Each application for an airport special exception use shall include a site
plan drawn to scale, as required in Article XIII, and a proposed airport
zoning plan.
D. The Town Board may impose such additional reasonable conditions on
the proposed airport as it may deem necessary or desirable before such
special exception is granted.
A. The Town Board may, upon application and after a public hearing notice
as provided for in Article XII for special permit uses, authorize a special
permit for the operation of a junkyard not otherwise permitted in such
district where the use is indicated in the Table of Use Regulations,
§ 322-10B, if said Board shall find that the proposed use is desirable and
compatible with the other uses in the area and would not be a deterrent
factor in respect to the purposes of this chapter as stated in § 322-2.
B. In consideration of such special permit, the Town Board shall determine
that the following minimum conditions and standards are provided:
(1) The site shall not be less than two nor larger than five acres in area,
not including other area required uses; all other requirements of
§ 322-10C for the Heavy Industrial District shall apply, except as
otherwise provided herein.
(2) There shall exist at least 200 feet of frontage on a public highway.
(3) No church, school, library, playground or similar place of public
assembly shall be within 500 feet of the site.
(4) No existing junkyard or any site previously approved for such use
and not as yet terminated as provided for in this chapter shall be
located within 1,200 feet of the proposed site.
(5) Enclosure.
(a) All junkyard operations, including dismantling, storage or sale,
shall take place in an enclosed building which shall contain a
double reinforced concrete slab of a sufficient bearing
capacity, impervious to penetration by any liquid and approved
§ 322-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-96
1:947
§ 322-97. Commercial public recreation uses. [Added 10-21-1986]
by the Town Engineer. The licensee and/or the owner shall
provide and covenant for the protection of the groundwater.
(b) A six-foot high solid, nontransparent fence surrounding all
sides of the premises and approved by the Planning Director
shall be required if the Town Board waives the building
requirements of Subsection B(5)(a) above. The licensee and/or
the owner shall provide and covenant for the protection of the
groundwater.
(6) All pumps, lubricating and other devices shall be located within the
enclosed building described in Subsection B(5)(a) above, except
that the location of gasoline pumps, which shall only be used to
pump gasoline or diesel fuel into vehicles necessary for the
operation of a junkyard, shall be located at least 35 feet from any
street or lot line or highway right-of-way. Storage tanks for any
substance or fluid shall be totally underground at locations other
than any building and shall not be less than two feet distance from
each other.
(7) All fuel, oil, fluids or similar substances not otherwise provided for
shall be stored within the enclosed building described in
Subsection B(5)(a) above. In addition, all fuel, oil, fluids or similar
substances shall be stored separately in storage tanks approved for
the substances they contain and shall not be located less than two
feet distance from each other.
(8) Required front, side and rear yards adjacent to residence districts
shall be used only as a one-hundred-foot densely vegetated buffer
zone.
(9) The shredding or compacting of vehicles or machinery or any metal
is strictly prohibited.
(10) A minimum of four permanent test wells shall be constructed and
installed in accordance with the requirements of the Town
Engineer and the Supervisor of Environment and Waterways.
(11) The building shall not exceed 35 feet in height.
(12) There shall be adequate provision for off-street parking and loading
space according to good practice for the proposed use and
according to the requirements of Article IX of the Zoning
Ordinance.
C. The Town Board may impose such additional reasonable conditions on
the operation of a junkyard as it shall deem necessary or desirable
before such special permit is granted.
§ 322-96 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-97
1:948
A. The Town Board may, upon application and after a public hearing on
notice, as provided in Article XII for a special exception use, authorize a
special exception for a commercial public recreational use (such as
indoor skating rinks, indoor rifle ranges, indoor roller-skating rinks,
indoor handball courts, indoor squash courts, indoor tennis courts,
game center, bowling alleys and similar uses not specifically noted) in
such districts where the use is indicated in the Tables of Use
Regulations, § 322-8B, if said Board shall find that the proposed use is
desirable and compatible with other uses in the area and would not be a
deterrent factor in respect to the purpose of this chapter as stated in
§ 322-2. [Amended 6-8-1993]
B. In considering such special exception, the Town Board shall determine
that the following minimum conditions are provided: [Amended
6-8-1993]
(1) Except for outdoor golf driving ranges and outdoor miniature golf
ranges, all such uses shall be within a permanent structure and
shall not be permitted except as an accessory use to an indoor
operation, and the area for such outdoor activity shall not exceed
the area of the principal building, shall not be permitted within the
required front yards and shall be screened with plant material.
(2) There shall be adequate provisions for off-street parking for both
indoor and outdoor facilities, as required under § 322-62 of this
chapter. The Board, in conjunction with its review, may require a
greater number of spaces than set forth in § 322-62.
(3) Except for height, the premises shall comply with the dimensional
regulations as required by § 322-9B, Table of Dimensional
Regulations. Any variance concerning height shall be subject to
approval by the Board of Appeals in conformity with § 267-b,
Subdivision 3, of the Town Law.
(4) Except for bollard and bunker lighting, outdoor lighting fixtures
shall have opaque shields on the tops and sides and shall be
directed straight down and shall not exceed 18 feet in height.
C. If the proposed use is a skating rink, the following requirements shall
apply:
(1) The use of toxic or explosive chemicals (such as ammonia) as a
refrigerant shall be strictly regulated and safeguards directed by
the Fire Inspector.
(2) There shall be adequate muffling of the noises resulting from the
operation of refrigeration units.
(3) For a standard-size rink with minimum dimensions of 85 feet by
200 feet and facilities for regulation hockey, the proposed use shall
be located on a site of not less than five acres of land.
§ 322-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-97
1:949
§ 322-98. Concrete products manufacture. [Added 10-21-1986]
D. If the proposed use is a rifle range, the following requirements shall
apply:
(1) Structural plans and specifications shall bear the certification of an
acoustical engineer verifying that the proposed structure will
achieve the required sound transmission loss pursuant to Chapter
207, Noise, of the Town of Smithtown Code.
(2) The proposed structure or portion of the structure intended to be
used for the discharge of firearms shall be constructed of
impermeable materials, the ceiling of which shall be located at
least four feet below ground level, as approved by the Building
Director for such use. [Amended 5-8-2007]
(3) The storage of ammunition or explosives shall be prohibited.
E. If the proposed use is a bowling alley, no structure shall be built within
100 feet of a residence district.
F. Outdoor golf driving ranges and outdoor miniature golf ranges shall
also be subject to the following additional requirements: [Added
6-8-1993]
(1) The site shall be at least 500 feet from any residence.
(2) The minimum required lot area shall be 12 acres for driving ranges
and 60,000 square feet for miniature golf.
(3) Except for fences, signs and driveways, all structures and areas of
organized activity shall be set back at least 50 feet from any rightof-
way.
(4) The minimum planting area of the site shall be 85% for driving
ranges and 20% for miniature golf.
(5) On-site vegetation, landforms, open space and netting shall be
provided to the extent necessary to prevent injury or damage on
other premises and shall be indicated on a site plan submitted with
the petition.
(6) Netting shall be set back from all lot lines at least three feet for
every foot of height.
(7) No outdoor loudspeaker system shall be permitted.
A. The Town Board may, upon application and after a public hearing
notice, as provided for in § 322-94 for special exception uses, authorize
a special exception for concrete products manufacture not otherwise
permitted in such district where the use is indicated in the Table of Use
Regulations, § 322-10B, if said Board shall find that the proposed use is
§ 322-97 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-98
1:950
§ 322-99. Hospital; nursing home; convalescent home; rest home;
adult home or assisted living facility. [Added 10-21-1986; amended
4-26-2007]
compatible with other uses in the area and would not be a deterrent
factor in respect to the purposes of this chapter as stated in § 322-2.
B. Before approving such special exception, the Town Board shall
determine that the following minimum conditions are provided:
(1) The site shall not be less than 10 acres in area; all other
requirements of § 322-10C for the Heavy Industrial District shall
apply.
(2) The manufacture of products shall be confined to within a structure
only, and the batching plant or unit shall be a permanent
installation on the site, unless the nature of the particular product
warrants these requirements unfeasible, in which case the Board
shall establish other appropriate standards.
(3) The outside storage of materials and finished products shall be part
of a general plan submitted with this application.
C. The Town Board may impose such additional reasonable conditions on
the concrete products manufacture use as it shall deem necessary or
desirable before such special exception is granted.
A. The Town Board may, upon application and after a public hearing on
notice as provided in § 322-94 for special exception uses, authorize a
special exception for a hospital, nursing home, convalescent home, rest
home, adult home, or assisted living facility use in such districts where
that use is indicated in the Tables of Use Regulations, §§ 322-8B, 322-9B
and 322-10B, if said Board shall find that the proposed use is desirable
for adequate service to residents of the Town of Smithtown, that the
proposed location is appropriate for such use and gives due
consideration to the character of the surrounding neighborhood and
that the proposal is in keeping with the purposes of this chapter as
stated in § 322-2.
B. Before approving such a special exception, the Town Board shall
determine that the following minimum conditions are provided:
(1) The site shall not be less than five acres in area, with no less than
300 feet of street frontage on a public street. In calculating the site
area, no portion of the site with a width of less than 150 feet shall
be included.
(2) All principal and accessory buildings shall be set back from all land
being used for residence or land zoned for residence at least 100
feet. [Amended 4-14-1998]
(3) The total building area shall not exceed 25% of the total lot area.
§ 322-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-99
1:951
(4) The maximum building height shall be as stipulated in the Tables of
Dimensional Regulations, §§ 322-8C, 322-9C and 322-10C, or as
modified in accordance with § 322-14C.
(5) Subsection B(2) above may be modified for a use in existence at the
time of adoption of this chapter when it is satisfactorily proven to
the Town Board that such reduction is justifiable.
(6) The requirements of Subsection B(1) and (3) may be modified by
the Town Board where it is determined that: [Added 4-14-2009]
(a) There is a public benefit to the proposed modification; and
(b) The location of the proposed facility is within or adjacent to a
Central Business District and within walking distance of stores
and related uses as determined by the Town Board.
(7) For a congregate-care facility, the following additional criteria shall
apply: [Added 3-26-1991]
(a) The gross floor area of all buildings on the entire site shall not
exceed 25% of the site area.
(b) The gross building coverage of all buildings on the entire site
shall not exceed 15% of the site area.
(c) At least 40% of the total site area shall be devoted to unpaved
nonvehicular open space which shall be landscaped and well
maintained with grass, trees, shrubbery or other suitable plant
materials approved in site plan review and an automatic
irrigation system; outdoor recreation facilities should be
provided.
(d) A twenty-five-foot-wide densely planted buffer zone shall be
provided along the side and rear lot lines.
(e) No parking shall be located in the required front yard(s).
(f) There shall be adequate off-street parking and loading space as
required under § 322-59.
(g) The total number of housing units permitted shall not exceed
the total number of beds for which the affiliated nursing home
or hospital is licensed to operate.
(h) The maximum density shall not exceed 15 housing units per
acre.
(i) The buildings shall be designed to resemble a residential use,
e.g., townhouses or garden apartments, in order to be
compatible with the established character of the community.
§ 322-99 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-99
1:952
§ 322-100. Hotel; motel. [Added 10-21-1986]
§ 322-101. Bonus density for affordable housing units in retirement
communities. [Added 1-26-1988; amended 6-21-1988]
C. Each application for a hospital, nursing home, convalescent home or
rest home special exception shall include a site plan drawn to scale as
required in Article XIII.
D. The Town Board may impose such additional reasonable conditions on
the proposed use as it shall deem necessary or desirable before such
special exception is granted.
A. The Town Board may, upon application and after a public hearing on
notice, as provided in § 322-94 for special exception uses, authorize a
special exception for a hotel or motel in such districts where the use is
indicated in the Tables of Use Regulations, §§ 322-9B and 322-10B, if
said Board shall find that the proposed use is compatible with other
uses in the area and would not be a deterrent factor with respect to the
purposes of this chapter as stated in § 322-2.
B. In considering such special exception, the Town Board shall determine
that the following minimum conditions are provided:
(1) There shall be a minimum of 1,800 square feet of site area for each
guest room.
(2) There shall be adequate provisions for off-street parking and
loading space as required under Article IX.
(3) Off-street parking areas shall be adequately lighted but shall not be
located, installed or maintained so as to create a traffic hazard or
nuisance for motorists or adjacent properties.
A. The Town Board may, upon application and after a public hearing on
notice as provided in § 322-94 for special exception uses, authorize a
special exception for a density bonus of up to five units per acre added
to the Retirement Community (RC) Zoning District, if said Board shall
find that the proposed use is desirable and compatible with the
surrounding area and is in keeping with those purposes of this chapter
as stated in §§ 322-2 and 322-49.
B. Before approving such a special exception, the Town Board shall
determine that the following minimum site conditions are provided:
(1) The site shall comply with all provisions of this chapter as stated in
Article VII, with the exception of § 322-50C.
(2) The site shall have reasonable access to mass transit and local
shopping facilities.
(3) The site shall not be within 500 feet of a Light Industry or Heavy
Industry District.
§ 322-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-101
1:953
§ 322-102. Public utility. [Added 10-21-1986]
(4) The shape of the property shall be of an appropriate dimension to
accommodate this use.
(5) The site shall have frontage on state, county or Town arterial roads
as classified by the Long Island Regional Planning Board.
(6) Buildings on the proposed site shall not exceed two stories in
height, measured from at least two corners of the building.
(7) The premises shall comply with § 322-19B except that one
manager's apartment per 50 bonus apartments or fraction thereof
may be permitted in addition to the density otherwise yielded in
accordance with § 322-19B. [Amended 7-25-1989]
(8) The gross floor area shall not exceed 35% of the site area.
[Amended 8-9-1988]
C. Before approving such a special exception, the Town Board shall
determine that the following minimum conditions for the proposed use
are provided:
(1) The proposed use must comply with all provisions of this chapter as
stated in Article VII, with the exception of § 322-50C.
(2) At least 50% of the bonus units shall:
(a) Be set aside to be used by senior citizens whose total income is
classified as "low income" by the standards set forth by either
the United States Bureau of Census or the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(b) Rent for an amount which is less than 30% of the total median
income of low-income senior citizens as classified by the
United States Bureau of Census or the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
D. The applicant shall provide assurances in the form of a restrictive
covenant or other forms of agreement which are approved by the Town
Board, which demonstrate that these units will remain affordable to
low-income senior citizens.
E. Each application for a density bonus for a retirement community shall
include a graphic site analysis and a site plan drawn to scale as
required in Article XIII. The site analysis shall include illustrated steep
slopes, natural drainage patterns, depth to groundwater, soils,
significant vegetation and wildlife resources, wetlands and historic and
scenic resources.
F. The Town Board may impose such reasonable conditions on the
proposed use as it shall deem necessary or desirable before such a
special exception use is granted.
§ 322-101 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-102
1:954
§ 322-102.1. Personal wireless service facilities, Tier Three. [Added
5-15-2001]
A. The Town Board may, upon application and after a public hearing on
notice, as provided in § 322-94 for special exception uses, authorize a
special exception for a public utility operation or maintenance facility
not otherwise permitted in such districts where the use is indicated in
the Tables of Use Regulations, §§ 322-8B, 322-9B and 322-10B, if said
Board shall find that the proposed public utility facility is desirable for
adequate service to residents of the Town of Smithtown, that the
proposed location is appropriate for the efficient operation of such
utility facility and gives due consideration to the character of the
surrounding neighborhood and that the proposal is in keeping with the
purposes of this chapter as stated in § 322-2.
B. Before approving such special exception, the Town Board shall
determine that the following minimum conditions are provided:
(1) All principal and accessory buildings or equipment, exclusive of
transmission lines, shall be set back from all property lines at least
100 feet.
(2) Permitted open storage or equipment areas shall be adequately
fenced and screened.
C. Each application for a public utility special exception shall include a site
plan drawn to scale as required in Article XIII.
D. The Town Board may impose such additional reasonable conditions on
the proposed public utility use as it shall deem necessary or desirable
before such special exception is granted. The Town Board may further
modify, extend or diminish the application of the standards contained in
Subsection B above in those instances wherein, based upon specific
circumstances involved, the Board deems such action appropriate.
E. (Reserved)161
A. The Town Board may, upon application and after a public hearing on
notice, as provided in § 322-94 for special exception uses, authorize a
special exception for a Tier Three personal wireless service facility, if
said Board shall find that the proposed facility is desirable for adequate
service to residents of the Town of Smithtown, that there is no other
practical alternative to the installation of a Tier Three facility and that
the proposed location is appropriate as described in Chapter 242 of the
Town Code.
B. Before approving such special exception, the Town Board shall
determine that the following minimum conditions are provided:
161. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Moratorium on communications facilities, added
4-13-2000, is no longer in effect. For provisions relating to telecommunications facilities
and structures, see Ch. 242.
§ 322-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-102.1
1:955
§ 322-103. Sand mining. [Added 10-21-1986]
(1) All principal structures shall be set back at least 100 feet or
conform to the setback requirements as specified in § 242-6 of
Chapter 242, whichever is greater.
(2) If the facility is located in or adjacent to a residential district, the
height of the facility shall not exceed the height of the surrounding
structures as noted in § 242-5C(5)(a) of Chapter 242 or the
maximum height of the district, whichever is less. The Board may
waive this condition if the facility is not visible from any residence
or residentially used property.
(3) Ground equipment shall be adequately fenced and screened.
C. Each application for a Tier Three personal wireless service facilities
special exception shall include the information as required in § 242-7 of
Chapter 242 of the Town Code and a site plan drawn to scale as
required in Article XIII.
D. In determining the necessity of a Tier Three personal wireless service
facility, the Town Board may require the services of an independent
consultant. Costs associated with this review may be assigned to the
applicant pursuant to Charter 242.
E. The Town Board may impose such additional reasonable conditions on
the Tier Three personal wireless service facility use as it shall deem
necessary or desirable before such special exception is granted. The
Town Board may further modify, extend or diminish the application of
the standards contained in 322-102.1B(1) for those facilities or
structures constructed before May 15, 2001. [Amended 9-10-2002]
A. The Town Board may, upon application and after a public hearing on
notice, as provided for in § 322-94 for special exception uses, authorize
a special exception for sand mining in such districts where the use is
indicated in the Table of Use Regulations, § 322-8B, if said Board shall
find that the proposed use is compatible with other uses in the area and
would not be a deterrent factor in respect to the purposes of this
chapter as stated in § 322-2.
B. Before approving such special exception, the Town Board shall
determine that the following minimum conditions are provided:
(1) No residential district shall be within 500 feet of the site.
(2) No school, church, park or similar place of public assembly shall be
within 500 feet of the site.
(3) The proposed use shall not produce a significant adverse effect on
the environment.
§ 322-102.1 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-103
1:956
§ 322-104. (Reserved)164
§ 322-104.1. Winery events. [Added 4-22-2010]
(4) Permission for the proposed use shall be for an initial six-month
period, renewable every six months by the Town Board until such
time as the need for the same shall terminate.
(5) The proposed use shall comply with the provisions of § 154-5 of the
Town Code.162
C. The Town Board may impose such additional reasonable conditions on
the sand mining as it shall deem necessary or desirable before such
special exception is granted.
D. Any sand mining for which a special exception is granted shall comply
with the provisions of § 154-6 of, and require the payment of the fees set
out in, Chapter 154, Article I, of the Town Code for the removal of earth
products other than topsoil removal.163
A. The Town Board may, upon application and after a public hearing on
notice, as provided for in § 322-94 for special exception uses, authorize
a special exception for specific accessory activity events to be held at a
winery, as defined in § 322-3, as an accessory use, if said Board shall
find that the proposed events are appropriate for such location, and
gives due consideration to the character of the neighborhood, and are
in keeping with the purposes of this chapter as stated in § 322-2.
Approval of this special exception shall be limited to the types of events
included in an application pursuant to Subsection B(2).
B. Each application for a special exception use shall include the following
documents:
(1) A site plan to scale as required in Article XIII of this chapter.
(2) A complete and detailed description of the proposed types of
events, including time schedules, maximum number of attendees,
proposed temporary facilities such as tents, dance floors, sound
systems, traffic and parking management practices, and proposed
security.
C. Before approving such a special exception, the Town Board shall
determine that the following minimum conditions will be satisfied:
162. Editor's Note: See Ch. 154, Excavations and Regrading.
163. Editor's Note: Original § 54-17 of the 1964 Code, Coastal floodplain zoning and
management regulations, which immediately followed this subsection, added 11-28-1978,
as amended, was repealed 8-25-1987.
164. Editor’s Note: Former § 322-104, Mini storage warehouses, added 1-25-2000, was repealed
4-4-2017.
§ 322-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-104.1
1:957
(1) The location of the events shall be limited to the winery property as
shown in the site plan approved pursuant to Article XIII of this
chapter.
(2) Sufficient on-site parking shall be provided based on the
description of events, but in no case shall it be less than the amount
specified for public assembly in § 322-62. All on-site parking areas
shall be set back at least 50 feet from the property lines of
residentially developed properties and shall be separated from said
residentially developed property by an opaque barrier consisting of
a wall, slatted fence, and/or evergreen plantings sufficient to
screen such residentially developed property from fugitive light;
provided, however, that said barrier shall not be required where
the actual setback is greater than 200 feet.
(3) No exterior amplified music shall be played after 9:00 p.m. After
9:00 p.m., amplified music may be played only within permanent
buildings. At all times, the sound levels of on-site music shall be in
compliance with the requirements of Noise Control Table I in
Chapter 207 of the Smithtown Town Code.
(4) All permanent principal buildings shall be set back at least 175 feet
from the property lines of residentially developed properties.
(5) All permanent accessory buildings shall be set back at least 150
feet from the property lines of residentially developed properties.
(6) All outdoor dining areas, such as decks or patios, shall be set back
at least 200 feet from the property lines of residentially developed
properties or shall be fully screened from said residentially
developed properties by a permanent building.
(7) All temporary facilities, such as tents, dance floors, sound systems,
or locations of live entertainment, shall be set back at least 200 feet
from the property lines of residentially developed properties or
shall be fully screened from said residentially developed properties
by a permanent building.
(8) All on-site lighting shall be shielded from residentially developed
properties. Outdoor moving or flashing lighting, including but not
limited to spotlights, floodlights, searchlights, or strobe lights, is
not permitted at any time. Seasonal decorative lighting displays
shall be permitted, provided that all such seasonal decorative
lighting shall be located a minimum distance of 50 feet from the
property lines of all residentially developed properties, shall not
contain or include any bulbs, lamps, or light sources with an
individual light output in excess of the equivalent of a one-hundredwatt
incandescent bulb or 1,800 lumens, and shall be extinguished
no later than 11:00 p.m. each day and remain extinguished until no
earlier than 8:00 a.m. the following day.
§ 322-104.1 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-104.1
1:958
(9) All winery event solid waste must be removed from the site within
72 hours of its generation. All solid waste collection must occur
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and sunset. All on-site solid waste
containers must be located at least 100 feet from all residentially
developed properties.
(10) All wastewater design flows must meet the standards of the Suffolk
County Department of Health Services for individual septic
systems.
(11) The maximum occupancy of a winery site shall not exceed 20
persons per contiguous acre. Lands which are separated from the
winery parcel by a roadway or by other publicly or privately owned
lands may not be used in the calculation of the maximum
occupancy of the winery site.
D. The Town Board may impose such additional conditions on the
proposed use as it shall deem necessary or desirable before granting
such special exception.
§ 322-104.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-104.1
1:959

ARTICLE XV
Administration and Enforcement
§ 322-105. Enforcement. [Amended 3-22-1966; 10-10-1967;
7-9-1968; 4-29-1969; 6-3-1969; 7-22-1969; 6-9-1970; 3-23-1971;
6-26-1973; 12-11-1973; 6-8-1976; 9-8-1981; 12-22-1981; 1-25-1982;
1-25-1983; 8-9-1983; 6-25-1985; 1-25-2000; 5-8-2007]
It shall be the duty of the Building Director and other persons designated
by the Town Board to administer and enforce the provisions of Article 16 of
the Town Law and the provisions of this chapter, in the manner described
in Chapter 112, Article II, Building Construction Administration, and this
article.
§ 322-106. Penalties for offenses; other remedies. [Added
6-25-1985; amended 1-25-2000]
A. For each violation of the provisions of this chapter, including but not
limited to violations of conditions imposed by the Town Board, Planning
Board, Board of Site Plan Review and/or Zoning Board of Appeals, the
owner, business entity who is the owner, general agent, or person in
charge of the premises, architect, engineer and/or contractor of the
building, structure or premises where such violation has been
committed or exists shall be held liable, on conviction thereof, to a fine
or penalty of not less than $500 nor more than $5,000 for a conviction
of a first offense; upon conviction of a second violation where the
offense is committed within five years of the first conviction, a fine of
not less than $2,000 nor more than $10,000; and upon conviction of a
third or subsequent violation where the offense is committed within five
years of the first and second convictions, which shall constitute a
misdemeanor, a by a fine of not less than $4,000 nor more than $15,000
or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day, or part thereof, such violation continues
following notification by the Town or service of a summons shall
constitute a separate offense punishable in like manner. In addition to
such fine, the defendant shall pay all costs and expenses incurred by the
Town in determining such violation. The foregoing shall be in addition
to all other remedies available under the law to the Town or the Town
Board. [Amended 1-15-2004; 9-20-2012]
B. In the event of any actual or impending violation of this chapter, the
Town Board or Town Attorney, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate such violation. In addition to the criminal penalties set
forth herein or in other applicable law, rule or regulation, the Town
Attorney is authorized to pursue civil and equitable relief, including but
not limited to compensatory actions; civil penalties in the amount of up
to $500 per day or any part thereof; an action to compel compliance
with or to restrain by injunction the violation of this chapter; and other
remedies which the Town Attorney may deem necessary and proper.
§ 322-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-106
1:961
§ 322-107. Public records. [Amended 1-25-2000]
Duly certified copies of this chapter and of the Building Zone Map,165 which
forms a part hereof, together with copies of all amendments hereto, shall be
filed in the Town Clerk's office and shall be open to public inspection.
Any civil monetary penalty awarded may be assessed against the tax bill
of the property where the violation has occurred and shall be collected
in the same manner. In any civil or equitable action or proceeding
commenced in the name of the Town of Smithtown for violations of this
chapter, if the Town is successful in its action or proceeding, it can
expect attorney fees to be paid in addition to other fines and penalties.
[Amended 9-20-2012]
C. In addition to other remedies provided by law, any appropriate action or
proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise, may be instituted or
taken to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use to restrain, correct or
abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building,
structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use
in or about such premises.
165. Editor's Note: The Building Zone Map is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 322-106 SMITHTOWN CODE § 322-107
1:962
Chapter 323
TRANSFER OF DENSITY FLOW RIGHTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental and coastal quality
review — See Ch. 151.
Zoning — See Ch. 322.
§ 323-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Transfer of Density Flow Rights
Ordinance."
§ 323-2. Legislative intent.
The intent of this chapter is to regulate the transfer of density flow rights
and encourage the transfer of density flow rights from certain open spaces
to the historic downtowns in order to facilitate the:
§ 323-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DENSITY FLOW RIGHT — The right to discharge to the groundwater 300
gallons of wastewater per day pursuant to the Suffolk County Sanitary
Code.
DENSITY FLOW RIGHTS BANK — A depository comprised of:
PASSIVE OPEN SPACE — Undeveloped land that is preserved in its natural
state as forest or as a meadow and that is not used for residential,
commercial, industrial, institutional, agricultural or active recreational
A. Preservation of open space and environmentally sensitive land;
B. Protection of the groundwater from contamination; and
C. Preservation and enhancement of the Town's three historic central
business districts.
A database maintained by the Planning Department that catalogs
density flow rights acquired or redeemed by the Town of Smithtown;
and
A.
A separate cash account and accounting of the density flow rights in
a fund that combines into the general fund for financial statement
presentation as a restricted reserve which deposits are made upon sale
of publicly held flow rights and from which withdrawals are made to
purchase interests to acquire and conserve open space. [Amended
3-23-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
B.
§ 322-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 323-3
1:963
purposes such as golf courses, athletic fields, or playgrounds, but may
include minor incidental appurtenances such as fences, benches, and signs.
PRIVATE PARTY TRANSFER — A conveyance of density flow rights between
two parties, neither of which is the Town.
PUBLIC PARTY TRANSFER — A conveyance of density flow rights between
the Town of Smithtown and another party.
PURCHASE PRICE — The price paid by the Town for the purchase of a
development flow right.
RECEIVING DISTRICT — An area of the Town that is desirable to be
developed more intensively than areas outside the district as depicted on
the Transfer of Density Flow Rights Map in § 323-4 of this chapter of the
Town Code.
RECEIVING PARCEL — Land to which density flow rights generated from
one or more sending parcels are transferred.
SALE PRICE — The price paid to the Town for the sale of density flow rights
from the Density Flow Rights Bank.
SENDING DISTRICT — An area of the Town that is desirable to be
preserved as open space as depicted on the Transfer of Density Flow Rights
Map in § 323-4 of this chapter of the Town Code.
SENDING PARCEL — Land from which density flow rights are severed for
use in one or more receiving areas in the Town of Smithtown.
TRANSFER OF DENSITY FLOW RIGHTS (TDFR) — The process by which
such rights are transferred from one sending parcel to one or more
receiving parcels in the Town of Smithtown.
TRANSFER OF DENSITY FLOW RIGHTS (TDFR) CERTIFICATE — A paper
or digital certificate, issued by the Town, that documents the transfer of
density flow rights from a particular sending parcel to a particular receiving
parcel.
§ 323-4. Transfer of Density Flow Rights Map.
The boundaries of the sending and receiving districts are hereby
established as shown upon the Transfer of Density Flow Rights Map of the
Town of Smithtown, which accompanies this chapter and which, with all
notations, references and other matter shown thereon, is hereby declared
to be part of this chapter.166
§ 323-5. Authority of Town Board.
The Town Board is authorized to:
166. Editor's Note: The Transfer of Density Flow Rights Map is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 323-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § 323-5
1:964
§ 323-6. TDFR requirements.
A. Determine, subject to a concurring determination by the Suffolk County
Department of Health Services, the number of density flow rights that
may be severed from or added to a parcel of land.
B. Approve, subject to a concurring determination by the Suffolk County
Department of Health Services, and deny applications for private party
transfers.
C. Purchase and sell density flow rights in compliance with the Suffolk
County Sanitary Code and the provisions of this chapter.
D. Impose reasonable conditions the Board deems necessary or desirable,
provided that the conditions do not undermine a determination by the
Suffolk County Department of Health Services.
A. No density flow rights shall be transferred in the Town of Smithtown
except in accordance with the requirements of the Suffolk County
Sanitary Code, the transfer of development rights standards as
promulgated by the Suffolk County Department of Health Services, and
the provisions of this chapter.
B. No density flow rights shall be transferred from:
(1) Land in a receiving district, unless the right is transferred to a
receiving district.
(2) Land in another municipality except in an incorporated village
located wholly in the Town of Smithtown.
(3) Land in an incorporated village if the village board of trustees
objects to the transfer.
(4) Wetlands or underwater lands.
(5) Land in a subdivision that was approved by the Planning Board as a
cluster subdivision or where the Planning Board modified the
density.
(6) Land required to be left as a natural buffer or open space as a
condition of any Town, county, state, or federal approval to develop
or use real property.
(7) Land within an easement area, or within a right-of-way, or land
restricted by some other condition, covenant or encumbrance of
record, to the extent that any of these prevent development
thereon.
(8) Any lot used for a single-family residence unless a distinct open
space area can be defined on the site, and the severance of that
area would not result in a substandard lot.
C. No density flow rights shall be transferred to:
§ 323-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 323-6
1:965
(1) Land in a sending district.
(2) Land required to be left as a natural buffer or open space as a
condition of any Town, county, state, or federal approval to develop
or use real property.
(3) Land listed on the Smithtown Historic Sites Inventory, unless the
historic resource is preserved.
(4) Land located within a sewer district or approved for connection to a
sewage treatment facility.
(5) Land not served by public water.
(6) A parcel that would not be in compliance with the land use or
dimensional requirements of Chapter 322, Zoning, of the Town
Code unless an appropriate variance has been granted by the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
D. Except for cases where density flow rights have been transferred from a
parcel developed for a commercial or institutional use or for more than
one dwelling unit, sending parcels from which density flow rights have
been transferred shall be used only for passive open space and shall be
kept in perpetuity as natural open space. The use of fertilizers,
pesticides, or irrigation is prohibited. Plants that are poisonous,
hazardous, or not native to Long Island, as determined by the Planning
Department, may be removed and replaced with native plants that are
not poisonous or hazardous.
E. No transfer of density flow rights shall be approved without written
consent from the Suffolk County Department of Health Services.
F. The designation of sending and receiving districts does not imply that
all land within the districts has density flow rights that can be sent or
received.
G. Approval of a transfer of density flow rights shall not imply that
applications for development on the sending or receiving parcels will
receive preferential treatment.
H. A separate deed or deed restriction, as appropriate, must be filed for
the affected sending parcel. All deed restrictions shall allow perpetual
oversight and access for monitoring by the Town. This document shall
be in a form acceptable to the Town Attorney.
I. If the receiving parcel is located in the Local Waterfront Area as defined
by Chapter 151 of the Town Code, the transfer shall not be approved
unless the Town Board determines that the transfer is consistent with
the Local Waterfront Revitalization Program.
J. If the receiving parcel is located in a wild, scenic, or recreational river
corridor, the transfer shall not be approved unless the applicant obtains
§ 323-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § 323-6
1:966
§ 323-7. Density flow rights.
a permit or a letter of nonjurisdiction from the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation.
A. Except as provided for in § 323-6D and E, a density flow right shall
correspond to a parcel having 20,000 square feet of area or the
minimum lot area required by Chapter 322, Zoning, of the Town Code,
whichever is greater. In cases where the calculation results in a number
that is not a whole number, the number shall be rounded down to the
nearest tenth of a density flow right.
B. As an incentive to encourage the transfer of density flow rights, the
following environmentally sensitive lands, provided that these lands are
not underwater lands or wetlands, shall be included in the calculations
of lot area:
(1) Land with slopes in excess of 15%.
(2) Land within 100 feet of surface water or wetlands.
(3) Land where groundwater is less than 10 feet below grade.
(4) Land in a Special Flood Hazard Area indicated on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
C. The number of density flow rights for a single parcel or contiguous
parcels having a total of at least 20,000 square feet of land area shall be
based on a yield plan.
(1) The yield plan shall comply with the following:
(a) Chapter 248, Subdivision Regulations, of the Town Code,
except as modified pursuant to Subsection C(3)
(b) Chapter 322, Zoning, of the Town Code, except as otherwise
stated in Subsection B and as modified pursuant to Subsection
C(3)
(c) All lots shall be at least 20,000 square feet or the minimum
required by Chapter 322, Zoning, of the Town Code, whichever
is greater, including certain environmentally sensitive land,
pursuant to Subsection B.
(d) The yield plan shall show all streets and drainage land that
would normally be required if the land were being subdivided.
(e) All other applicable laws and regulations.
(2) The yield plan used for the calculation of density flow rights may
not necessarily be acceptable for applications pursuant to any
other chapters of the Town Code.
§ 323-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 323-7
1:967
§ 323-8. Private party transfers.
(3) As an incentive to encourage the transfer of density flow rights, the
Town Board shall have the authority to modify highway design
standards and frontage, setback, parking, and buffer requirements
if the Board determines that the modification would not adversely
impact the public health, safety, or welfare.
D. The number of density flow rights for a parcel that has an area of less
than 20,000 square feet and is exempt from Article 6 of the Suffolk
County Sanitary Code pursuant to § 760-609 of the Suffolk County
Sanitary Code shall be one if:
(1) The parcel meets the minimum lot area and frontage required by
Chapter 322, Zoning; or
(2) The parcel is buildable as evidenced by the Board of Zoning
Appeals granting an area variance for the parcel and/or, if
necessary, the adjoining lot.
E. If a parcel is lawfully developed for a commercial or institutional use, or
for more than one dwelling unit, the number of density flow rights shall
be equal to Suffolk County Department of Health Services' approved
sanitary flow divided by 300 gallons per day (gpd).
F. The number of density flow rights for a parcel having an area of less
than 20,000 square feet that does not meet the requirements listed in
Subsection D shall be determined by dividing the lot area by 20,000
square feet or by the minimum lot area required by Chapter 322,
Zoning, whichever results in a smaller number of rights.
A. Nondiscretionary private party transfers; procedure.
(1) Transfers involving a sending parcel which appeared as separately
assessed on the Suffolk County Tax Map as of January 1, 1981, and
meets at least one of the following criteria shall be processed as a
nondiscretionary private party transfer which shall be approved
upon compliance with the requirements of this chapter:
(a) The parcel is lawfully developed for a commercial or
institutional use, or for more than one dwelling unit;
(b) A vacant parcel that meets the minimum lot area and frontage
required by Chapter 322, Zoning;
(c) A sufficient area variance has been granted by the Board of
Zoning Appeals for the parcel and/or, if necessary, the
adjoining lot; or
(d) The application includes a yield plan that complies with
§ 323-7C and does not require the discretionary modification
by the Town Board of any of those standards identified in
§ 323-7C(3).
§ 323-7 SMITHTOWN CODE § 323-8
1:968
(2) Applications for nondiscretionary private party transfers shall be
filed in the Planning Department. The following documents and
fees shall be filed together:
(a) Two copies of a completed TDFR application form to be
supplied by the Planning Department.
(b) A written determination of yield from the Suffolk County
Department of Health Services if the parcel is in an
incorporated village or is lawfully developed for a commercial
or institutional use, or for more than one dwelling unit.
(c) Two copies of current surveys, site plans, and floor plans of the
sending and receiving parcels showing all existing and
proposed boundaries, structures, easements, etc.
(d) Two copies of the latest deeds and current title searches of the
sending and receiving parcels, including searches for any and
all restrictions, including liens, covenants, and easements.
(e) The proposed deed of conveyance, conservation easement or
covenant.
(f) A fee of $250 per density flow right requested.
(3) The Planning Department shall send written notification to the
Suffolk County Department of Health Services and other involved
agencies, if any, within five days of the filing of all of the abovelisted
documents and fees.
(4) The Planning Department shall act on the application within 15
days of receiving comments from the Suffolk County Department of
Health Services. The time period may be extended upon mutual
consent of the applicant and the Planning Department. The
application shall be approved if it is acceptable to the Suffolk
County Department of Health Services and the proposal is in
compliance with this chapter.
(5) Approval shall expire within 180 days unless, within that period, a
deed of conveyance, conservation easement or covenant
acceptable to the Town Attorney is filed in the Office of the Suffolk
County Clerk. For a fee of $50, the Planning Department shall
extend this time period 180 days if the Planning Department
determines in writing that the relevant regulations and
circumstances have not changed.
(6) The Planning Department shall issue the TDFR certificate upon
receipt of a copy of the filed deed of conveyance, conservation
easement or covenant. The certificate shall indicate the date of the
approval, the date the deed, easement or covenant was filed, the
number of density flow rights transferred, the location of the
sending parcel, and the location of the receiving parcel.
§ 323-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 323-8
1:969
(7) The Planning Department shall notify the Sole Assessor when the
transfer of density flow rights has been completed and shall keep a
record of all transfers.
(8) Density flow rights are only useable pursuant to the conditions
under which the transfer was approved. They are site-specific to
the project reviewed by the Planning Department.
(9) After the disposition of an application, the Planning Department
shall not accept a new application for a nondiscretionary private
party transfer for substantially the same request.
B. Discretionary private party transfers; procedure.
(1) Proposed transfers that require modification(s) of any of those
standards identified in § 323-7C(3) shall be processed as
discretionary private party transfers and shall be subject to the
procedure in this subsection.
(2) Applications for discretionary private party transfers shall be filed
in the Planning Department. The following documents and fees
shall be filed together:
(a) Three copies of a completed TDFR application form to be
supplied by the Planning Department.
(b) Two copies of a completed environmental assessment form as
well as the environmental quality review fee required by
Chapter 151 of the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
(c) For applications where the sending parcel is greater than
20,000 square feet, three copies of a yield plan, or a written
determination of yield from the Suffolk County Department of
Health Services if the parcel is in an incorporated village or is
lawfully developed for a commercial or institutional use, or for
more than one dwelling unit.
(d) Three copies of current surveys of the sending and receiving
parcels showing all boundaries, structures, easements, etc.
(e) Three copies of the latest deeds and current title searches of
the sending and receiving parcels, including searches for any
and all restrictions, including liens, covenants, and easements.
(f) The proposed deed of conveyance, conservation easement or
covenant.
(g) A fee of $500 per density flow right requested.
(3) The Planning Department shall send written notification to the
Suffolk County Department of Health Services and other involved
agencies, if any, within five days of the filing of all of the abovelisted
documents and fees.
§ 323-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § 323-8
1:970
§ 323-9. Public party transfers.
(4) Within 15 days of receiving comments from the Suffolk County
Department of Health Services, the Planning Department shall
make a written recommendation to the Town Board. Within 62 days
of receipt of a complete application, the Town Board shall act on
the application. The time period may be extended upon mutual
consent of the applicant and the Town Board. The application shall
not be approved unless the Town Board determines that it is
consistent with the purposes of a comprehensive plan as described
in § 263 of the Town Law, complies with this chapter, is acceptable
to the Suffolk County Department of Health Services, and would
not otherwise hinder the public health, safety, or general welfare.
(5) Approval shall expire within 180 days unless, within that period, a
deed of conveyance, conservation easement or covenant
acceptable to the Town Attorney is filed in the Office of the Suffolk
County Clerk. For a fee of $50, the Town Board may extend this
time period 180 days if it finds that such extension would not
hinder the public interest.
(6) The Planning Department shall issue the TDFR certificate upon
receipt of a copy of the filed deed of conveyance, conservation
easement or covenant. The certificate shall indicate the date of the
approval, the date the deed, easement or covenant was filed, the
number of density flow rights transferred, the location of the
sending parcel, and the location of the receiving parcel.
(7) The Planning Department shall notify the Sole Assessor when the
transfer of density flow rights has been completed and shall keep a
record of all transfers.
(8) Density flow rights are only useable pursuant to the terms and
conditions under which the transfer was approved. They are sitespecific
to the project reviewed by the Town Board.
(9) A unanimous vote of all of the members of the Board then present is
necessary for the Board to:
(a) Reopen a matter, after an earlier decision; and
(b) Modify an earlier decision; or
(c) Accept a second application after an earlier denial of
substantially the same request.
A. Purchase of density flow rights by the Town; procedure.
(1) The Town may acquire the land fee simple in order to retain or
resell the density flow rights, or the Town may acquire merely the
density flow rights to retain or resell.
§ 323-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 323-9
1:971
(2) A property owner or contract vendee may request the Town Board
to purchase density flow rights by filing an application at the
Planning Department. The following documents shall be filed
together:
(a) Three copies of a completed public party transfer application
form to be supplied by the Planning Department.
(b) Two copies of a completed environmental assessment form as
well as the environmental quality review fee required by
Chapter 151 of the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
(c) Three copies of a current property survey showing all
boundaries, structures, easements, etc.
(d) Three copies of a yield plan, or a written determination of yield
from the Suffolk County Department of Health Services if the
parcel is in an incorporated village or is lawfully developed for
a commercial or institutional use, or for more than one
dwelling unit.
(e) Three copies of a current title search, including a search for
any and all encumbrances, including all easements, liens,
covenants, and restrictions on the property.
(f) The proposed deed of conveyance, conservation easement or
covenant.
(g) Any other documentation deemed necessary by the Town
Board to conduct a thorough review.
(3) The Planning Department shall send written notification to the
Suffolk County Department of Health Services and other involved
agencies, if any, within five days of the filing of all of the abovelisted
documents and fees.
(4) Within 15 days of receiving comments from the Suffolk County
Department of Health Services, the Planning Department shall
make a written recommendation to the Town Board. If the Town
Board wishes to consider the application further, the Board shall
obtain an appraisal of the density flow rights.
(5) The Town Board shall notify the seller of the results of the appraisal
and offer the seller an opportunity to obtain his own appraisal.
(6) The Town Board may establish the fair market value of the rights
based on the Town's appraisal and seller's appraisal, if applicable.
(7) If the Town Board wishes to proceed, it shall authorize the Town
Attorney to negotiate the purchase of the parcel or rights for an
amount up to, but not exceeding, 0.9 multiplied by the fair market
value.
§ 323-9 SMITHTOWN CODE § 323-9
1:972
(8) Upon approval of the purchase, the property owner or contract
vendee of the sending parcel shall receive the agreed payment
upon delivery to the Town of the deed of conveyance, conservation
easement, or covenant in a form acceptable to the Town Attorney
and acceptable for filing in the office of the Suffolk County Clerk.
(9) If at any point the Town Board does not wish to proceed, the Board
shall notify the owner in writing, stating its reasons therefor.
(10) The Planning Department shall notify the Sole Assessor when the
transfer of density flow rights has been completed and shall keep a
record of all transfers.
B. Sale of density flow rights from the Density Flow Rights Bank;
procedure.
(1) Application to Town Board. A property owner may request to
purchase density flow rights from the Density Flow Rights Bank by
filing an application at the Planning Department. The following
documents shall be filed together:
(a) Three copies of a completed public party transfer application
form to be supplied by the Planning Department.
(b) Two copies of a completed environmental assessment form as
well as the environmental quality review fee required by
Chapter 151 of the Code of the Town of Smithtown.
(c) Three copies of a current property survey showing all
boundaries, structures, easements, etc.
(d) Three copies of a full title search, including a search for any
and all encumbrances, including all easements, liens,
covenants, and restrictions on the property.
(e) Three copies of a site plan showing proposed improvements to
the property.
(f) Three copies of architectural plans.
(g) The proposed deed of conveyance.
(h) Any other documentation requested by the Town Board or the
Planning Department.
(i) A fee of $500 per density flow right requested.
(2) The Planning Department shall notify the Suffolk County
Department of Health Services within five days of the filing of all of
the above-listed documents and fees. A TDFR certificate shall not
be issued without written consent from the Suffolk County
Department of Health Services.
§ 323-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 323-9
1:973
§ 323-10. Records.
The Planning Department shall:
§ 323-11. Administration and enforcement.
Any covenant, restriction, easement or other such limitation or condition
placed upon property pursuant to this chapter shall become part of the
zoning requirements for such property pursuant to § 322-8 of the Town
(3) If two or more applications are pending at the same time before the
Town Board, the Board shall award the density flow rights to the
projects that the Board determines best further the intent of this
chapter as described in § 323-2.
(4) In cases where the Town wishes to sell density flow rights from land
it has acquired in fee simple, it shall, by resolution, transfer the
associated density flow rights into the Density Flow Rights Bank
prior to selling those rights. The value of those rights shall be equal
to the average fair market value, as determined pursuant to
Subsection A(6), of the rights in the Density Flow Rights Bank. If
there are no rights in the bank at the time of transfer, the value
shall be equal to the fair market value of the right most recently
purchased from the bank.
(5) The sale price of a density flow right shall be negotiated by the
Town Attorney and shall be no less than 1.1 multiplied by the
average fair market value, as determined pursuant to Subsection
A(6), of the density flow rights in the Density Flow Rights Bank.
(6) The density flow rights shall be deemed transferred from the
Density Flow Rights Bank at such time as the deed of conveyance is
filed in the Office of the Suffolk County Clerk.
(7) The Planning Department shall issue the TDFR certificate upon
receipt of a copy of the filed deed of conveyance. The certificate
shall indicate the date of the approval, the date the deed was filed,
the number of density flow rights transferred from the Density
Flow Rights Bank, and the location of the receiving parcel.
(8) The Planning Department shall notify the Sole Assessor when a
transfer of density flow rights has been authorized.
A. Maintain all records pertaining to TDFR applications.
B. Maintain a database of all TDFR certificates, sending parcels, receiving
parcels, dates of transfer, and other information deemed necessary or
desirable by the Town Board or the Planning Director.
C. Send an annual report to the Town Board providing statistics on TDFR
program activity, and send a copy to the Suffolk County Department of
Health Services.
§ 323-9 SMITHTOWN CODE § 323-11
1:974
Code. Any violation of any such covenant, restriction, easement or other
such limitation or condition shall constitute a violation of Chapter 322,
Zoning, of the Town Code.
§ 323-12. Severability.
If any section, clause, phrase or provision of this chapter is held invalid
or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity
or unconstitutionality shall not be so construed as to render invalid or
unconstitutional the remaining provisions of this chapter.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2005 2-8-2005 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 164
2-2005 2-22-2005 Assessment exemption for
volunteer fire fighters and
ambulance workers
amendment
Ch. 256, Art. VIII
5-10-2005 Boat basin and mooring
areas amendment
Ch. 108
5-19-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
3-2005 5-19-2005 Licensing of junkyards and
junk dealers amendment
Ch. 194
6-28-2005 Noise amendment Ch. 207
4-2005 6-28-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Uniform
Traffic Code
6-28-2005 Department of Parks,
Buildings and Grounds
amendment
Ch. 101
7-26-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
5-2005 8-23-2005 Town Attorney escrow
account amendment
Ch. 75
6-2005 12-13-2005 Solid waste management
amendment
Ch. 177
12-27-2005 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Ch. 135
§ 323-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:975
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-10-2006 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 112, Art. II
2-7-2006 Erosion and sediment
control
Repealed by L.L.
No. 1-2010
1-2006 2-28-2006 Alternative veterans tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 256, Art. II
2-2006 2-28-2006 Assessment exemption for
volunteer fire fighters and
ambulance workers
amendment
Ch. 256, Art. VIII
4-4-2006 Tow trucks amendment Ch. 281
5-23-2006 Town Board meetings and
hearings
Ch. 76, Art. I
6-13-2006 Computer policy
amendment
Ch. 19
7-11-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
7-25-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
3-2006 9-12-2006 Salaries NCM
10-10-2006 Building construction
administration amendment
Ch. 112, Art. II
10-10-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
4-2006 11-21-2006 Appearance tickets
amendment
Ch. 9
1-2007 2-22-2007 Streets and sidewalks:
civil claims notice
amendment
Ch. 245, Art. III
2-2007 2-22-2007 Senior citizens tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 256, Art. I
3-2007 2-22-2007 Tax exemption for disabled
persons with limited
incomes amendment
Ch. 256, Art. III
3-13-2007 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 248
4-2007 3-29-2007 Streets and sidewalks:
civil claims notice
amendment
Ch. 245, Art. III
3-29-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
3-29-2007 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 248
4-26-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
§ DL-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:976
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-8-2007 Nomenclature change to
"Building Director"
Chs. 101, 112,
145, 153, 154, Art.
III, 181, 221, 245,
252, 273
5-8-2007 Zoning amendment
(nomenclature change to
"Building Director")
Ch. 322
5-2007 5-8-2007 Nomenclature change to
"Building Director"
Chs. 9, 13, 30,
113, 151, 164,
185, 194, 242, 285
9-11-2007 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 248
9-11-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
6-2007 9-11-2007 Zoning amendment (signs) Ch. 322
9-27-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
1-2008 1-24-2008 Tax exemption for Cold
War veterans
Ch. 256, Art. X
6-10-2008 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 259
6-10-2008 Tow trucks amendment Ch. 281
7-2-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
2-2008 8-12-2008 Building Code amendment Ch. 112, Art. I
9-9-2008 Solid waste management
amendment
Ch. 177
10-30-2008 Shellfish amendment Ch. 233
10-30-2008 Boat basin and mooring
areas amendment
Ch. 108
Board of
Water
Commissioners
12-2-2008 Water districts amendment Ch. 312
12-18-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
2-26-2009 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 259
2-26-2009 Tow trucks amendment Ch. 281
3-26-2009 Water districts amendment Ch. 312
4-14-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
4-14-2009 Department of Parks,
Buildings and Grounds
amendment
Ch. 101
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:977
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-5-2009 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 252
5-5-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
5-28-2009 Special events amendment Ch. 119
1-2009 6-9-2009 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 30
2-2009 6-9-2009 Solid waste management
amendment
Ch. 177
3-2009 6-25-2009 Appearance tickets
amendment
Ch. 9
6-25-2009 Excavations amendment Ch. 245, Art. IV
4-2009 8-11-2009 Flood damage prevention Ch. 168
8-11-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
9-8-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
9-24-2009 Building construction
administration amendment
Ch. 112, Art. II
9-24-2009 Building construction
administration amendment
Ch. 112, Art. II
5-2009 10-6-2009 Solid waste management
amendment
Ch. 177
10-6-2009 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 215, Arts. I
and II
11-10-2009 Workplace Violence
Prevention Policy
amendment
Ch. 83
11-10-2009 Sexual and Other
Harassment Policy
amendment
Ch. 68
6-2009 12-17-2009 Solid waste management
amendment
Ch. 177
12-17-2009 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 259
12-17-2009 Tow trucks amendment Ch. 281
12-17-2009 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 215
12-17-2009 Procurement Policy
amendment
Ch. 57
2-9-2010 Transfer of density flow
rights
Repealed 5-7-2013
4-6-2010 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 112
§ DL-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:978
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-22-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
6-24-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
8-2-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
8-17-2010 Solid waste management
amendment
Ch. 177
1-2010 10-5-2010 Stormwater management
and erosion and sediment
control
Ch. 153
2-2010 12-14-2010 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Ch. 135
12-14-2010 Tow trucks amendment Ch. 281
1-4-2011 Transfer of density flow
rights amendment
Repealed 5-7-2013
3-8-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
3-8-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
4-28-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
8-9-2011 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 221
10-4-2011 Waterways amendment Ch. 318
1-2011 10-4-2011 Appearance tickets
amendment
Ch. 9
2-2011 10-25-2011 Business investment tax
exemption
Ch. 256, Art. IV
10-25-2011 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 112, Arts. I
and II
10-25-2011 Transfer of density flow
rights amendment
Repealed 5-7-2013
10-25-2011 Boat basin and mooring
areas amendment
Ch. 108
12-13-2011 Building construction
administration amendment
Ch. 112, Art. II
3-2011 12-13-2011 Building code amendment Ch. 112, Art. I
12-13-2011 Building construction
administration amendment
Ch. 112, Art. II
12-13-2011 Procurement policy Ch. 57
1-19-2012 Swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 252
2-23-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:979
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-22-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
4-3-2012 Firearms amendment Ch. 160
1-2012 5-17-2012 Appearance tickets
amendment
Ch. 9
2-2012 5-17-2012 Building code amendment Ch. 112, Art. I
3-2012 5-17-2012 Trees amendment Ch. 285
5-17-2012 Building construction
administration amendment
Ch. 112, Art. II
5-17-2012 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 248
5-17-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
4-2012 7-17-2012 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 30, Part 1
5-2012 8-14-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
8-14-2012 Department of Parks,
Buildings and Grounds
amendment
Ch. 101
9-20-2012 Building construction
administration amendment
Ch. 112, Art. II
9-20-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
10-2-2012 Building construction
administration amendment
Ch. 112, Art. II
10-2-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
10-2-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
10-25-2012 Department of Parks,
Buildings and Grounds
amendment
Ch. 101
12-11-2012 Department of Parks,
Buildings and Grounds
amendment
Ch. 101
2-5-2013 Tents amendment Ch. 273
5-7-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
5-7-2013 Transfer of density flow
rights
Ch. 323
6-20-2013 Solid waste management
amendment
Ch. 177
1-2013 11-21-2013 Taxation: Superstorm
Sandy assessment relief
Ch. 256, Art. XI
2-2013 12-17-2013 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 164
§ DL-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:980
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-8-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
4-24-2014 Tow trucks amendment Ch. 281
5-22-2014 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 248
7-15-2014 Investment Policy Superseded
1-22-2015
1-2014 9-9-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
See Uniform
Traffic Code
Board of
Water
Commissioners
10-3-2014 Water districts amendment Ch. 312
Board of
Water
Commissioners
11-20-2014 Water districts amendment Ch. 312
1-6-2015 Procurement Policy
amendment
Ch. 57
1-22-2015 Investment Policy Ch. 46
3-19-2015 Building Code amendment Ch. 112, Art. I
1-2015 4-23-2015 Procurement: best value
bid awards
Ch. 57A
6-2-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
6-2-2015 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 248
2-2015 7-14-2015 Utility poles on Town road
rights-of-way
Ch. 245, Art. VI
7-14-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
3-2015 9-8-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
4-2015 9-24-2015 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Ch. 135
5-2015 11-3-2015 Taxation: partial income
for senior citizens with
limited income
amendment; alternative
veterans exemption
amendment
Ch. 256, Arts. I
and II
11-3-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:981
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Board of
Water
Commissioners
11-3-2015 Water rates increase Ch. 312
11-19-2015 Town Board: meetings and
hearings amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
1-5-2016 Procurement Policy Ch. 57
1-21-2016 Investment Policy Ch. 46
1-21-2016 Building construction
administration amendment
Ch. 112, Art. II
3-17-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
1-2016 5-3-2016 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 221
5-19-2016 Investment Policy
amendment
Ch. 46
9-6-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
9-22-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
10-4-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
2-2016 11-1-2016 Noise amendment Ch. 207
Board of
Water
Commissioners
11-17-2016 Water rates increase Ch. 312
1-3-2017 Investment Policy Ch. 46
1-3-2017 Procurement Policy Ch. 57
1-2017 3-23-2017 Special events amendment Ch. 119
2-2017 3-23-2017 Office of Deputy
Superintendent of
Highways
Ch. 53, Art. VI
3-2017 3-23-2017 Transfer of density flow
rights amendment
Ch. 323
4-4-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
5-9-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 322
4-2017 8-8-2017 Building construction
administration amendment
Ch. 112, Art. II
9-5-2017 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Ch. 135
5-2017 11-30-2017 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 221
§ DL-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:982
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
6-2017 11-30-2017 Department of Parks,
Buildings and Grounds
amendment
Ch. 101
11-30-2017 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 259
Board of
Water
Commissioners
11-30-2017 Water rates increase Ch. 312
1-2018 2-6-2018 Tax exemption for Cold
War veterans amendment
Ch. 256, Art. X
2-2018 4-26-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 322
4-26-2018 Building Construction
Amendment
Ch. 112
3-2018 6-12-2018 Subdivision of Land
Amendment
Ch. 248
7-17-2018 Subdivision of Land
Amendment
Ch. 248
4-2018 8-14-2018 Dogs and Other Animals
Amendment
Ch. 135
9-4-2018 Peddling and Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 215
9-20-2018 Noise Amendment Ch. 207
10-9-2018 Environmental and Coastal
Quality Review
Amendment
Ch. 151
11-6-2018 Boat Basin and Mooring
Areas Amendment
Ch. 108
11-6-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 322
Board of
Water
Commissioners
11-29-2018 Water Districts
Amendment
Ch. 312
12-11-2018 Boat Basin and Mooring
Areas Amendment
Ch. 108
12-11-2018 Subdivision of Land
Amendment
Ch. 248
12-11-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 322
12-11-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 322
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:983
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-8-2019 Environmental and Coastal
Quality Review:
Environmental Quality and
Coastal Consistency
Review Amendment
Ch. 151, Art. II
1-8-2019 Town Board: Meetings and
Hearings Amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
2-5-2019 Building Construction:
Building Construction
Administration
Amendment
Ch. 112, Art. II
Board of
Water
Commissioners
2-5-2019 Water Districts
Amendment
Ch. 312
2-5-2019 Taxation: Alternative
Veterans Exemption
Amendment
Ch. 256, Art. II
4-9-2019 Streets and Sidewalks:
Excavations Amendment
Ch. 245, Art. IV
1-2019 5-7-2019 Anti-Bias Task Force
Amendment
Ch. 43
2-2019 7-16-2019 Streets and Sidewalks:
Excavations Amendment
Ch. 245, Art. IV
7-16-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 322
3-2019 8-13-2019 Appearance Tickets
Amendment
Ch. 9
4-2019 8-13-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 322
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
12-17-2019 Department of Parks,
Buildings and
Grounds Amendment
Ch. 101 169
1-2020 1-7-2020 Special Events
Amendment
Ch. 119 169
2-2020 1-23-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 322 170
3-2020 1-23-2020 Petty Cash Fund NCM 170
4-2020 2-4-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 322 170
§ DL-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:984
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
5-2020 2-4-2020 Department of Parks,
Buildings and
Grounds Amendment
Ch. 101 170
6-2020 3-19-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 322 170
Traffic Code
Part I: the Traffic Law
Chapter TC1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:985

ARTICLE I
Definitions; Interpretation
§ TC1-1. Definitions. [Amended 6-5-1984 by L.L. No. 7-1984;
1-20-1987 by L.L. No. 1-1987; 5-12-1987 by L.L. No. 2-1987;
9-14-2004 by L.L. No. 7-2004]
A. The words and phrases used in this Code shall for the purpose of this
Code have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for the purpose
of this Code:
CODE — The Uniform Traffic Code of the Town of Smithtown, Suffolk
County, New York.
COMMUTER PARKING PERMIT — A permit which allows persons to
park their vehicles in designated commuter parking fields. Said permits
shall be obtained at the Town Clerk's office. Residents may obtain said
permits, for their use only, at no charge. All commuter parking permits
shall be valid for the calendar year within which they are issued.
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HANDICAPPED PARKING PERMIT — A permit which allows
handicapped persons to park their vehicles in designated handicapped
parking spaces. Said permit shall be obtained at the Town Clerk's office.
A handicapped resident may obtain such a permit, for his/her own use
only, at no charge. These handicapped parking permits are valid for a
five-year period.
HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACE — Any parking space that is
delineated by blue striping and/or a handicapped parking sign. To park
in this space, an individual is required to have a handicapped parking
permit issued by the Town of Smithtown, other municipality or county,
or a state disabled license plate.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
PARKING FIELDS — Any part of land determined by the owner or
owners of said land to be used by the public for the purpose of parking
vehicles.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A motorized or towable vehicle made for
camping.[Added 9-9-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
RESIDENT — All persons residing in or paying real property tax to the
Town of Smithtown shall be considered "residents," including residents
of the incorporated villages located within the Town of Smithtown. All
others shall be considered nonresidents.
§ TC1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TC1-1
1:987
§ TC1-2. Interpretation.
SCHOOL DAYS — Days when school is officially open for regular
sessions.
SCHOOL SPEED LIMITS — That speed limit established on any portion
of highway passing a school building and for not more than 300 feet in
either direction from the building line of a school abutting on a highway.
TRAILER — Any structure mounted upon wheels which is incapable of
moving or traveling under its own power and is designed to be towed
by a motor vehicle.
C. Definitions not provided in Subsections A and B above shall be as
defined by the New York State Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
A. Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein or on
traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard which is in
current use in this state.
B. Measurements. Any linear measurements specified for various
regulations contained in this Code shall be deemed to be approximate
and such measurements, and the regulation to which they pertain, shall
not be affected in any way by the widening of a street, by the
construction of curbs, gutters or sidewalks or by any other action which
might tend to obliterate the point from which such measurements were
originally made. Unless otherwise indicated, measurements shall be
made from the nearest curbline of the street referred to in the location
description or, if there is no curbline, from the nearest pavement edge.
C. For the purposes of this Code, all streets and highways in the Town shall
be deemed to run north-south or east-west, and streets or highways
running generally parallel to the direction indicated shall be deemed to
run in such direction.
§ TC1-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § TC1-2
1:988
ARTICLE II
Administration
§ TC1-3. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Department of Traffic of the Town of Smithtown shall install, operate
and maintain traffic control devices when and as required under the
provisions of this Code to make effective the provisions of this Code and
may install and maintain such additional traffic control devices as may be
deemed necessary for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic
under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, subject to the
provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ TC1-4. Schedules; regulations.
§ TC1-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-26-1984 by L.L. No.
8-1984]
A. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations
adopted under the provisions of this Code, there is hereby established a
system of schedules, appearing as Part II of this Code, in which shall be
entered all regulations after adoption. Such schedules shall be deemed
a part of the section to which they refer. All regulations shall be adopted
with reference to the appropriate schedule as indicated in the various
sections of this Code.
B. Regulations shall be adopted by resolution of the Town Board, in
accordance with the provisions of the Town Law and the Vehicle and
Traffic Law, or by an officer or agency authorized by the Town Board to
adopt regulations pursuant to § 1603(e) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
[Amended 9-6-1983 by L.L. No. 4-1983]
A. Every person convicted of a violation of the Uniform Traffic Code of the
Town of Smithtown shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, for a first conviction. For a second conviction within 18
months thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. The provisions of this subsection shall
govern unless specifically otherwise provided. [Amended 4-3-1990 by
L.L. No. 6-1990; 9-9-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
B. Penalties for late payment. If the fines as set forth in § TC1-5A are not
paid on or before the summons return date, a penalty of double the
amount of the original fine will be charged, plus an additional penalty of
$15 for each successive thirty-day period. Up to a maximum of two
successive thirty-day late notices will be assessed for failure to respond
to and/or make payment on the original fine plus any penalty so
assessed. [Added 6-10-1986 by L.L. No. 5-1986; amended
4-23-1991 by L.L. No. 5-1991; 5-12-1998 by L.L. No. 5-1998]
§ TC1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TC1-5
1:989
C. Charge for insufficient funds. A penalty of $15 shall be charged to the
maker of a check returned for insufficient funds. [Added 4-23-1991 by
L.L. No. 5-1991]
D. The fines for violations of the Uniform Traffic Code of the Town of
Smithtown and/or the penalties for failure to pay these fines may be
amended by resolution, from time to time, by the Town Board of the
Town of Smithtown, without the necessity of a formal public hearing.
[Added 5-12-1998 by L.L. No. 5-1998]
§ TC1-5 SMITHTOWN CODE § TC1-5
1:990
ARTICLE III
Repealer; Severability; When Effective
§ TC1-6. Repealer.
All prior ordinances, regulations and rules, or parts of such, of the Town of
Smithtown regulating traffic and parking and not included in this Code are
hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall not:
§ TC1-7. Severability.
If any chapter, article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause
or provision of the Code shall be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such adjudication shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation
to the chapter, article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause
or provision thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered.
§ TC1-8. When effective.
A. Affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any
act done or committed in violation of any ordinance, regulation or rule
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this Code.
B. Affect any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted after January 1, 1977,
and before the effective date of this Code. Such ordinances, rules or
regulations shall be deemed to be a part of this Code, and adoption of
this Code shall be understood to incorporate such ordinances, rules and
regulations. In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the
provisions of such ordinances, rules or regulations and the provisions of
this Code, the provisions of such ordinances, rules or regulations shall
control.
A. Except those parts, if any, which are subject to approval under § 1684 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York and § 46 of the
Highway Law of the State of New York, this Code and any regulations
adopted hereunder shall take effect as provided by law.
B. Any part or parts of this Code and any regulations adopted hereunder
which are subject to approval under § 1684 of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York and § 46 of the Highway Law of the State
of New York shall take effect from and after the day on which approval,
in writing, is received from the New York State Department of
Transportation.
§ TC1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TC1-8
1:991
Chapter TC2
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ TC1-8 SMITHTOWN CODE § TC1-8
1:992
ARTICLE I
Traffic Control Signals
§ TC2-1. Installation. [Amended 1-20-1987 by L.L. No. 1-1987]
Traffic signals, consisting of traffic control signals, pedestrian signals,
flashing signals and beacons, special purpose traffic control signals and fire
signals, shall be installed, operated and maintained at the intersections and
locations described in Schedule A.
§ TC2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TC2-1
1:993

ARTICLE II
Turning Movements
§ TC2-2. Prohibited right turns on red signals.
Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal is hereby prohibited to run right
on the red signal, as indicated at the intersections and locations described
in Schedule B, in accordance with the provisions of § 1111(d)2 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law.
§ TC2-3. Prohibited turns.
The turning of vehicles is hereby regulated as indicated (left, right or all)
at the intersections and locations described in Schedule C during the hours
designated in said schedule.
§ TC2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TC2-3
1:995

ARTICLE III
One-Way Streets; Driveways; Lane Use Designations
§ TC2-4. One-way streets.
The streets or highways, or parts thereof, described in Schedule D are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated in said
schedule, during the hours specified.
§ TC2-5. Parking area exits and entrances.
The driveways described in Schedule E, between highways and off-street
parking areas in the town, shall be used for exit or entrance only, as
indicated in said schedule.
§ TC2-6. Lane use designations. [Added 9-6-1983 by L.L. No.
4-1983]
The lanes on the streets described in Schedule F are hereby restricted
to the use indicated (left turn, right turn or through traffic only) in said
schedule.
§ TC2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TC2-6
1:997

ARTICLE IV
Stop or Yield Intersections
§ TC2-7. Stop or yield intersections designated.
The intersections described in Schedule G are hereby designated as stop
intersections or yield, as indicated, and stop or yield signs shall be erected
as provided in said schedule.
§ TC2-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TC2-7
1:999

ARTICLE V
Speed Restrictions
§ TC2-8. General speed limits.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Article, 30 miles per hour
is hereby established as the maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed
on or along streets and highways within the town and 15 miles per hour in
all designated municipal parking areas.
§ TC2-9. Speed limits on certain streets.
The maximum speed limit for vehicles proceeding on or along those streets,
or parts of streets, described in Schedule H shall be as indicated in said
schedule. The maximum speed limit for streets which are a part of the state
highway system shall be as established by the New York State Department
of Transportation.
§ TC2-10. School speed limits.
The speed limit at which vehicles may proceed along highways and streets,
or parts thereof, passing school buildings and for not more than 300 feet
in either direction from the building line of such schools are hereby
established as described in Schedule I, during the hours indicated, on
school days.
§ TC2-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TC2-10
1:1001
Chapter TC3
PARKING REGULATIONS
§ TC2-10 SMITHTOWN CODE § TC2-10
1:1002
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ TC3-1. Applicability of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ TC3-2. Manner of parking.
Wherever a space shall be marked off, in any appropriate manner, on the
surface of any street, highway or public parking lot for the parking of an
individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the
markings designating such space.
§ TC3-3. Unregistered vehicles. [Added 4-3-1990 by L.L. No. 6-1990
167; amended 1-12-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
The parking of any unregistered motor vehicle and/or trailer on any public
street and/or Town of Smithtown property shall be prohibited.
§ TC3-4. Vehicle repair on public streets. [Added 4-3-1990 by L.L.
No. 6-1990]
No motor vehicle, whether registered or unregistered, shall be repaired,
serviced or raised on jacks, blocks or any other device or object on any
public street at any time.
167. Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former §§ TC3-3 through TC3-7 as §§ TC3-5
through TC3-9, respectively.
§ TC3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TC3-4
1:1003

ARTICLE II
Parking, Stopping and Standing Restrictions
§ TC3-5. Designation of areas and restrictions.
The parking, stopping or standing of vehicles in the locations described in
Schedule J is hereby restricted as follows:
§ TC3-6. Parking of trailers. [Added 9-14-2004 by L.L. No. 7-2004
168; amended 9-9-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
A. In locations designated as "no parking," the parking of vehicles is
prohibited at all times or during the hours or time periods indicated, if
any.
B. In locations designated as "limited parking," the parking of vehicles is
hereby prohibited for a longer period of time than that specified during
the hours indicated, if any.
C. In locations designated as "no standing," the standing of vehicles is
hereby prohibited at all times or during the hours indicated, if any.
D. In locations designated as "no stopping," the stopping of vehicles is
hereby prohibited at all times or during the hours indicated, if any.
E. In locations designated as "bus stops," the parking, standing or
stopping of vehicles other than buses is hereby prohibited.
F. In locations designated as "taxi stands," the parking, standing or
stopping of vehicles other than taxis is hereby prohibited. Taxis using
such stands shall not be left unattended and shall be subject to all other
vehicle and traffic regulations of the Town.
G. In locations designated as "metered parking," the parking of vehicles
shall be subject to the provisions of Article III of this chapter, and
parking is hereby prohibited for a longer period of time than that
specified during the hours indicated, if any.
H. In locations designated for "angle parking," vehicles shall be parked
only at the angle designated.
I. In parking spaces designated as "handicapped parking spaces," the
parking, standing or stopping of a vehicle other than those with
handicapped parking permits or handicapped license plates, is hereby
prohibited. [Added 6-5-1984 by L.L. No. 7-1984]
J. No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle within 15 feet of any
fire hydrant, fire well cistern or Fire Department connection or
apparatus. [Added 5-12-1998 by L.L. No. 5-1998]
168. Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Art. III, Metered Parking, comprising
§§ TC3-6 through TC3-9.
§ TC3-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TC3-6
1:1005
A. It shall be a violation of this section to park any trailer on any street
within the unincorporated areas of the Town.
B. In all residential zoning districts, the parking or storage of any
recreation vehicle on the street shall be prohibited.
§ TC3-6 SMITHTOWN CODE § TC3-6
1:1006
Chapter TC4
OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS
§ TC4-1. Traffic regulations at parking areas and driveways of
hospitals, shopping centers, private apartment complexes, private
condominium complexes, fire stations, industrial parks and
industrial complexes. [Amended 4-3-1990 by L.L. No. 6-1990]
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Town Board of the Town of
Smithtown by § 1660-a of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, the
Town Board of the Town of Smithtown, with respect to parking areas and
driveways of a hospital parking areas of a shopping center; the parking
areas and private streets or roads of a private apartment house complex;
the parking areas. driveways, streets and roads of a private condominium
complex or fire station; or private streets, roadways or driveways of an
industrial park or industrial complex, and pursuant to the written request of
either the owner or the person in general charge of the operation or control
of such area or the Fire Chief of the Fire Department serving such area,
hereby adopts the following regulations:
§ TC4-2. Town parking areas.
The areas owned or leased by the Town of Smithtown and described in
Schedule L are Town parking fields, and the parking, standing and stopping
of vehicles in such fields shall be subject to the restrictions and regulations
indicated in said schedule and the following:
A. In any parking area listed in Schedule K, no vehicle shall be parked:
(1) In any manner other than as designated on the surface thereof by
appropriate markings.
(2) In any manner other than directed by appropriate signs.
(3) In any designated fire-zone area.
(4) In any designated handicapped parking space. [Added 6-5-1984
by L.L. No. 7-1984]
B. Additional traffic and parking regulations for the parking areas listed in
Schedule K shall be as indicated in said schedule.
C. Upon request of either the owner or the person in general charge of the
operation and control of such area, the Town of Smithtown may provide
for the removal and storage of vehicles parked or abandoned in any
such area herein described during snow storms, floods, fires or other
public emergencies or found unattended in any such area, where they
constitute an obstruction to traffic or where stopping, standing or
parking is prohibited. The owner requesting such service shall be
required to make payment of reasonable charges for such removal and
storage.
§ TC3-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TC4-2
1:1007
A. In parking areas, or parts thereof, designated as "commuter parking,"
no vehicle shall be parked unless the vehicle displays an official
resident parking permit issued by the Town Clerk's office or the Parks
Department, which is displayed on the left rear window of said vehicle.
[Amended 8-13-1985 by L.L. No. 10-1985; 6-12-2005 by L.L. No.
4-2005]
B. In parking areas, or parts thereof, designated as "parks and beaches":
[Amended 7-27-2004 by L.L. No. 6-2004; 6-28-2005 by L.L. No.
4-2005]
(1) Except as otherwise provided, no vehicle shall be parked unless the
vehicle displays an official resident parking permit issued by the
Town Clerk's office or the Parks Department which is displayed on
the left rear window of said vehicle.
(2) No vehicle shall be parked at any park or beach between 1/2 hour
after sunset and sunrise of the following day, except as otherwise
authorized under Schedule L or Subsection B(3).
(3) The overnight parking of vehicles between 1/2 hour after sunset
and sunrise of the following day will be permitted for vehicles of
campers, boaters and fishermen with permits issued by the Town
Clerk or the Parks Department and displaying an official resident
parking permit or vehicles bearing Smithtown Bay Yacht Club
stickers. Overnight parking of vehicles by campers, boaters or
fishermen pursuant to this subsection shall only be authorized
while occupants of the vehicles are actively engaged in such
permitted activity.
C. In parking areas, or parts thereof, designated as "Town Hall employee
parking," no vehicle shall be parked unless the vehicle displays a
current official Town Hall employee parking permit issued by the Town
Clerk's office, which is displayed on the left rear bumper of said vehicle.
D. In parking areas designated as "commuter, parks or beaches, library or
municipal parking areas;" no vehicle shall be parked longer than 24
hours.
E. In parking areas designated as "metered parking," the parking of
vehicles shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 3, Parking
Regulations, Article III, Metered Parking, of this Code.
F. In any parking area listed in Schedule L no vehicle shall be parked:
(1) In any manner other than as designated on the surface by
appropriate markings.
(2) In any manner other than as designated by the appropriate signs.
(3) In any designated fire-zone area.
§ TC4-2 SMITHTOWN CODE § TC4-2
1:1008
§ TC4-3. Sidewalk and public right-of-way parking. [Added
8-23-1988 by L.L. No. 2-1988]
The parking and storing of vehicles on town sidewalks and public rights-ofway
shall be restricted and regulated as follows:
Chapter TC5
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES: WEIGHT LIMITS
§ TC5-1. Truck exclusions.
§ TC5-2. Parking of commercial vehicles. [Amended 9-6-1983 by
L.L. No. 4-1983]
Commercial vehicles, tractor-trailer combinations and trucks in excess of
two tons are prohibited from parking, except to load or unload, on the
streets and highways, or parts thereof, described in Schedule N.
(4) In any designated handicapped parking space. [Added 6-5-1984
by L.L. No. 7-1984]
A. No vehicle may be parked and/or stored partially or completely on a
sidewalk.
B. No vehicle may be parked and/or stored partially or completely on the
public right-of-way without written permission from the Town Board.
For the purpose of this section, the "public right-of-way" shall be
defined as that area between the private property line and the abutting
street.
A. All trucks, commercial vehicles, tractors and tractor-trailer
combinations in excess of 2 1/2 tons' unladen weight are hereby
excluded from the streets and highways, or parts thereof, described in
Schedule M. All trucks, commercial vehicles, tractors and tractortrailer
combinations in excess of five tons' unladen weight are hereby
excluded from the streets and highways, or parts thereof, described in
Schedule M1. [Amended 2-24-2004 by L.L. No. 5-2004]
B. The regulations established in this section shall not be construed to
prohibit municipally owned vehicles or authorized public utility vehicles
or to prevent the delivery or pickup of merchandise or other property
along the streets or highways from which such vehicles and
combinations are otherwise excluded.
C. In all residential districts, the parking or storage of any truck having a
New York State motor vehicle gross weight in excess of 10,000 pounds
shall be prohibited. [Added 4-3-1990 by L.L. No. 6-1990]
§ TC4-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TC5-3
1:1009
§ TC5-3. Weight limits on bridges.
All vehicles in excess of the posted gross vehicle weight limits are excluded
from those bridges and elevated structures as described in Schedule O.
§ TC5-4. Hours prohibited in residential districts. [Added 4-3-1990
by L.L. No. 6-1990; amended 9-10-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
Parking any vehicle which bears commercial license plates on any street
within any residential district between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
shall be prohibited.
Chapter TC6
REMOVAL AND STORAGE OF VEHICLES
§ TC6-1. Authority to remove and store a vehicle. [Amended
5-7-1985 by L.L No. 7-1985; 4-3-1990 by L.L. No. 6-1990]
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Town Board of the Town of
Smithtown by § 1600 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, the
Town Board of the Town of Smithtown, hereby adopts the following
regulations to provide for the removal and storage of vehicles parked or
abandoned on highways during snow storms, floods, fires or other public
emergencies or found unattended where they constitute an obstruction to
traffic or any place where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited and
for the payment of reasonable charges for such removal and storage by the
owner or operator of any such vehicle.
A. A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned if left unattended:
(1) With no number plates affixed thereto for more than six hours on
any highway or any public place.
(2) For more than 24 hours on any highway or other public place
except a portion of the highway or public place on which parking is
legally permitted.
(3) For more than 48 hours after the parking of such vehicle shall have
become illegal if left on a portion of a highway or public place on
which parking is legally permitted.
(4) For more than 96 hours on property of another if left without
permission of the owner.
B. If an abandoned vehicle, at the time of abandonment, has no numbered
plates affixed and is of a wholesale value, taking into consideration the
condition of the vehicle of $750 or less, title shall immediately vest in
the Town of Smithtown.
C. Custody and inquiry.
§ TC5-3 SMITHTOWN CODE § TC6-1
1:1010
(1) Except for vehicles governed by Subsection B, the Town of
Smithtown shall have custody of an abandoned vehicle and shall
make an inquiry concerning the last owner of such vehicle as
follows:
(a) For an abandoned vehicle with numbered plates affixed,
inquiry to the jurisdiction which issued such numbered plates.
(b) For an abandoned vehicle with no numbered plates affixed,
inquiry to the Department of Motor Vehicles.
(2) The Town of Smithtown shall notify the last owner, if known, that
the vehicle in question has been recovered as an abandoned vehicle
and that, if unclaimed, it will be sold at public auction or by bid
after ten days from the date such notice was given. If the agency
described in § TC6-lC(l) also notifies the Town of Smithtown that a
lien or mortgage exists, such notice shall also be sent to the
lienholder or mortgagee. Any person claiming such vehicle shall be
required to pay the cost of removal and storage of such a vehicle.
(3) Ownership of such abandoned vehicles, if unclaimed, shall vest in
the Town of Smithtown ten days from the date such notice is given
or, if the last owner cannot be ascertained, when notice of such fact
is received.
D. The Town of Smithtown shall determine:
(1) If an abandoned vehicle is suitable for operation on the public
highways. If so, the vehicle shall be sold at public auction to the
highest bidder or converted pursuant to Subsection E of this
section.
(2) If the Town of Smithtown determines that an abandoned vehicle is
not suitable for operation on the public highways, it may sell the
vehicle to a vehicle dismantler or scrap processor registered or
certified pursuant to § 415-a of the New York State Vehicle and
Traffic Law or to a vehicle dismantler or scrap processor who does
not have a place of business in this state but who conforms to the
laws and regulations of the state in which he has a place of
business.
(3) An abandoned vehicle without a vehicle identification number plate
must be sold only to a vehicle dismantler or a scrap processor
registered or certified pursuant to § 415-a of the New York State
Vehicle and Traffic Law or to a vehicle dismantler or scrap
processor who does not have a place of business in this state but
who conforms to the laws and regulations of the state in which he
has a place of business. Nothing contained herein shall be
construed as preventing the Town of Smithtown from applying for
replacement vehicle identification number plates.
E. Conversion and sale.
§ TC6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TC6-1
1:1011
§ TC6-2. Tow-away zones.
The locations described below are hereby designated as tow-away zones,
and when any vehicle is found unattended and unlawfully parked in such
a zone, said vehicle may be removed by the town or by the Suffolk County
Police Department or their respective designees:
§ TC6-3. Towing, impoundment and storage; fees, liability.
[Amended 5-7-1985 by L.L. No. 7-1985, 4-3-1990 by L.L. No. 6-1990;
5-12-1998 by L.L. No. 5-1998; 9-8-1998 by L.L. No. 7-1998;
5-15-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
Any vehicle which is towed away by the town pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be impounded and stored by the Town of Smithtown. To
redeem said vehicle, the owner or operator shall present proof of ownership
and pay the parking violation fee, if applicable; the impound fee of $250 for
all passenger cars, trucks, buses and all other motor vehicles; an additional
fee may be charged at $50 per hour for uprighting and winching; and a
storage fee of $10 per day or any part thereof in cash or certified check to
the Town Clerk in the Town Hall or to an authorized representative of the
Department of Public Safety between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.,
weekdays, excluding holidays. The town shall not be liable for any damages
claimed during impound, towing, storage or disposal of abandoned vehicles
or other vehicles towed, impounded or stored pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
Chapter TC7
(1) The Town of Smithtown may convert in any calendar year up to 1%
of its unclaimed, abandoned vehicles not affected by § TC6-1B of
this chapter or two such vehicles, whichever is greater, to its own
use.
(2) Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle less any
expenses incurred by the Town of Smithtown shall be held by the
town without interest for the benefit of the owner of such vehicle
for a period of one year. If not claimed within such one-year period,
such proceeds shall be paid into the general fund of the Town of
Smithtown.
F. No person shall cause any vehicle to be an abandoned vehicle. A
violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a fine not less than
$100 nor more than $500.
G. The last owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be liable to the Town of
Smithtown for the cost of removal and storage of such vehicle.
A. Any public parking field owned or leased by the Town of Smithtown.
B. All no-parking or restricted-parking areas on the streets and highways
in the town.
§ TC6-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § TC6-3
1:1012
OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
§ TC7-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OFF-ROAD VEHICLE (ORV) —
PRIVATE PROPERTY — All property located within the Town of Smithtown
which does not constitute public property.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — All streets, sidewalks, easements or other areas
dedicated or commonly used by the public, as well as all lands in which title
is vested in the Town of Smithtown, other political subdivision or agency or
public authority thereof located within the Town of Smithtown.
§ TC7-2. Operation restricted.
§ TC7-3. Presumption of lack of consent.
There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the operator of an off-road
vehicle on private or public property lacks consent to so operate the vehicle
if the operator cannot produce written consent from the property owner to
operate said vehicle on said private or public property.
§ TC7-4. Impoundment.
Any motor-driven off-road recreational vehicle capable of cross-country
travel or travel without benefit of a road or trail on or immediately
over land, snow, ice or marsh or swamp land or other natural terrain,
including but not limited to a multitrace or multiwheel drive or lowpressure-
tire vehicle, a motorcycle or related two- or three-wheel
vehicle, a motorbike or dirtbike and an amphibious machine, a groundeffect
air-cushion vehicle or other vehicle which derives motor power
from a source other than muscle or wind.
A.
"Off-road vehicle" shall not include a registered snowmobile, a farm
vehicle being used for farming purposes, a vehicle used for fire,
emergency, law enforcement and military purposes, a construction or
logging vehicle used in performance of its common function or a
registered aircraft.
B.
A. No person shall operate an off-road vehicle on any road, street, public
land, park or beach or, in the case of private property, on private
property unless the operator has the express written permission of the
property owner to operate the vehicle on the property prior to
commencing said activity.
B. No person shall operate a motor vehicle off of any road, street, highway
or other area commonly and normally used for motor vehicle traffic,
operation or use.
§ TC6-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TC7-4
1:1013
§ TC7-5. Enforcement. [Amended 9-7-1993 by L.L. No. 2-1993;
2-1-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by Park Rangers, Public
Safety Inspectors, Public Safety Investigators, the Director of Public Safety,
Bay Constables or any Suffolk County Police Officer.
§ TC7-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter of the Uniform Traffic Code of the Town of Smithtown
shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or
both. However, for the purposes of confirming jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers, such violations shall be deemed to be misdemeanors, and,
for such purposes only, all provisions of the law relating to misdemeanors
shall apply to such violations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person,
firm, association or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter of
the Town of Smithtown shall be subject to a fine in a sum not exceeding
$250 or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. In addition to such fine, the defendant shall
pay all costs and expenses incurred by the town in determining such
violation. The foregoing shall be in addition to all other remedies available
under the law to the Town Attorney or the Town Board.
Part II: the Schedules
Schedule A
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS
A. In addition to other provisions of the Uniform Traffic Code of the Town
of Smithtown, the state, county, local police, Department of Public
Safety or other authorized law enforcement agency who may enforce
the provisions herein may immediately impound any off-road vehicle
operated in violation of this chapter. Such impounded vehicle shall be
stored by the Department of Public Safety. [Amended 3-22-1994 by
L.L. No. 2-1994]
B. The owner of the off-road vehicle so impounded may redeem the same
upon satisfactory proof of ownership and payment of a redemption fee
of $250 for storage and impoundment. [Amended 5-15-2001 by L.L.
No. 3-2001]
C. No vehicle impounded under this chapter shall be released to the owner
or operator without the payment of such redemption fee and upon
demonstrating satisfactory proof of ownership.
§ TC7-4 SMITHTOWN CODE § A-1
1:1014
§ A-1. Traffic control signals. [Amended 11-2-1984; 8-13-1985;
10-28-1986]
In accordance with the provisions of § TC2-1, traffic control signals shall
be installed, operated and maintained at the following intersections and
locations as indicated.
Location
Description of
Signal
Adams Avenue at Commerce Drive (HPG) [Added
10-23-1990]
Traffic control
signal
Adams Avenue at Oser Avenue (HPG) Traffic control
signal
Adams Avenue at Wireless Boulevard (HPG) [Added
9-29-1998]
Traffic control
signal
Brooksite Drive at New Mill Road and Edgewater
Avenue (SMT)
Traffic control
signal
Commack Road (CR 4) at Crooked Hill Road
Extension (CR 13) (COM) [Added 5-23-2006]
Traffic control
signal
Crooked Hill Road (CR13) at Henry Street (COM)
[Added 5-21-1996]
Traffic control
signal
Crooked Hill Road (CR13) at P.J. Venture II Shopping
Center main access (between Henry Street and
Commack Road (CR4) (COM) [Added 5-9-2006]
Traffic control
signal
East Northport Road at First Avenue (CR11) (KPK)
[Added 7-22-2003]
Traffic control
signal
East Northport Road (CR11) at Old Commack Road
(KPK) [Added 4-5-1988]
Traffic control
signal
Edgewood Avenue at Glenrich Drive/Glenrich Drive
South (SMT) [Added 1-25-1994]
Traffic control
signal
Edgewood Avenue at Landing Avenue (SMT) Traffic control
signal
Edgewood Avenue at Nesequake Junior High School
entrance (SMT)
Traffic control
signal
Edgewood Avenue at River Road (SMT) Traffic control
signal
Harned Road (CR14) at Cutchogue Lane/Sunken
Meadow Parkway Exit SMT [Added 10-22-1991]
Traffic control
signal
Indian Head Road (CR14) at vicinity of Christ the
King School (COM) [Added 12-11-1990]
Flashing beacons
Indian Head Road (CRl4) at Commack Library (COM) Traffic control
signal
Indian Head Road (CR14) at vicinity of curve by
Cortez Lane (KPK) [Added 12-11-1990]
Flashing beacons
§ A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A-1
1:1015
Location
Description of
Signal
Indian Head Road (CR14) at Ellen Place (KPK) Traffic control
signal
Indian Head Road (CR14) at Kings Park Road/Reydon
Way (COM) [Added 10-6-1987]
Traffic control
signal
Indian Head Road (CR14) at Meadow Road (KPK) Traffic control
signal
Indian Head Road [Added 1-27-2004; repealed
3-21-2006]
Indian Head Road [Added 8-5-2003; repealed
3-21-2006]
Indian Head Road (CR14) at Old Indian Head Road
and Manitou Trail (Entrance to Country Pointe) (KPK)
[Added 3-21-2006]
Traffic control
signal
Indian Head Road (CR14) at Old Northport Road
(KPK)
Traffic control
signal
Indian Head Road (CR14) at Sommers Lane (COM) Traffic control
signal
Indian Head Road (CR14) at Tara Lane (COM)
[Added 2-24-1987]
Traffic control
signal
Indian Head Road (CR14) at Timber Ridge Drive/
Roxbury Drive (COM) [Added 4-11-1995]
Traffic control
signal
Jefferson Avenue at Roseville Avenue (STJ) Flashing signal
Kings Park Road at Wichard Boulevard (COM) Traffic control
signal
Lake Avenue at Moriches Road (STJ) [Added
1-28-1997]
Traffic control
signal
Lake Avenue at Woodlawn Avenue (STJ) Traffic control
signal
Lake Avenue South at Gibbs Pond Road (NES) Fire signal
Lake Avenue South at Nesconset Fire Department
(NES)
Fire signal
Landing Avenue at approach to curve in vicinity of
southern intersection with Oakside Drive (SMT)
[Added 4-11-1995]
Flashing signal
Landing Avenue at Smithtown Landing Country Club
(SMT) [Amended 2-9-1988]
Traffic control
signal
Lawrence Avenue at Maple Avenue (SMT) [Added
1-9-2001]
Traffic control
signal
Ledgewood Drive at Hauppauge Fire Department
(SMT)
Fire signal
§ A-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § A-1
1:1016
Location
Description of
Signal
Marcus Boulevard and Oser Avenue (HPG) Traffic control
signal
Meadow Road at Lawrence Road (KPK) [Repealed
10-23-1990]
Meadow Road at Lawrence Road (KPK) [Added
10-23-1990]
Traffic control
signal
Meadow Road at Old Northport Road (SMT) Flashing signal
Meadow Road at Ridge Road (SMT) Traffic control
signal
Middle Country Road (SR25) at the Senior Citizen
Center (SMT)
Traffic control
signal
Moreland Road at Commerce Drive and Austin
Boulevard (HPG) [Added 10-25-1994]
Traffic control
signal
Moreland Road at Wireless Boulevard (HPG) [Added
8-14-2018]
Traffic control
signal
Moriches Road at Fairfield Drive (STJ) Traffic control
signal
Moriches Road at Woodlawn Avenue (STJ) Traffic control
signal
Mount Pleasant Road at Cross Street and Dale Lane
(SMT)
Traffic control
signal
New Highway at Adams Avenue/Pine Hollow Road
(HPG) [Added 10-6-1987]
Traffic control
signal
New Highway at Cardinal Lane/Robin Drive (HPG)
[Added 10-6-1987]
Traffic control
signal
New Highway at Gannet Drive - Hoyt Farm Park
(COM)
Traffic control
signal
New Highway at Harned Road (COM) Traffic control
signal
New Highway at Marcus Boulevard (HPG) [Added
10-6-1987]
Traffic control
signal
New Highway at Parkway Drive North (COM) [Added
10-6-1987]
Traffic control
signal
New Highway at Wicks Path (COM) Traffic control
signal
Nichols Road at Browns Road and Alexander Avenue
(NES)
Traffic control
signal
Nichols Road at Gibbs Pond Road (NES) Traffic control
signal
§ A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A-1
1:1017
Location
Description of
Signal
Old Dock Road at Church Street (KPK) Traffic control
signal
Old Northport Road at Cell 6 Landfill (COM) [Added
10-23-1990]
Traffic control
signal
Old Northport Road at Old Commack Road (COM)
[Added 12-5-1995]
Traffic control
signal
Old Northport Road at Plymouth Boulevard/Lawrence
Road (SMT) [Added 1-9-2001]
Traffic control
signal
Old Willets Path at Engineers Road (HPG) Traffic control
signal
Old Willets Path at Erin Way (The Lakes at Honey
Hollow) (HPG) [Added 4-11-1989]
Traffic control
signal
Old Willets Path at Grandview Lane (SMT) Traffic control
signal
Old Willets Path at North Drive (SMT) Traffic control
signal
Old Willets Path at Oser Avenue (HPG) Traffic control
signal
Old Willets Path at Rabro Drive (CR76) (HPG) Traffic control
signal
Old Willets Path at Woodland Lane (SMT) Traffic control
signal
Plaisted Avenue at Smithtown Fire Department (SMT) Fire signal
Plymouth Boulevard at Smithtown Fire Department
(SMT)
Fire signal
Pulaski Road (CR11) at Bread and Cheese Hollow
Road (KPK)
Traffic control
signal
St. Johnland Road at Juniper Road and Landing Road
(KPK)
Traffic control
signal
St. Johnland Road at Old Dock Road (KPK) Traffic control
signal
St. Johnland Road at Squire Lane (KPK) Traffic control
signal
Scholar Lane at Hayrick Lane (COM) Traffic control
signal
Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) at Lake Avenue South
(NES)
Traffic control
signal
Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) at Nichols Road (NES) Traffic control
signal
§ A-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § A-1
1:1018
Location
Description of
Signal
Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) at Rosevale Avenue
(NES) [Repealed 12-1-2009]
Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) at Rosevale Avenue
(CR93) at Gibbs Pond Road (NES) [Added
12-1-2009]
Traffic control
signal
Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) at School House Road
(NES)
Traffic control
signal
Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) at Southern Boulevard
(NES)
Traffic control
signal
Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) at Terry Road (NES)
[Repealed 2-7-1995]
Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) at Terry Road/Annetta
Avenue (NESC) [Added 2-7-1995]
Traffic control
signal
Southern Boulevard at Great Hollow Intermediate
School driveway (NES) [Added 8-31-1999]
Traffic control
signal
Sunken Meadow Road at Fort Salonga School (KPK) Flashing signal
Terry Road (CR16, Smithtown Boulevard) at Town
Commons Road (SMT) [Added 11-10-1998]
Traffic control
signal
Town Line Road at Burr Road (COM) Traffic control
signal
Town Line Road at Cedar Road (COM) [Added
2-23-1993]
Traffic control
signal
Town Line Road at Havemeyer Lane (COM) Traffic control
signal
Town Line Road (CR76) at Lincoln Boulevard (HPG)
[Added 10-23-1990]
Traffic control
signal
Town Line Road (CR76) at Mt. Pleasant Road and
Blydenburgh Road (SMT)
Traffic control
signal
Town Line Road (CR76) at Nichols Road (NES) Traffic control
signal
Town Line Road (CR76) at North Hoffman Lane (SMT) Traffic control
signal
Town Line Road at North Ridge School (COM) Traffic control
signal
Town Line Road at Scholar Lane (COM) Traffic control
signal
Town Line Road (CR76) at Southern Boulevard (NES)
[Added 10-6-1987]
Traffic control
signal
Town Line Road (CR76) at Terry Road (NES) Traffic control
signal
§ A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A-1
1:1019
Location
Description of
Signal
Vanderbilt Motor Parkway (CR67) at Harned Road
(COM)
Traffic control
signal
Vanderbilt Motor Parkway (CR67) at Shinbone Lane
(COM) [Added 12-1-2009]
Traffic control
signal
Vanderbilt Motor Parkway (CR67) at Waldbaum's
Shopping Center Driveway (south side of CR67)
opposite and including the Bonwit Shopping Center
Driveway (north side of CR67) 600 feet east of
Commack Road (CR4) (COM) [Added 2-22-2007]
Traffic control
signal
Woodlawn Avenue at Jefferson Avenue (STJ) Fire signal
Woodlawn Avenue at Northern Boulevard (STJ)
[Added 11-23-1993]
Traffic control
signal
Schedule B
TURNS ON RED SIGNALS
§ B-1. Turns on red signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC2-2, vehicular traffic facing a
steady red signal at the intersections or locations described below is
prohibited to turn right on red as indicated.
Location Controlling Traffic
Cardinal Lane at New Highway
(HPG) [Added 5-24-1988]
North on Cardinal Lane
Cedar Road at Townline Road (COM)
[Added 9-12-2006]
East on Cedar Road
Commack Road (CR4) at Daly Road
and plant driveway (COM)
West on plant driveway
Commack Road (CR4) at New
Highway (COM)
North on Commack Road (CR4)
Commack Road (CR4) at Vanderbilt
Motor Parkway (CR67) (COM)
North on Commack Road (CR4);
west on Vanderbilt Motor Parkway
(CR67)
Commerce Drive at Adams Avenue
(HPG) [Added 2-9-1999]
East on Commerce Drive, Monday
through Friday 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Edgewood Avenue at Landing
Avenue (SMT) [Repealed
8-28-1990]
Edgewood Avenue at Landing
Avenue (SMT) [Added 8-28-1990]
North/South on Landing Avenue;
east/west on Edgewood Avenue
§ A-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § B-1
1:1020
Location Controlling Traffic
Edgewood Avenue at Nesequake
Junior High School (SMT)
South on school driveway
Edgewood Avenue at River Road
(SMT)
North/South on River Road
Erin Way at Old Willets path (HPG)
[Added 5-2-1989]
East on Erin Way
Harned Road at New Highway
(COM)
East on New Highway; north/south
on Harned Road
Hayrick Lane at Scholar Lane
(COM) [Added 2-5-1991;
amended 10-8-1996]
North/South on Hayrick Lane
Indian Head Road (CR14) at Ellen
Place (KPK)
East on Ellen Place
Indian Head Road (CR14) at
Meadow Road (KPK)
East/West on Meadow Road
Kings Park Road at Wichard
Boulevard (COM)
West on Wichard Boulevard
Lake Avenue at Woodlawn Avenue
(STJ) [Repealed 8-27-1991]
Lawrence Avenue at Maple Avenue
(SMT) [Added 1-9-2001]
West on Lawrence Avenue
Lawrence Road at Meadow Road
(KPK) [Added 2-5-1991]
South on Lawrence Road
Mt. Pleasant Road at Cross Street
and Dale Lane (SMT) [Amended
7-14-1992]
North/South on Mt. Pleasant Road;
west on Dale Lane
Mt. Pleasant Road at Town Line
Road (HPG) [Added 9-12-1989;
repealed 2-25-2003]
New Highway at Commack Road
(COM) [Added 5-27-1997]
West on New Highway
New Highway at Wicks Path (COM) South on Wicks Path
Nichols Road at Browns Road and
Alexander Avenue (NES)
North/South on Nichols Road; east/
west on Browns Road; south on
Alexander Avenue
Nichols Road at Gibbs Pond Road
(NES)
North/South on Nichols Road; east/
west on Gibbs Pond Road
Old Dock Road at Church Street
(KPK)
North/South on Church Street; east/
west on Old Dock Road
Old Willets Path at Grandview Lane
(SMT) [Added 10-28-1986]
East on Grandview Lane
§ B-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § B-1
1:1021
Location Controlling Traffic
Old Willets Path at Oser Avenue
(HPG) [Added 5-10-2011]
South on Old Willets Path
Old Willets Path at Woodland Lane
(SMT) [Added 10-28-1986]
East on Woodland Lane
Oser Avenue at Adams Avenue
(HPG) [Added 7-28-1992;
repealed 11-10-1998]
Pulaski Road (CR11) at Bread and
Cheese Hollow Road (KPK)
North/South on Bread and Cheese
Hollow Road
Reydon Way at Indian Head Road
(CR14) (KPK) [Added 5-23-1989]
East on Reydon Way
Robin Drive at New Highway (HPG)
[Added 5-23-1989]
South on Robin Drive
Rosevale Avenue (CR93) at
Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) (NES)
[Repealed 4-21-1992]
Rosevale Avenue (CR 93) at
Smithtown Boulevard (CR 16) (NES)
[Added 2-25-2003]
North on Rosevale Avenue (CR 93)
St. Johnland Road at Landing Road
(KPK) [Added 8-9-2016]
North on St. Johnland Road
St. Johnland Road at Squire Lane
(KPK)
North on Squire Lane
Scholar Lane at Hayrick Lane and
Circle Hill School driveway (COM)
[Repealed 2-5-1991]
Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) at
Lake Avenue South (NES)
North on Lake Avenue South
Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) at
School House Road (NES)
[Repealed 2-26-1991]
Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) at
Terry Road/Annetta Avenue (NESC)
[Added 5-23-1995]
East (south) on Smithtown
Boulevard (CR16)
Smithtown Landing Country Club
Roadway at Landing Avenue (SMT)
[Added 5-10-1988]
West on Smithtown Landing Country
Club Roadway
Town Line Road (CR76) at Nichols
Road (NES)
East/West on Town Line Road
(CR76)
Town Line Road (CR76) at North
Hoffman Lane (HPG)
North/South on North Hoffman Lane
§ B-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § B-1
1:1022
Location Controlling Traffic
Town Line Road (CR76) at Pleasant
Road (HPG) [Added 5-25-1993;
repealed 2-25-2003]
Town Line Road at Scholar Lane
(COM)
North on Town Line Road; west on
Scholar Lane
Town Line Road at Southern
Boulevard (NES) [Added
10-6-1987]
South on Southern Boulevard
Town Line Road (CR76) at Southern
Boulevard (NES) [Added
6-20-1996]
West on Town Line Road
Woodlawn Avenue at Moriches Road
(STJ) [Added 3-22-1988]
East on Woodlawn Avenue
Schedule C
PROHIBITED TURNS
§ C-1. Prohibited turns. [Amended 9-6-1983 by L.L. No. 4-1983]
In accordance with the provisions of § TC2-3, the turning of vehicles is
hereby prohibited at the intersections and locations described below during
the hours indicated.
Location Controlling Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours/Days
Adams Avenue exit from
Adams Commerce Plaza
(HPG) [Added
1-13-1998]
East on driveway Left All
Alexander Avenue 150
feet south of Middle
Country Road (SR25)
(NES) [Added
5-8-2018]
West on driveway Left All
Browns Road at
Hawthorne Avenue
[Added 5-4-1993]
North and south on
Browns Road (NES)
Right/Left All
Commack Road end of
concrete channelization
island 145 feet south of
Crooked Hill Road (CMK)
[Added 9-26-2006]
Southbound U-turn left All
§ B-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § C-1
1:1023
Location Controlling Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours/Days
Commack Road at
Crooked Hill Road
(COM) [Added
1-22-2015]
South on Commack
Road
U-turn All
Commack Road at
Crooked Hill Road
(COM) [Added
1-22-2015]
North on Commack
Road
U-turn/Left All
Edgewood Avenue at
Teapot Lane (SMT)
[Added 11-19-2002]
West on Edgewood
Avenue
Right All
Fairview Avenue at
commuter parking field
(SMT)
West at the southerly
driveway of the
commuter parking
field
Left All
Franklin Drive 175 feet
north of Middle Country
Road (Rt. 25) (SMT)
[Added 5-23-2006]
West on driveway Right All
Gibbs Pond Road (NES)
[Added 6-18-2015]
North on Gibbs Pond
Road north of
Smithtown Boulevard
into 7-11 store
Left All
Hampton Street at Old
Willets Path (HPG)
[Added 9-2-1986]
West on Hampton
Street
Left All
Indian Head Road
(CR14) at Ashlon Lane
(COM) [Added
12-4-1990]
Southbound Left All
Indian Head Road
(CR14) at Christ the King
exit/Tara Lane (COM)
[Added 8-22-2006]
North on Indian
Head Road
Left All
Indian Head Road
(CR14) at Christ the King
exit/Tara Lane (CMK)
[Added 8-22-2006]
South on Indian Head
Road
Right All
Jefferson Avenue 160
feet north of Middle
Country Road (Rt. 25)
(STJ) [Added
5-23-2006]
East on driveway Left All
§ C-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § C-1
1:1024
Location Controlling Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours/Days
Jefferson Avenue 430
feet north of Middle
Country Road (Rt. 25)
(SMT) [Added
5-23-2006]
East on driveway Left All
Lake Avenue at St. James
Post Office exit (STJ)
[Added 11-10-1992]
West at the northern
driveway of the Post
Office parking field
Left All
Lawrence Road at Lordly
Court (KPK) [Added
4-11-2000]
South on Lawrence
Road
U-turn All
Lawrence Road
southbound right turn
channelization to
westbound Old
Northport Road (KPK)
[Added 7-25-1995]
South on Lawrence
Road
Left All
Moreland Road at
Parkway Drive South
(HPG) [Added
6-4-1985]
North on Moreland
Road
Left All
Old Northport Road at
Indian Head Road (COM)
[Added 7-10-1984;
repealed 12-27-1984]
Oser Avenue at Parkway
Drive South (HPG)
[Repealed 6-4-1985]
Parkway Drive South,
northbound right-turn
channelization to
eastbound New Highway
(HPG) [Added
6-26-1990]
North on Parkway
Drive South
Left All
Rosevale Avenue (CR93)
at Mon Repos Lane
(NES) [Added
4-21-1992; repealed
12-14-1999]
§ C-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § C-1
1:1025
Location Controlling Traffic
Prohibited
Turn Hours/Days
Terry Road (CR16,
Smithtown Boulevard) at
Town Commons Road
and parking lot entrance/
exit (currently Maureen's
Kitchen) [Added
11-10-1998]
North on Terry Road Left All
Terry Road (CR16,
Smithtown Boulevard) at
parking area entrance/
exit (Maureen's Kitchen/
CVS) opposite Larsen
Avenue (SMT) [Added
5-10-2005]
West exiting parking
lot
Left All
Vanderbilt Motor
Parkway (CR67) at the
shopping complex on the
south side just east of
Commack Road (CR4)
(COM)
East/West on
Vanderbilt Motor
Parkway (CR67) at
the easterly driveway
of the shopping
complex
Right/Left All
Vanderbilt Motor
Parkway (CR67) at the
shopping complex on the
south side just east of
Commack Road (CR4)
(COM)
North at easterly
driveway of the
shopping complex
Left All
Schedule D
ONE-WAY STREETS
§ D-1. One-way streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC2-4, the following described
streets or parts of streets are designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated.
Name of Street Direction Hours Limits
Annette Avenue (NES)
[Added 4-20-1993]
West All From Smithtown Boulevard
(CR 16) to William Street
Bank Avenue (SMT) North All From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) to Manor Road
Carow Place (STJ) South All From North Country Road
(SR25A) to Clinton Avenue
§ C-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § D-1
1:1026
Name of Street Direction Hours Limits
Christ the King exit,
opposite Tara Lane
(CMK) [Added
8-22-2006]
East All From Auditorium to Indian
Head Road (CR14)
Elliott Place (SMT) North All From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) to Fairview
Avenue
Henry Street (KPK) North All From Main Street (SR25,
25A) to Park Avenue
Jeremy Circle (NES)
[Added 3-2-1993]
North All From Patricia Lane
counterclockwise back to
Patricia Lane
Lawrence Road
southbound right turn
channelization to
westbound Old
Northport Road (KPK)
[Added 7-25-1995]
South All From North end of traffic
island to Old Northport
Road
Parkway Drive North
(HPG) [Added
11-22-1988; amended
2-7-1989]
West All From New Highway to 110
feet east of Fisher Road
Parkway Drive South
(HPG) [Amended
6-4-1985]
East All From Bambi Lane to
Moreland Road
Remsen Street (STJ) North All From Clinton Avenue to
North Country Road
(SR25A)
Second Street (STJ) [Repealed 12-23-1986]
Second Street (STJ)
[Added 1-24-1989]
East All From New Lake Avenue to
First Avenue
Smithtown Railroad
Station Parking Field
(SMT)
North/
East
All From Main Street (SR25,
25A) to Scott Lane
Upper Old Dock Road (KPK) [Repealed 6-21-1994]
Upper Old Dock Road
(KPK) [Added
6-21-1994]
East/
North
All From 500 feet south and
west of Old Dock Road
(northern intersection) east
and north for 500 feet
Schedule E
PARKING AREA EXITS AND ENTRANCES
§ D-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § E-1
1:1027
§ E-1. Parking area exits and entrances.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC2-5, the driveways described
below, between highways and off-street parking areas in the town, shall be
used for exit or entrance only as indicated below.
Driveway on Side Use Location
Bellemeade Avenue
(SMT) [Added
10-7-1986]
West Entrance At the northernmost
driveway of the municipal
parking area
Bellemeade Avenue
(SMT) [Added
10-7-1986]
West Exit At the southernmost
driveway of the municipal
parking area
Edgewood Avenue
(SMT)
North Entrance At a point 300 feet east of
River Road
Gibbs Pond Road
(NES) [Added
3-12-1985]
West Entrance At the northernmost
driveway of Gibbs Pond
Park
Gibbs Pond Road
(NES) [Added
3-12-1985]
West Exit At the southernmost
driveway of Gibbs Pond
Park
Hauppauge Road
(SR111) (SMT)
[Added 8-12-1986]
West Entrance At the northernmost
driveway of Ronald Shule,
Esq.
Hauppauge Road
(SR111) (SMT)
[Added 8-12-1986]
West Exit At the southernmost
driveway of Ronald Shule,
Esq.
Lake Avenue (STJ)
[Added 10-20-1992]
East Entrance At the southernmost
driveway of the St. James
Post Office parking area
Lake Avenue (STJ)
[Added 10-20-1992]
East Exit At the northernmost
driveway of the St. James
Post Office parking area
Lake Avenue (STJ)
[Added 7-28-1987]
West Entrance At the northernmost
driveway of King Kullen
Shopping Center
Lake Avenue (STJ)
[Added 7-28-1987]
West Exit At the southernmost
driveway of King Kullen
Shopping Center
Lawrence Avenue
(SMT)
East Exit At a point 30 feet south of
Jericho Turnpike
Middle Country Road
(SR25) (SMT)
South Entrance At the northernmost gate of
the Animal Shelter's
parking area
§ E-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § E-1
1:1028
Driveway on Side Use Location
Middle Country Road
(SR25) (SMT)
South Entrance At the westerly curb cut of
the Senior Citizen Center
Middle Country Road
(SR25) (SMT)
South Exit At the southernmost gate of
the Animal Shelter's
parking area
Moriches Road (STJ)
[Added 9-7-1993]
East Entrance At the southernmost
driveway of Veterans
Memorial Park
Moriches Road (STJ)
[Added 9-7-1993]
East Exit At the northernmost
driveway of Veterans
Memorial Park
North Country Road
(SR25A) (SMT)
Southeast Entrance At the southernmost
driveway of the Smithtown
Library
North Country Road
(SR25A) (SMT)
Southeast Exit At the northernmost
driveway at the Smithtown
Library
Old Dock Road (KPK) West Entrance At the northernmost gate of
the Kings Park Bluff
parking area
Old Dock Road (KPK) West Exit At the southernmost gate of
the Kings Park Bluff
parking area
River Road (SMT) East Exit At a point 250 feet north of
Edgewood Avenue
Rosalia Court (SMT) Terminus Exit At the terminus
Vanderbilt Motor
Parkway (CR67)
(COM) [Added
3-27-1984]
South Exit At the easterly driveway of
the Vanderbilt Shopping
Complex
Schedule F
LANE USE DESIGNATIONS
§ F-1. Lane use designations. [Added 9-6-1983 by L.L. No. 4-1983]
In accordance with § TC2-6, lanes are hereby designated upon the following
streets or parts thereof, to be used exclusively as indicated (left turn, right
turn or through traffic only) below.
§ E-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § F-1
1:1029
Street
Controlling
Traffic Restriction
Hours/
Days
Brooksite Drive at
Jericho Turnpike (SR25)
(SMT)
North on
Brooksite Drive
Left lane must
turn left
All
Commack Road (CR4) at
Vanderbilt Motor
Parkway (CR67) (COM)
North on
Commack Road
(CR4)
Right lane must
turn right
All
Edgewood Avenue at
Jericho Turnpike (SR25)
(SMT)
South on
Edgewood
Avenue
Right lane must
turn right
All
Edgewood Avenue at
Landing Avenue (SMT)
North on
Landing
Avenue
Right lane must
turn right
All
Edgewood Avenue at
Landing Avenue
[Amended 11-10-1998;
8-12-2008]
West on
Edgewood
Avenue
Right lane must
turn right
All
Harned Road at Jericho
Turnpike (SR25) (COM)
North on
Harned Road
Right lane must
turn right
All
Lake Avenue at Jericho
Turnpike (SR25) (STJ)
South/North on
Lake Avenue
Left lane must
turn left
All
Lawrence Park at
Meadow Road (KPK)
[Added 2-5-1991]
South on
Lawrence Road
Right lane must
turn right
All
Moriches Road at
Woodlawn Avenue (STJ)
North on
Moriches Road
Left lane must
turn left
All
Mt. Pleasant Road at
Nesconset Highway
(SR347)
North/South on
Mt. Pleasant
Road
Left lane must
turn left
All
New Highway at
Veterans Memorial
Highway (SR454) (HPG)
North on New
Highway
Right lane must
turn right
All
Old Northport Road at
Indian Head Road
(CR14) (COM) [Added
12-27-1984]
East on Old
Northport Road
Left lane must
turn left
All
Old Northport Road at
Indian Head Road
(CR14) (COM)
West on Old
Northport Road
Left lane must
turn left
All
Old Willets Path at
Engineers Road (HPG)
North on Old
Willets Path
Left lane must
turn left
All
Old Willets Path at
Engineers Road (HPG)
South on Old
Willets Path
Right lane must
turn right
All
§ F-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § F-1
1:1030
Street
Controlling
Traffic Restriction
Hours/
Days
Old Willets Path at
Jericho Turnpike (SR25)
(SMT)
North on Old
Willets Path
Right lane must
turn right
All
Old Willets Path at Oser
Avenue (HPG)
North on Old
Willets Path
Left lane must
turn left
All
Old Willets Path at Oser
Avenue (HPG)
South on Old
Willets Path
Right lane must
turn right
All
Oser Avenue (HPG)
[Added 5-10-2011]
East on Oser
Avenue
Right lane must
turn right
All
Parkway Drive South at
New Highway (HPG)
[Added 6-26-1990]
North on
Parkway Drive
South
Right lane must
turn right
All
Parkway Drive South at
New Highway (HPG)
[Added 6-26-1990]
North on
Parkway Drive
South
Left lane must
turn left
All
Schedule G
STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS
§ G-1. Stop and yield intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC2-7, the following described
intersections are designated as stop or yield intersections, as indicated.
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Abbey Drive at Dewey Road
(COM) [Added 9-9-2014]
Stop North on Abbey Drive
Abbey Drive at Fisher Road
(COM) [Added 8-28-1984]
Stop East on Abbey Drive
Abbot Road at Plymouth
Boulevard (COM)
Stop East on Abbot Road
Acacia Road at Landing Road
(KPK)
Stop South on Acacia Road
Acacia Road at Longfellow Drive
(KPK) [Added 10-7-1986]
Stop East/West on Acacia Road
Adams Avenue at Oser Avenue
(HPG) [Repealed 3-12-1985]
Addie Lane at Lake Avenue South
(NES)
Stop West on Addie Lane
Adrienne Lane at Mt. Pleasant
Road (HPG)
Stop East on Adrienne Lane
§ F-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1031
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Adrienne Lane at Sandra Drive
(SMT) [Added 11-29-2007]
Stop East/West on Adrienne
Lane
Adrienne Lane at South Plaisted
Avenue (HPG)
Stop West on Adrienne Lane
Aesop Lane at Hillside Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East on Aesop Lane
Aesop Lane at Hillside Avenue
(STJ) [Added 8-25-1987;
repealed 7-14-1992]
Agren Lane at Eklund Boulevard
(NES)
Stop North on Agren Lane
Agren Lane at Empress Pines
Drive (NES) [Added 9-18-1990]
Stop South on Agren Lane
Albatross Lane at Brooksite Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Albatross Lane
Alberta Court at Mt. Pleasant
Road (SMT)
Stop East on Alberta Court
Alden Court at Fairfield Drive
(STJ) [Added 5-24-1988]
Stop West on Alden Court
Alder Drive at Rosewood Drive
(KPK)
Stop South on Alder Drive
Alexander Avenue at Dover Hill
Drive North (NES)
Stop North/South on Alexander
Avenue
Alexander Avenue at Dover Hill
Drive South (NES)
Stop North/South on Alexander
Avenue
Alexander Avenue at Yardley Lane
(NES) [Added 7-12-1988]
Stop North/South on Alexander
Avenue
Alfred Land at Melody Lane (KPK)
[Added 6-27-2000]
Stop North on Alfred Lane
Alfred Lane at Old Northport
Road (SMT)
Stop South on Alfred Lane
Algonquin Lane at Sioux Drive
(COM) [Added 10-24-2006]
Stop South on Algonquin Lane
Alice Lane at Andrea Lane (SMT)
[Added 5-26-1998]
Stop North/South on Alice
Lane
Allegany Place at Delaware
Avenue (COM)
Stop West on Allegany Place
Allegany Place at New Highway
(COM)
Stop North on Allegany Place
Alo Court at Jefferson Avenue
(STJ) [Added 9-5-2000]
Stop East on Alo Court
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1032
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Amapola Lane at Primrose Lane
(KPK)
Stop South on Amapola Lane
Amherst Lane at Cornell Drive
(SMT) [Added 5-3-1988]
Stop South on Amherst Lane
Amherst Lane at Foothill Lane
(SMT) [Added 7-25-2000]
Stop North/South on Amherst
Lane
Andam Way at Bayberry Drive
(STJ)
Stop East on Andam Way
Andam Way at Moriches Road
(STJ)
Stop West on Andam Way
Andrea Lane at Alice Lane (SMT)
[Added 2-10-1998]
Stop West on Andrea Lane
Andrea Lane at Old Willets Path
(PNS)
Stop East on Andrea Lane
Angela Court at Lake Avenue
(STJ) [Added 10-26-1999]
Stop East on Angela Court
Angelica Court at Mount Pleasant
Road (HPG) [Added 6-26-2001]
Stop West on Angelica Court
Animal Shelter service road at the
Senior Citizen Center parking
field (SMT)
Yield East on the service road
Annandale Road at Eastwood
Place (COM) [Added
11-19-1991]
Stop East/West on Annandale
Road
Annandale Road at Timber Ridge
(COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop South on Annandale Road
Annemarie Drive at Jefferson
Avenue (STJ) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop West on Annemarie Drive
Annetta Avenue at Summit Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Annetta Avenue
Annetta Avenue at Summit Drive
(NES) [Added 7-14-1987;
repealed 7-14-1992]
Annette Avenue at George Street
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Annette
Avenue
Annette Avenue at Sheppard Lane
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Annette
Avenue
Apple Lane at Chestnut Court
(COM)
Stop North/South on Apple
Lane
Apple Lane at Crocus Lane (COM) Stop North/South on Apple
Lane
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1033
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Apple Lane at Crocus Lane (COM) Stop West on Apple Lane
Apple Lane at Map Lane (COM) Stop North/South on Apple
Lane
Apple Tree Drive at Saturn
Boulevard (HPG) [Added
1-9-2007]
Stop East on Apple Tree Drive
Applewood Road at Bayberry
Drive (STJ)
Stop East on Applewood Road
Applewood Road at Copper Beech
Road (STJ)
Stop North on Applewood Road
Arbutus Court at White Spruce
Circle (COM) [Added 3-12-1985]
Stop West on Arbutus Court
Arbutus Court at Wyandanch
Boulevard (COM)
Stop East on Arbutus Court
Arbutus Drive at Juniper Road
(KPK) [Added 9-19-1988]
Stop East on Arbutus Drive
Arden Lane at Montrose Drive
(COM)
Stop East on Arden Lane
Ardito Avenue at Wartburg Drive
(KPK) [Added 6-12-1990]
Stop South of Ardito Avenue
Argyle Place at Ledgewood Drive
(PNS)
Stop East/West on Argyle Place
Arkay Drive at Adams Avenue
(HPG)
Stop West on Arkay Drive
Arkay Drive at Marcus Boulevard
(HPG)
Stop East on Arkay Drive
Arlington Avenue at Roseville
Avenue (STJ)
Stop North on Arlington
Avenue
Arlington Avenue at Rutherford
Street (STJ)
Stop North/South on Arlington
Avenue
Armon Street at Browns Road
(NES)
Stop East on Armon Street
Armor Court at Boxwood Drive
(KPK)
Stop South on Armor Court
Armor Court at Knight Lane (KPK) Stop North on Armor Court
Aron Street at Hurtin Boulevard
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Aron Street
Arrowood Drive at Elderwood
Drive (southern intersection) (STJ)
[Added 6-27-2000]
Stop North/South on Arrowood
Drive
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1034
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Arrowood Drive at Elderwood
Drive North (STJ) [Added
7-24-1990]
Stop North on Arrowood Drive
Arrowood Drive at Mills Pond
Road (STJ) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop West on Arrowood Drive
Arthur Drive at Fifty Acre Road
South (SMT) [Added 9-11-1990]
Stop North on Arthur Drive
Asbury Drive at Plymouth
Boulevard (COM)
Stop East on Asbury Drive
Ashland Drive at Haig Place (KPK) Stop North/South on Ashland
Drive
Ashland Drive at Primrose Lane
(KPK)
Stop North/South on Ashland
Drive
Ashland Drive at Rumford Road
(KPK) [Added 8-31-1999]
Stop North on Ashland Drive
Ashleigh Drive at North Country
Road (STJ) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop South on Ashleigh Drive
Ashley Loop at Callahan's Road
(KPK) [Added 6-3-1997]
Stop South on Ashley Loop
Ashlon Lane at Balsam Lane
(COM)
Stop East/West on Ashlon Lane
Ashlon Lane at Bethany Lane
(COM)
Stop East on Ashlon Lane
Aspatuck Court at Long House
Way (COM) [Added 2-26-2002]
Stop East on Aspatuck Court
Aspen Circle at Moriches Road
(STJ) [Added 2-4-1997]
Stop South on Aspen Circle
Aspen Road at St. Johnland Road
(KPK) [Added 9-19-1988]
Stop North on Aspen Road
Aspen Road at Washington Drive
(KPK) [Added 9-19-1988;
amended 7-14-1992]
Stop North/South on Aspen
Road
Aspen Road at Woodland Drive
(KPK)
Stop North/South on Aspen
Road
Astor Avenue at Oak Street (STJ)
[Added 9-26-1986]
Stop North/South on Astor
Avenue
Astor Avenue at Woodlawn Avenue
(STJ)
Stop North on Astor Avenue
Astor Court at Verbena Drive
(COM)
Stop West on Astor Court
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1035
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Astor Court at Wyandanch
Boulevard (COM)
Stop East on Astor Court
Atterbury Drive at Landing
Avenue (SMT)
Stop East on Atterbury Drive
Atterbury Drive at Prospect Street
(SMT)
Stop South on Atterbury Drive
Atterbury Drive at Strongs Court
(SMT) [Added 11-22-2005]
Stop North/South on Atterbury
Drive
Audubon Street at Carl Court
(NES) [Added 5-16-2000]
Stop North on Audobon Street
Audubon Street at Eklund
Boulevard (NES)
Stop North/South on Audobon
Street
August Crescent at Fisher Road
(north intersection) (COM)
[Added 9-18-1990]
Stop West on August Crescent
August Crescent at Fisher Road
(south intersection) (COM)
[Added 9-18-1990]
Stop West on August Crescent
Austin Boulevard at Moreland
Road (COM) [Repealed
10-25-1994]
Autumn Court at Autumn Drive
(HPG)
Stop South on Autumn Court
Autumn Drive at Butterfly Drive
(HPG) [Added 8-11-1992]
Stop East/West on Autumn
Drive
Autumn Drive at Sorrel Hill Lane
(HPG) [Added 8-11-1992]
Stop East/West on Autumn
Drive
Avenue A at Lou Avenue (KPK) Stop North/South on Avenue A
Avenue B at Lou Avenue (KPK) Stop North/South on Avenue B
Averly Place at Grassy Pond Drive
(SMT) [Added 6-9-1992]
Stop East on Averly Place
Averly Place at Ledgewood Drive
(PNS)
Stop East/West on Averly Place
Azealia Court at Walter Court
(COM)
Stop East on Azealia Court
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Balboa Drive at Ellen Place (KPK) Stop South on Balboa Drive
Balboa Drive at First Avenue
(KPK)
Stop West on Balboa Drive
Balis Drive at Cedar Road (KPK) Stop East on Balis Drive
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1036
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Balis Drive at Forest Road (KPK)
[Added 9-19-1988]
Stop West on Balis Drive
Balsam Lane at Ashlon Lane
(COM)
Stop North on Balsam Lane
Balsam Lane at Cottonwood Drive
(COM) [Added 8-14-1984]
Stop South on Balsam Lane
Balsam Lane at Somerset Drive
(COM)
Stop North/South on Balsam
Lane
Bambi Lane at Florida Avenue
(COM) [Added 7-12-1994]
Stop South on Bambi Lane
Bambi Lane at Parkway Drive
South (COM)
Stop North on Bambi Lane
Bank Avenue at Manor Road
(SMT)
Stop North/South on Bank
Avenue
Bank Avenue at Redwood Lane
(SMT)
Stop North on Bank Avenue
Barbera Road at Chardonnay
Road (COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop North on Barbera Road
Barbera Road at Eastwood Place
(COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop West on Barbera Road
Barett Court at Leonard Street
(NES)
Stop South on Barett Court
Barley Place at Hayrick Lane
(COM)
Stop East on Barley Place
Barley Place at Town Line Road
(COM)
Stop West on Barley Place
Barry Lane at Foothill Lane
[Added 1-21-2016]
Stop South on Barry Lane
Barton Lane at Sherbrook Drive
(SMT)
Stop West on Barton Lane
Bauss Road at Uncas Street (NEC)
[Added 2-6-1990]
Stop South on Bauss Road
Bayberry Drive at Copper Beech
Road (STJ)
Stop North on Bayberry Drive
Bayberry Drive at Mills Pond Road
(STJ)
Stop East on Bayberry Drive
Bayberry Lane at Laurel Drive
(PNS)
Stop West on Bayberry Lane
Bayberry Lane at Mobrey Lane
(PNS)
Stop South on Bayberry Lane
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1037
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Baylor Drive at Dartmouth Drive
(SMT)
Stop North on Baylor Drive
Baylor Drive at Howell Drive
(SMT) [Added 6-28-1988;
amended 7-14-1992]
Stop West on Baylor Drive
Bay Street at Columbus Avenue
(KPK) [Added 9-7-1993]
Stop South on Bay Street
Bay Street at Huntington Avenue
(KPK)
Stop North/South on Bay
Street
Bay Street at Lawrence Road
(KPK) [Added 8-12-1986]
Stop North on Bay Street
Beau Jol Court at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop West on Beau Jol Court
Beaver Drive at Rosewood Drive
(KPK)
Stop South on Beaver Drive
Beaver Drive at Sycamore Road
(KPK)
Stop North/South on Beaver
Drive
Beaver Drive at Tulip Drive (KPK) Stop North/South on Beaver
Drive
Becca Road at Springbriar Lane
(SMT) [Added 11-9-1989]
Stop South on Becca Road
Bee Drive at Hampton Street
(HPG) [Added 6-26-1990]
Stop South on Bee Drive
Bee Drive at Mackay Drive (HPG)
[Added 6-26-1990]
Stop North on Bee Drive
Beechwood Drive at Elder Drive
(COM)
Stop North on Beechwood
Drive
Belford Lane at Amsterdam Road
(SMT) [Added 5-12-1998]
Stop South on Belford Lane
Belford Lane at Parnell Drive
(COM)
Stop North on Belford Lane
Belinda Court at Rhoda Avenue
(NES)
Stop South on Belinda Court
Bella Court at Southern Boulevard
(NES)
Stop West on Bella Court
Bellemeade Avenue at
Blydenburgh Avenue (SMT)
Stop North on Bellemeade
Avenue
Bellemeade Avenue parking area
exit at Bellemeade Avenue (SMT)
[Added 8-24-1993]
Stop East at parking area exit
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1038
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Belmar Lane at Old Commack
Road (COM)
Stop West on Belmar Lane
Belmar Lane at Pimlico Drive
(COM) [Added 9-12-2006]
Stop East and west on Belmar
Lane
Belmar Lane at Roxbury Drive
(COM)
Stop East on Belmar Lane
Belmont Drive at Grassy Pond
Drive South (SMT) [Added
12-27-1984]
Stop East on Belmont Drive
Belmont Drive at Ledgewood
Drive (PNS)
Stop West on Belmont Drive
Bennett Street at Cedar Street
(KPK)
Stop West on Bennett Street
Bennett Street at Lou Avenue
(KPK)
Stop East on Bennett Street
Bentley Court at Fairfield Drive
(STJ) [Added 5-24-1988]
Stop West on Bentley Court
Berg Avenue at Avenue B (KPK)
[Added 9-11-1990]
Stop East/West on Berg Avenue
Bernard Street at Sunken
Meadow Road (KPK)
Stop North on Bernard Street
Berryhill Drive at Woodhollow
Lane (KPK) [Added 6-30-1998]
Stop East on Berryhill Drive
Bethal Lane at Carmel Drive
(COM) [Added 9-24-1996]
Stop East on Bethal Lane
Bethal Lane at Peppermint Road
(COM) [Added 9-24-1996]
Stop West on Bethal Lane
Bethany Drive at Kings Park Road
(COM)
Stop East on Bethany Drive
Bethany Drive at Somerset Drive
(COM) [Added 9-5-2000]
Stop South on Bethany Drive
Bette Lane at Elder Drive (COM)
[Added 9-25-2001]
Stop East on Bette Lane
Beverly Court at Beach Hill Drive
(KPK) [Added 9-10-2002]
Stop North on Beverly Road
Beverly Court at Soundview Drive
(KPK) [Added 9-24-2002]
Stop South on Beverly Court
Beverly Road at Fleetwood Road
(COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop North on Beverly Road
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1039
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Beverly Road at Wichard
Boulevard (SMT) [Added
8-25-1987]
Stop South on Beverly Road
Bezel Lane at Cedar Ridge Avenue
(HPG) [Added 9-25-2008]
Stop South on Bezel Lane
Bianco Court at Mt. Pleasant Road
(SMT)
Stop East on Bianco Court
Birch Road at Hawthorne Road
(KPK) [Added 9-19-1988]
Stop North on Birch Road
Birch Road at Hawthorne Road
(KPK)
Stop South on Birch Road
Birch Road at Juniper Road (KPK) Stop North/South on Birch
Road
Birch Road at Lincoln Drive (KPK)
[Added 7-24-1984]
Stop North/South on Birch
Road
Birch Road at St. Johnland Road
(KPK)
Stop North on Birch Road
Birch Road at Woodland Drive
(KPK) [Added 8-12-1986]
Stop North/South on Birch
Road
Black Gum Tree Lane at Hilden
Street (KPK) [Added 5-15-2001]
Stop West on Black Gum Tree
Lane
Blackman Street at Howell Drive
(SMT)
Stop West on Blackman Street
Blackman Street at Lindner Place
(SMT)
Stop East on Blackman Street
Bluegrass Lane at Hayrick Lane
(COM) [Added 5-2-1989]
Stop West on Bluegrass Lane
Blydenburgh Avenue at
Bellemeade Avenue (SMT)
[Added 5-12-1998]
Stop East/West on
Blydenburgh Avenue
Blydenburgh Avenue at Landing
Avenue (SMT)
Stop West on Blydenburgh
Avenue
Blydenburgh Avenue at
Nissequogue River Road (SMT)
Stop East on Blydenburgh
Avenue
Bobann Drive at Louis Place
(NES) [Added 10-26-1999]
Stop North/South on Bobann
Drive
Bobann Drive at Roy Drive (NES)
[Added 10-23-1984]
Stop West on Bobann Drive
Bobann Drive at Truval Lane
(NES)
Stop West on Bobann Drive
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1040
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Bonarck Lane at Cambon Place
(NES) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop East on Bonarck Lane
Bonny Court at Terry Road (NES)
[Added 2-21-1989]
Stop West on Bonny Court
Borrell Court at Hartsdale Street
(SMT) [Added 5-25-1993]
Stop South on Borrell Court
Boulevard at St. Johnland Road
(KPK) [Added 7-14-1998]
Stop West on Boulevard
Bow Drive at Mt. Pleasant Road
(SMT)
Stop West on Bow Drive
Bow Drive East at Steven Place
(HPG) [Added 3-22-1988]
Stop East on Bow Drive East
Bowers Court at Browns Road
(NES)
Stop East on Bowers Court
Bowers Lane at Maple Avenue
(SMT)
Stop, East on Bowers Lane
Bowers Lane at New York Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Bowers Lane
Bowman Lane at Midvale Drive
(KPK) [Added 9-22-1992]
Stop East/West on Midvale
Drive
Bowman Lane at Yale Lane (KPK)
[Added 11-27-2001]
Stop North/South on Bowman
Lane
Boxwood Drive at Geoffrey Lane
(KPK) [Added 7-28-1987]
Stop East on Geoffrey Lane
Boxwood Drive at Geoffrey Lane
(KPK) [Added 7-28-1987]
Stop North/South on Boxwood
Drive
Boxwood Drive at Lawrence Road
(KPK)
Stop West on Boxwood Drive
Boxwood Drive at Mina Place
(KPK) [Added 9-5-2017]
Stop North/South on Boxwood
Drive
Boxwood Drive at Ravenwood
Drive (south intersection) (KPK)
[Added 6-24-1997]
Stop West on Boxwood Drive
Bralo Court at Kohr Road (KPK) Stop East on Bralo Court
Brasswood Road at Arrowood
Drive (STJ) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop West on Brasswood Road
Brasswood Road at Elderwood
Drive (STJ) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop East on Brasswood Road
Bread and Cheese Hollow Road at
Sunken Meadow Road (KPK)
[Added 5-11-1999]
Stop North/South on Bread
and Cheese Hollow Road
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1041
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Breezy Hill Drive at Sunken
Meadow Road (KPK) [Added
1-8-1985]
Stop North on Breezy Hill
Drive
Brewster Avenue at Bread and
Cheese Hollow Road (KPK)
Stop West on Brewster Drive
Brewster Avenue at Heights Road
(KPK) [Added 8-25-1998]
Stop East/West on Brewster
Avenue
Brian Street at Harned Road
(COM)
Stop West on Brian Street
Brian Street at Marie Crescent
(COM)
Stop East on Brian Street
Briaroot Drive at Crescent Place
(SMT) [Added 4-8-1997]
Stop West on Briaroot Drive
Briaroot Drive at Maple Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Briaroot Drive
Bri Court at Nichols Road (NES)
[Added 4-11-1995]
Stop South on Bri Court
Bridge Branch Road at Old Willets
Path (PNS)
Stop East on Bridge Branch
Road
Bridle Court at Paddock Drive
(KPK) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop North on Bridle Court
Bridlepath Road at Nissequogue
River Road (SM
Stop East on Bridlepath Road
Bristol Lane at Rumford Road
(KPK)
Stop East on Bristol Lane
Broadview Avenue at Kohr Road
(KPK) [Repealed 8-20-1996]
Broadview Avenue at Valley Road
(KPK) [Added 8-20-1996]
Stop South on Broadview Drive
Broadview Drive at Shirley Court
(COM)
Stop North on Broadview
Avenue
Broadview Drive at Valleywood
Road (SMT) [Added 4-26-2007]
Stop South on Broadview Drive
Broadway at Maple Avenue (SMT) Stop West on Broadway
Broadway at Theodore Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Broadway
Brocton Lane at Rumford Road
[Added 8-24-1993]
Stop North on Brocton Lane
Brook Court at Maple Avenue
(SMT) [Added 2-4-1997]
Stop West on Brook Court
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1042
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Brookfield Road at Woodmere
Drive (KPK) [Added 4-27-2004]
Stop East/West on Brookfield
Road
Brook Lane at Brooksite Drive
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Brook Lane
Brook Lane at Crescent Place
(SMT) [Added 7-26-1988]
Stop East on Brook Lane
Brook Lane at Devon Lane (SMT)
[Added 7-26-1988]
Stop East/West on Brook Lane
Brook Lane at Maple Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Brook Lane
Brook Land at Tall Tree Lane
(SMT) [Added 7-26-1988]
Stop West on Brook Lane
Brooksite Drive at Brook Lane
(SMT)
Stop North/South on Brooksite
Drive
Brooksite Drive at Forest Lane
(SMT)
Stop North/South on Brooksite
Drive
Brooksite Drive at Higbie Drive
(SMT)
Stop North/South on Brooksite
Drive
Browning Street at Fifty Acre
Road (STJ) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop West on Browning Street
Browns Road at Bowers Court/
Cromwell Place (NES) [Added
9-8-1987; amended 7-14-1992]
Stop North/South on Browns
Road
Browns Road at Daremy Court
(NES) [Amended 11-24-1987]
Stop South on Daremy Court
Browns Road at Foltman Street
(NES) [Added 9-8-1987;
amended 7-14-1992]
Stop North/South on Browns
Road
Browns Road at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop North/South on Browns
Road
Browns Road at Magnolia Avenue
(NES) [Added 8-12-1986;
amended 7-14-1992]
Stop North/South on Browns
Road
Browns Road at Nicola Lane
(NES) [Added 2-7-2012]
Stop North/South on Browns
Road
Browns Road at Shenandoah
Boulevard South (NES) [Added
10-22-2002]
Stop North/South on Browns
Road
Browns Road at South Hillside
Avenue (NES) [Added
10-22-2002]
Stop North/South on Browns
Road
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1043
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Brownwood Lane at Elderwood
Drive North (STJ) [Added
7-24-1990]
Stop South on Brownwood
Lane
Bruce Lane at Bruce Lane South
(KPK) [Added 9-23-2003]
Stop East on Bruce Lane
Bryan Meadow Path at Bread and
Cheese Hollow Road (KPK)
[Added 8-6-1996]
Stop West on Bryan Meadow
Path
Burgundy Lane at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop East on Burgundy Lane
Burgundy Lane at Southern
Boulevard (NES)
Stop West on Burgundy Lane
Burham Drive at Dehan Street
(SMT) [Added 9-27-1983]
Stop North and south on
Burham Drive
Burham Drive at Oakside Road
(SMT)
Stop South on Burham Drive
Burham Drive at Rose Street
(SMT)
Stop North on Burham Drive
Burham Drive at Trent Court
(SMT) [Added 8-13-1991]
Stop North on Burham Drive
Burham Drive at Trent Lane
(SMT) [Added 8-13-1991]
Stop South on Burham Drive
Burlington Boulevard at Wildwood
Lane (SMT)
Stop South on Burlington
Boulevard
Burr Avenue at Lou Avenue (KPK) Stop West on Burr Avenue
Bury Court at Roxbury Drive
(COM) [Added 2-11-1997;
repealed 3-16-2000]
Butterfly Drive at Autumn Drive
(HPG)
Stop South on Butterfly Drive
Buxton Way at Dorchester Road
(HPG) [Added 4-28-1987]
Stop East on Buxton Way
Buxton Way at Steven Place (HPG)
[Added 3-22-1988; amended
7-14-1992]
Stop West on Buxton Way
Byron Road at Montrose Drive
(COM) [Added 9-12-2006]
Stop East and west on Byron
Road
Byron Road at Roxbury Drive
(COM)
Stop West on Byron Road
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1044
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Cabot Court at Adams Avenue
(HPG) [Amended 5-22-1984]
Stop West on Cabot Court
Cabot Court at Fairfield Drive
(STJ) [Added 5-24-1988]
Stop West on Cabot Court
Cactus Lane at Primrose Lane
(KPK)
Stop South on Cactus Lane
Cakewalk Terrace at Landing
Avenue (SMT)
Stop West on Cakewalk
Terrace
Caleb's Path at Old Willets Path
(HPG)
Stop North on Caleb's Path
Cambon Avenue at Camelot Lane
[Added 7-12-1988]
Stop North/South on Cambon
Avenue
Cambon Avenue at Fifth Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Cambon
Avenue
Cambon Avenue at Gordon Gate
(STJ) [Added 7-12-1988;
amended 7-14-1992]
Stop North/South on Cambon
Avenue
Cambon Avenue at Moriches Road
(STJ)
Stop North on Cambon Avenue
Cambon Avenue at Third Street
(STJ) [Added 7-13-2010]
Stop North/South on Cambon
Avenue
Cambon Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ)
Stop North/South on Cambon
Avenue
Cambon Place at Bonarck Lane
(NES) [Added 8-19-2003]
Stop North/South on Cambon
Place
Cambon Place at Vista Place
(NES) [Added 8-19-2003]
Stop North/South on Cambon
Place
Camelot Lane at Cambon Avenue
(STJ)
Stop West on Camelot Lane
Camelot Lane at Hillside Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East on Camelot Lane
Cameo Road at Ruth Boulevard
(COM)
Stop East on Cameo Road
Cameron Court at Long House
Way (COM) [Added 2-26-2002]
Stop South on Cameron Court
Candy Lane at Carmel Drive
(COM) [Added 9-24-1996]
Stop East on Candy Lane
Candy Lane at Peppermint Road
(COM) [Added 9-24-1996]
Stop West on Candy Lane
Canterbury Lane at Midwood
Avenue (NES)
Stop West on Canterbury Lane
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1045
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Capitol Court at New Highway
(HPG)
Stop South on Capitol Court
Cardinal Lane at Eagle Lane
(HPG)
Stop East/West on Cardinal
Lane
Cardinal Lane at Hawk Lane
(HPG)
Stop East/West on Cardinal
Lane
Cardinal Lane at Hawk Lane
(HPG) [Added 7-28-1987]
Stop North on Hawk Lane
Cardinal Lane at Holiday Park
Drive (HPG)
Stop East/West on Cardinal
Lane
Cardinal Lane at Holiday Park
Drive (HPG)
Stop North on Cardinal Lane
Cardinal Lane at Holiday Park
Drive (HPG) (western
intersection) [Added 5-16-2000]
Stop South/West on Cardinal
Lane
Cardinal Lane at New Highway
(HPG)
Stop North on Cardinal Lane
Cardinal Lane at Old Willets Path
(HPG)
Stop East on Cardinal Lane
Carl Court at Audubon Street
(NES)
Stop East on Carl Court
Carl Court at Lillian Road (NES)
[Added 9-26-2000]
Stop West on Carl Court
Carlson Avenue at First Avenue
(KPK)
Stop West on Carlson Avenue
Carman Lane at Southern
Boulevard (NES)
Stop West on Carman Lane
Carmel Road at Hayrick Lane
(COM) [Added 7-11-1995]
Stop North/South on Carmel
Road
Carmel Road at Marshmallow
Drive (COM) [Added 6-11-1996]
Stop North/South on Carmel
Road
Carnegie Drive at Fifty Acre Road
South (SMT)
Stop East on Carnegie Drive
Caroline Avenue at George Street
(SMT) [Added 10-12-1999]
Stop East/West on Caroline
Avenue
Caroline Avenue at Jerome Street
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Caroline
Avenue
Caroline Avenue at William Street
(SMT) [Amended 3-10-1998]
Stop East/West on Caroline
Avenue
Carol Lane at Hillside Avenue
(STJ)
Stop West on Carol Lane
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1046
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Carol Lane at Richie Court North
(STJ)
Stop East on Carol Lane
Carow Place at Clinton Avenue
(STJ)
Stop South on Carow Place
Carriage Drive at Ravenwood
Drive (KPK) [Added 5-2-1989]
Stop East on Carriage Drive
Carrie Court at Edgewood Avenue
(SMT)
Stop North on Carrie Court
Caryl Place at Dorothy Lane (KPK)
[Added 4-27-1993]
Stop West on Caryl Place
Cassata Court at Ardito Avenue
(KPK) [Added 6-12-1990]
Stop North on Cassata Court
Cassata Court at Wartburg Drive
(KPK) [Added 6-12-1990]
Stop South on Cassata Court
Castle Court at Gaigal Drive
(NES) [Added 3-9-1999]
Stop West on Castle Court
Cedar Field Terrace at Ashleigh
Drive (STJ) (north intersection)
[Added 2-21-1989]
Stop North on Cedar Field
Terrace
Cedar Field Terrace at Ashleigh
Drive (STJ) (south intersection)
[Added 2-21-1989]
Stop West on Cedar Field
Terrace
Cedar Place at Twin Oaks Drive
(KPK) [Added 5-26-1987]
Stop East on Cedar Place
Cedar Place at Woodvale Avenue
(KPK)
Stop East on Cedar Place
Cedar Place at Woodvale Avenue
(KPK) [Added 5-2-1991]
Stop West on Cedar Place
Cedar Ridge Avenue at
Dorchester Road (HPG) [Added
4-28-1987]
Stop East on Cedar Ridge
Avenue
Cedar Road at Woodland Drive
(KPK) [Added 6-22-2004]
Stop North/South on Cedar
Road
Cedar Street at Fifth Avenue (STJ) Stop West on Cedar Street
Cedar Street at Lawrence Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Cedar Street
Cedar Street at Lincoln Avenue
(SMT)
Stop West on Cedar Street
Cedar Street at Lou Avenue (KPK) Stop North/South on Cedar
Street
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1047
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Cedar Street at Sixth Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East on Cedar Street
Central Road at Old Northport
Road (SMT) [Added 9-11-2007]
Stop North on Central Road
Central Road at Plymouth
Boulevard (COM)
Stop West on Central Road
Chapman Road at Heritage Place
South (NES) [Added 1-23-2020]
Stop West on Chapman Road
Chapman Road at Midwood
Avenue (NES)
Stop East on Chapman Road
Chardonnay Road at Annandale
Road (COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop West on Chardonnay Road
Chardonnay Road at Annandale
Road (COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop East on Chardonnay Road
Charlemagne Drive at Nesconset
Avenue (NES) [Added 9-3-1996]
Stop South on Charlemagne
Drive
Charter Lane at Morewood Drive
(COM)
Stop East on Charter Lane
Charter Lane at Villa Lane (COM) Stop West on Charter Lane
Chassyl Road at Lincoln Avenue
(COM) [Added 6-26-2001]
Stop East/West on Chassyl
Road
Chassyl Road at Parkway Drive
South (COM) [Added 6-26-2001]
Stop East on Chassyl Road
Chassyl Road at Penquin Lane
(COM) [Added 6-26-2001]
Stop West on Chassyl Road
Chatham Road at Edna Lane
(COM) [Added 6-28-2005]
Stop East and west on
Chatham Road
Chatham Road at Kings Park Road
(COM)
Stop West on Chatham Road
Chatham Road at Wesleyan Road
(COM) [Added 10-25-1988]
Stop East on Chatham Road
Cherry Lane at Edgewood Avenue
(SMT)
Stop South on Cherry Lane
Chester Street at Terry Road
(SMT) [Added 11-20-1990]
Stop West on Chester Street
Chestnut Court at Apple Lane
(COM) [Added 10-11-1988]
Stop West on Chestnut Court
Chestnut Street at Oak Street
(NES)
Stop South on Chestnut Street
Chestnut Stump Road at Sunken
Meadow Road (KPK)
Stop North on Chestnut Stump
Road
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1048
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Chivalry Lane at Midwood Avenue
(NES)
Stop West on Chivalry Lane
Christina Court at Hobson Avenue
(STJ) [Added 3-8-1988;
amended 7-14-1992]
Stop West on Christina Court
Christopher Court at Lake Avenue
(STJ) [Added 2-21-1989;
amended 10-24-1989]
Stop East on Christopher Court
Churchill Lane at Bayberry Lane
(PNS) [Added 9-18-1990]
Stop West on Churchill Lane
Churchill Lane at Ledgewood
Drive (PNS)
Stop East/West on Churchill
Lane
Churchill Lane at Winston Drive
(PNS)
Stop East/West on Churchill
Lane
Churchill Road at Captain
Richards Lane (KPK) [Added
2-8-2005]
Stop East on Churchill Road
Clark Street at Valley Avenue
(SMT) [Added 6-12-1990]
Stop Eastbound traffic on
Clark Street
Cleveland Street at Uncas Street
(NES) [Added 2-6-1990]
Stop South on Cleveland Street
Cliff Drive at Melody Lane (KPK)
[Added 10-8-1991]
Stop North on Cliff Drive
Clime Court of Woodlawn Avenue
(STJ) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop South on Clime Court
Clover Drive at Lone Oak Path
(SMT) [Added 10-23-1984]
Stop North on Clover Drive
Clover Lane at Bayberry Drive
(STJ)
Stop West on Clover Lane
Clover Lane at Rumford Road
(KPK) [Added 10-11-1988]
Stop North on Clover Lane
Coach Lane at Carriage Drive
(KPK) [Added 8-12-1986]
Stop North on Coach Lane
Cobb Lane at Ruth Boulevard
(COM)
Stop West on Cobb Lane
Cobbler Lane at Fairfield Drive
(STJ) [Added 5-24-1988]
Stop East on Cobbler Lane
Cobblestone Court at Midwood
Avenue (NES) [Added
10-12-1999]
Stop West on Cobblestone
Court
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1049
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Coconut Drive at Scholar Lane
(COM)
Stop South on Coconut Drive
Cody Place at Summerfield Drive
(NES) [Added 11-25-1997]
Stop North on Cody Place
Colonial Drive at Old Hauppauge
Road (PNS)
Stop South on Colonial Drive
Colonial Road at New York Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Colonial Road
Colony Court at Plymouth
Boulevard (COM)
Stop West on Colony Court
Columbine Lane at Amapola Lane
(KPK)
Stop East on Columbine Lane
Columbine Lane at Rumford Road
(KPK) [Added 8-9-1988]
Stop North on Columbine Lane
Columbus Avenue at Lawrence
Road (KPK) [Added 1-3-1995]
Stop West on Columbus
Avenue
Columbus Avenue at Maple
Avenue (SMT)
Stop West on Columbus
Avenue
Columbus Avenue at Meadow
Road (KPK) [Added 8-27-1991]
Stop East on Columbus Avenue
Columbus Avenue at Theodore
Avenue (SMT) [Added 9-8-1987;
amended 7-14-1992]
Stop East/West on Columbus
Avenue
Commerce Drive at Adams Avenue
(HPG) [Repealed 2-11-1992]
Commerce Drive at Moreland
Road (HPG) [Repealed
10-25-1994]
Concord Lane at Parnell Drive
(COM)
Stop South on Concord Lane
Cook Street at Bruce Lane North
(KPK)
Stop South on Cook Street
Copper Beech Road at Bayberry
Drive (STJ) [Added 4-8-1997]
Stop East/West on Copper
Beech Road
Copper Beech Road at Mills Pond
Road (STJ)
Stop East on Copper Beech
Road
Copper Beech Road at Moriches
Road (STJ)
Stop West on Copper Beech
Road
Cornell Drive at Cornell Court
(COM)
Stop East/West on Cornell
Drive
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1050
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Cornell Drive at Edna Lane (COM)
[Added 4-4-1989]
Stop East/West on Cornell
Drive
Cornell Drive at Kings Park Road
(COM)
Stop West on Cornell Drive
Corporate Drive at Marcus
Boulevard (HPG) [Added
5-22-1984]
Stop East on Corporate Drive
Corporate Drive at New Highway
(HPG) [Added 5-22-1984]
Stop North on Corporate Drive
Cortez Lane at Cook Street (KPK) Stop East on Cortez Lane
Cortland Row and Dorchester
Road (HPG) [Added 4-28-1987]
Stop East on Cortland Row
Cosmos Place at Rumford Road
(KPK) [Added 7-11-1985]
Stop South on Cosmo Place
Cottage Road at Old Dock Road
(KPK) [Repealed 9-25-1984]
Cottage Road at Sunken Meadow
Road (KPK) [Repealed
9-25-1984]
Cornell Drive South at Cornell
Drive (COM) [Added 9-6-2011]
Stop North on Cornell Drive
South
Cottontail Court at Whispering
Woods Drive (SMT) [Added
6-22-1999]
Stop West on Cottontail Court
Cottonwood Drive at Elder Drive
(COM) [Added 10-11-1988]
Stop South on Cottonwood
Drive
Country Oaks Drive at Cedar
Place (KPK)
Stop North on Country Oaks
Drive
Country Oaks Drive at Twin Oaks
Drive (KPK)
Stop South on Country Oaks
Drive
Crabapple Lane at Cottonwood
Drive (COM)
Stop West on Crabapple Lane
Creek Road at Croft Lane (PNS) Stop East/West on Creek Road
Creek Road at Old Willets Path
(PNS)
Stop West on Creek Road
Crescent Place at Brook Lane
(SMT) [Added 7-26-1988]
Stop North on Crescent Place
Crest Lane at Long House Way
(KPK) [Added 10-7-1997]
Stop North on Crest Lane
Crest Lane at Roxbury Drive
(COM)
Stop South on Crest Lane
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1051
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Crestwood Drive at Sunken
Meadow Road (KPK)
Stop South on Crestwood Drive
Crocus Lane at Palmer Lane
(COM)
Stop North/South on Crocus
Lane
Crocus Lane at Shirley Court
(COM)
Stop North on Crocus Lane
Croft Lane at old Willets Path
(PNS)
Stop West on Croft Lane
Cromwell Place at Browns Road
(NES)
Stop West on Cromwell Place
Cross Street at Plaisted Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Cross Street
Crusader Lane at Midwood
Avenue (NES)
Stop East on Crusader Lane
Crystal Court at Fairview Street
(SMT) [Added 9-24-2002]
Stop East on Crystal Court
Crystal Brook Court at Southern
Boulevard (NES) [Added
9-24-2002]
Stop West on Crystal Brook
Court
Curlin Lane at Copper Beech
Road (STJ) [Added 11-3-2015]
Stop North on Curlin Lane
Curlin Lane at Pear Court (STJ)
[Added 5-7-1991; amended
7-14-1992]
Stop South on Curlin Lane
Cusick Avenue at Kings Highway
(KPK) [Added 8-23-1988]
Stop East/West on Cusick
Avenue
Cusick Avenue at Lawrence Road
(KPK)
Stop West on Cusick Avenue
Cusick Avenue at Meadow Road
(SMT)
Stop East on Cusick Avenue
Cutchogue Lane at Harned Road
(COM) [Repealed 2-4-1992]
Cutchogue Lane at Pawnee Drive
(COM)
Stop East on Cutchogue Lane
Cygnet Drive at Brooksite Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Cygnet Drive
Cygnet Drive at Larkspur Drive
(SMT) [Added 11-8-2005]
Stop East/West on Cygnet
Drive
Cygnet Drive at New Mill Road
(SMT)
Stop West on Cygnet Drive
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1052
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Cypress Drive at Rosewood Road
(KPK)
Stop South on Cypress Drive
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Dahlia Court at Shirley Court
(COM)
Stop North on Dahlia Court
Daisy Drive at Cedar Road (KPK) Stop East on Daisy Drive
Daisy Lane at Shirley Court
(COM)
Stop South on Daisy Lane
Daisy Lane at Walter Court (COM) Stop North on Daisy Lane
Daisy Road at Grove Road (KPK)
[Added 9-19-1988]
Stop West on Daisy Road
Dalewood Lane at Ravenwood
Drive (KPK) [Added 6-24-1997]
Stop East on Dalewood Lane
Damin Circle (north leg) at
Glenrich Drive (STJ)
Stop South on Damin Circle
Damin Circle (south leg) at
Glenrich Drive (STJ)
Stop East on Damin Circle
Dana Lane at Morewood Drive
(COM)
Stop East on Dana Lane
Daphne Place at Oakside Road
(COM)
Stop South on Daphne Place
Daphne Place at St. Nicholas
Avenue (SMT)
Stop North on Daphne Place
Daremy Court at Browns Road
(NES) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop South on Daremy Court
Darling Avenue at Maple Avenue
(SMT) [Added 12-12-1995]
Stop West on Darling Avenue
Dading Avenue at Maple Avenue
(COM)
Stop West on Darling Avenue
Daron Lane at Delmar Lane
(COM) [Added 9-24-1996]
Stop East on Daron Lane
Daron Lane at Peppermint Road
(COM) [Added 9-24-1996]
Stop West on Daron Lane
Dartmouth Drive at Baylor Drive
(western intersection) (SMT)
[Added 5-25-1999]
Stop South on Dartmouth
Drive
Dartmouth Drive at Penn Drive
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Dartmouth
Drive
David Lane at Jefferson Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East on David Lane
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1053
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
David Lane at O'Shea Lane
[Added 4-27-1993]
Stop West on David Lane
Davids Drive at Adams Avenue
(HPG)
Stop East on Davids Drive
Dawn Drive at Edgewood Avenue
(SMT)
Stop South on Dawn Drive
Dawson Street at Lou Avenue
(KPK)
Stop West on Dawson Street
Dean Court at Ruth Boulevard
(COM)
Stop East on Dean Court
Debra Drive at Bonarck Lane
(NES) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop South on Debra Drive
Deepdale Drive at Redleaf Lane
(COM)
Stop North on Deepdale Drive
Dehan Street at Burham Drive
(SMT) [Added 9-27-1983]
Stop East/West on Dehan
Street
Dehan Street at St. Nicholas
Avenue (SMT)
Stop East/West on Dehan
Street
Delano Lane at Boxwood Drive
(KPK) [Added 7-28-1987]
Stop East/West on Boxwood
Drive
Delano Lane at Boxwood Drive
(KPK)
Stop North on Delano Drive
Delmar Lane at Peppermint Road
(COM) [Added 9-24-1996]
Stop West on Delmar Lane
Delmar Lane at Peppermint Road
(COM) [Added 9-24-1996]
Stop North on Delmar Lane
Del Place at Rainbow Drive (HPG)
[Added 11-13-2001]
Stop North on Del Place
Denise Court at Glenrich Drive
(STJ)
Stop East on Denise Court
Derby Place at Ashland Drive
(KPK) [Added 8-12-1997]
Stop North on Derby Place
Derby Place at Veronica Court
(SMT) [Added 11-29-2007]
Stop East/West on Derby Place
Devon Lane at Brook Lane (SMT)
[Added 7-26-1988]
Stop South on Devon Lane
Dewberry Place at Autumn Drive
(HPG)
Stop South on Dewberry Place
Dewberry Place at Terrace Drive
(HPG) [Added 7-10-2001]
Stop North/South on Dewberry
Place
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1054
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Dewey Road at Marie Crescent
(COM) [Added 9-18-1990]
Stop West on Dewey Road
Dewey Road at Valmont Lane
(COM) [Added 9-9-2014]
Stop East on Dewey Road
Diane Court at Southern
Boulevard (NES) [Repealed
9-22-1987]
Dillmont Drive at Meadow Road
(SMT)
Stop South on Dillmont Drive
Dillmont Drive at Pine Acre Drive
(SMT) [Added 5-2-1989]
Stop West on Dillmont Drive
Dogwood Road at Balis Drive
(KPK) [Added 9-19-1988]
Stop North on Dogwood Road
Dolores Lane at Sunken Meadow
Road (KPK)
Stop North on Dolores Lane
Donna Lane at Fisher Road (COM)
[Added 9-18-1990]
Stop East on Donna Lane
Donna Lane at Parkway Drive
North (COM)
Stop South on Donna Lane
Donnatella Lane at Southern
Boulevard (NES)
Stop East on Donnatella Lane
Don Way at Peppermint Road
(COM) [Added 9-24-1996]
Stop East on Don Way
Don Way at Town Line Road
(COM)
Stop West on Don Way
Dorchester Road at Eton Path
(HPG) [Added 4-28-1987]
Stop North/South on
Dorchester Road
Dorchester Road at Terry Road
(SMT)
Stop East on Dorchester Road
Dorothy Lane at Boxwood Drive
(northern intersection) (KPK)
[Added 4-27-1993]
Stop East on Dorothy Lane
Dorothy Lane at Boxwood Drive
(southern intersection) (KPK)
[Added 4-27-1993]
Stop South on Dorothy Lane
Dorset Way at Starlight Drive
(COM)
Stop North on Dorset Way
Dove Lane at New Mill Road
(SMT)
Stop North on Dove Lane
Dover Hill Drive North at
Alexander Avenue (NES)
Stop West on Dover Hill
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1055
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Dover Hill Drive South at
Alexander Avenue (NES)
Stop West on Dover Hill Drive
South
Drake Lane at Balboa Drive (KPK)
[Added 7-28-1998]
Stop South on Drake Lane
Drake Lane/Hudson Avenue (KPK)
[Added 6-8-1993]
Stop North on Drake Lane
Drew Drive at Fairfield Drive (STJ)
[Added 5-24-1988]
Stop West on Drew Drive
Drew Drive South at Fairfield
Drive (STJ) [Added 5-24-1988]
Stop West on Drew Drive South
Dunlop Court at Annandale Road
(COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop North on Dunlop Court
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Eagle Lane at old Willets Path
(HPG)
Stop East on Eagle Lane
Eagle Lane at Sparrow Lane
(HPG)
Stop East/West on Eagle Lane
Eagle Lane at Swan Lane (HPG) Stop East/West on Eagle Lane
East Hill Drive at Fifty Acre Road
South (SMT)
Stop East on East Hill Drive
East Hill Drive at Howell Drive
(SMT) [Added 6-28-1988;
amended 7-14-1992]
Stop West on East Hill Drive
East Hill Gate at Carnegie Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on East Hill Gate
East Lane at Oakside Road (SMT) Stop South on East Lane
Easton Avenue at Lindron Avenue
(SMT) [Added 3-12-1985]
Stop North on Easton Avenue
Eastwood Place at Annandale
Road (COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop North on Eastwood Place
Eastwood Place at Timber Ridge
Drive (COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop South on Eastwood Place
Echo Lane at First Avenue (KPK) Stop East on Echo Lane
Eckernkamp Drive at Everit Place
(SMT) [Added 7-11-1995]
Stop East/West on Eckernkamp
Drive
Eckernkamp Drive at Ingelore
Court (SMT) [Added
10-26-1993]
Stop West and east on
Eckernkamp Drive
Eckernkamp Drive at Landing
Avenue (SMT)
Stop East on Eckernkamp
Drive
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1056
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Eckernkamp Drive at Stengel
Place (SMT)
Stop East/West on Eckernkamp
Drive
Eckernkamp Drive at Ursular
Court (SMT) [Added 8-25-1998]
Stop East/West on Eckernkamp
Drive
Edgar Drive at Meadow Road
(SMT)
Stop West on Edgar Drive
Edgar Drive at Poplar Drive (SMT)
[Added 6-11-1996]
Stop North on Edgar Drive
Edgewood Avenue at Browns
Road (NES)
Stop East on Edgewood
Avenue
Edison Place at Dorchester Road
(HPG) [Added 4-28-1987]
Stop West on Edison Place
Edith Lane at Lake Avenue South
(NES)
Stop East on Edith Lane
Edna Lane at Cornell Drive (COM)
[Added 10-25-1988]
Stop South on Edna Lane
Edscho Lane at Chassyl Road
(COM)
Stop North on Edscho Lane
Edscho Lane at Gannett Drive
(COM)
Stop South on Edscho Lane
Eighth Avenue at Eugene Drive
(KPK) [Added 3-21-2006]
Stop North/South on Eighth
Avenue
Eighth Avenue at Marvin Drive
(KPK) [Added 4-21-1987]
Stop North/South on Eighth
Avenue
Eighth Avenue at Old Commack
Road (KPK)
Stop North on Eighth Avenue
Eighth Street at North
Shenandoah Boulevard (NES)
[Added 10-11-1988]
Stop East on Eighth Street
Eighth Street and South Hillside
Avenue (NES) [Added
5-26-1987]
Stop West on Eighth Street
Eileen Court at Sycamore Lane
(COM)
Stop West on Eileen Court
Eklund Boulevard at Browns Road
(NES)
Stop East on Eklund Boulevard
Eklund Boulevard at Gibbs Pond
Road (NES)
Stop West on Eklund Boulevard
Eklund Boulevard at Lillian Road
(NES) [Added 9-26-1989]
Stop East/West on Eklund
Boulevard
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1057
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Elder Drive at Beechwood Drive
(COM) [Added 4-23-2002]
Stop East/West on Elder Drive
Elder Drive at Cottonwood Drive
(COM) [Added 4-23-2002]
Stop East/West on Elder Drive
Elder Drive at Eileen Court (COM) Stop North on Elder Drive
Elder Drive at Kings Park Road
(COM)
Stop East on Elder Drive
Elder Drive at White Birch Lane
(COM) [Added 4-23-2002]
Stop North/South on Elder
Drive
Elderwood Drive at Arrowood
Drive (STJ) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop West on Elderwood Drive
Elderwood Drive East at Old Wood
Road (STJ) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop North and South on
Elderwood Drive East
Elderwood Drive West at
Arrowood Drive (STJ) [Added
7-24-1990]
Stop East on Elderwood Drive
West
Eliot Drive at Nichols Road (NES) Stop North on Eliot Drive
Elizabeth Avenue at George Street
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Elizabeth
Avenue
Elizabeth Avenue at William
Street (SMT) [Amended
3-10-1998]
Stop East/West on Elizabeth
Avenue
Ellen Drive at Lake Avenue South
(NES)
Stop West on Ellen Drive
Ellen Drive at Margaret Avenue
(NES) [Added 4-22-2003]
Stop North on Ellen Drive
Ellen Place at First Avenue (KPK) Stop East/West on Ellen Place
Ellen Place at Marvin Drive (KPK) Stop West on Ellen Place
Elliott Place at Fairview Avenue
(SMT) [Added 10-27-1998]
Stop South on Elliott Place
Elliott Place at Prospect Street
(SMT)
Stop North on Elliott Place
Elm Avenue at Lawrence Avenue
(SMT)
Stop South on Elm Avenue
Elm Avenue at Linden Place
(SMT) [Added 1-21-2010]
Stop North/South on Elm
Avenue
Elm Road at Balis Drive (KPK)
[Added 9-19-1988]
Stop North on Elm Road
Elm Road at Washington Drive
(KPK)
Stop North/South on Elm Road
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1058
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Elton Court East at Fairfield Drive
(STJ) [Added 5-24-1988]
Stop West on Elton Court East
Elton Court South at Fairfield
Drive (STJ) [Added 5-24-1988]
Stop West on Elton Court
South
Elton Court West at Fairfield Drive
(STJ) [Added 5-24-1988]
Stop East on Elton Court West
Emily Place at Eighth Avenue
(KPK) [Added 12-11-1984;
7-11-1995]
Stop East on Emily Place
Empress Pines Drive at Agren
Lane (NES) [Added 8-27-1991]
Stop East/West on Empress
Pines Drive
Empress Pines Drive at Gibbs
Pond Road (NES)
Stop West on Empress Pines
Drive
Empress Pines Drive (north leg) at
Empress Pines Drive (NES)
[Added 5-22-1984]
Stop South on Empress Pines
Drive (north leg)
Enchanted Forest Road at
Gingerbread Road (southern
intersection) (KPK) [Added
11-9-1999]
Stop East on Enchanted Forest
Road
Engineers Road at Plant Avenue
(HPG)
Stop West on Engineers Road
Erita Lane/Sheryl Crescent
(northern intersection) (SMT)
[Added 1-11-1994]
Stop North on Erita Lane
Erita Lane/Sheryl Crescent
(southern intersection) (SMT)
[Added 1-11-1994]
Stop South on Erita Lane
Ernest Court at Old Northport
Road (SMT)
Stop North on Ernest Court
Estate Road at Tanglewood Drive
(SMT)
Stop West on Estate Road
Estate Road at Westbrook Lane
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Estate Road
Eton Path at Dorchester Road
(HPG) [Added 4-28-1987]
Stop West on Eton Path
Eton Path at Terry Road (SMT) Stop East on Eton Path
Eugene Drive at Eighth Avenue
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Eugene
Drive
Eugene Drive at Fifth Avenue
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Eugene
Drive
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1059
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Eugene Drive at Marvin Drive
(KPK) [Added 11-19-1991]
Stop South on Eugene Drive
Eustace Drive at Marie Crescent
(COM) [Added 9-18-1990]
Stop West on Eustace Drive
Eva Path at Fisher Road (COM)
[Added 9-18-1990]
Stop East on Eva Path
Everit Place at Eckernkamp Drive
(SMT)
Stop North on Everit Place
Everit Place at Summerset Drive
(SMT)
Stop South on Everit Place
Evers Court at Ruth Boulevard
(COM)
Stop East on Evers Court
Evon Lane at Cambon Avenue
(STJ)
Stop West on Evon Lane
Evon Lane at Moriches Road (STJ) Stop East on Evon Lane
Excalibur Lane at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop West on Excalibur Lane
Executive Drive at Cardinal Lane
(HPG) [Added 8-28-1990]
Stop West on Executive Drive
Executive Drive at Holiday Park
Drive (HPG) [Added 8-28-1990]
Stop East on Executive Drive
Exit of recreation facilities at
Fairfield Drive (STJ) [Added
5-24-1988]
Stop East on exit at Recreation
Center
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Fairfield Drive at Cobbler Lane
(STJ) [Added 5-24-1988]
Stop North/South on Fairfield
Drive
Fair Oaks Lane at Churchill Lane
(PNS)
Stop South on Fair Oaks Lane
Fairview Avenue at Elliott Place
(SMT)
Stop West on Fairview Avenue
Fairview Avenue at Prospect
Street (SMT)
Stop North on Fairview Avenue
Fairview Commuter Field at
Atterbury Drive (SMT)
Stop West on Commuter Field
exit
Fairview Commuter Field at
Fairview Avenue (SMT)
Stop West on Commuter Field
exit
Fairview Street at Hillcrest Drive
West (SMT) [Added 8-14-2001]
Stop North and south on
Fairview Street
Falcon Drive at Eagle Lane (HPG) Stop South on Falcon Drive
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1060
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Farmstead Road at Hayrick Lane
(COM) [Added 5-2-1989]
Stop East on Farmstead Road
Feather Lane at Marshmallow
Drive (COM)
Stop North on Feather Lane
Fenway Road at Fairfield Drive
(STJ) [Added 5-24-1988]
Stop East on Fenway Road
Fern Drive at Shirley Court (COM) Stop South on Fern Drive
Fern Drive at Walter Court (COM) Stop North on Fern Drive
Fernwood Drive at Gannet Drive
(COM)
Stop South on Fernwood Drive
Fernwood Drive at Ronde Drive
[Repealed 10-2-1984]
Field View Drive at Bread and
Cheese Hollow Road (KPK)
Stop West on Field View Drive
Field View Drive at Timber Lane
(KPK) [Added 2-8-2005]
Stop North on Field View Drive
Fifth Avenue at Eugene Drive
(KPK) [Added 6-9-1992]
Stop North/South on Fifth
Avenue
Fifth Avenue at Fifth Street (STJ) Stop North/South on Fifth
Avenue
Fifth Avenue at First Street (STJ) Stop North/South on Fifth
Avenue
Fifth Avenue at Maple Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Fifth Avenue
Fifth Avenue at Marvin Drive
(KPK)
Stop North/South on Marvin
Drive
Fifth Avenue at Moriches Road
(STJ)
Stop North on Fifth Avenue
Fifth Avenue at Old Commack
Road (KPK)
Stop North on Fifth Avenue
Fifth Avenue at Seventh Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Fifth
Avenue
Fifth Avenue at Third Street (STJ) Stop North/South on Fifth
Avenue
Fifth Avenue at Woodlawn Avenue
(STJ)
Stop South on Fifth Avenue
Fifth Street at Cambon Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Fifth Street
Fifth Street at Fourth Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Fifth Street
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1061
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Fifth Street at Grant Avenue (STJ) Stop East/West on Fifth Street
Fifth Street at Jefferson Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Fifth Street
Fifth Street at Lake Avenue (STJ) Stop East/West on Fifth Street
Fifth Street at Moriches Road
(STJ)
Stop East on Fifth Street
Fifth Street at Northern
Boulevard (STJ)
Stop West on Fifth Street
Fifth Street at Second Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Fifth Street
Fifth Street at Shenandoah
Boulevard (NES) [Added
9-2-1986]
Stop East/West on Fifth Street
Fifth Street at Sixth Avenue (STJ) Stop East/West on Fifth Street
Fifty Acre Road South at Arthur
Drive (SMT) [Added 12-4-1990]
Stop North/South on Fifty Acre
Road South
Fifty Acre Road South at
Marquette Drive (SMT) [Added
12-4-1990]
Stop North/South on Fifty Acre
Road South
Fifty Acre Road South at
Woodlawn Avenue (STJ)
Stop North on Fifty Acre Road
South
Fiore Court at Woodlawn Avenue
(STJ)
Stop South on Fiore Court
Fireplace Drive at Kohr Road
(KPK)
Stop West on Fireplace Drive
Fireplace Drive at Robin Lane
(KPK) [Added 2-7-2007]
Stop North on Fireplace Drive
Firewood Court at Arrowood
Drive (STJ) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop South on Firewood Court
First Avenue at Echo Lane (KPK) Stop North/South on First
Avenue
First Avenue at Ellen Place (KPK) Stop South on First Avenue
First Avenue at Fifth Street (STJ) Stop North/South on First
Avenue
First Avenue at Railroad Avenue
(STJ)
Stop North on First Avenue
First Avenue at Seventh Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on First
Avenue
First Avenue at Third Street (STJ) Stop North/South on First
Avenue
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1062
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
First Avenue at Wartburg Drive
(KPK) [Added 10-7-2003]
Stop North/South on First
Avenue
First Avenue at Woodlawn Avenue
(STJ)
Stop South on First Avenue
First Street at Fourth Avenue
(KPK) [Added 6-10-1997]
Stop West on First Street
First Street at Fourth Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on First Street
First Street at Old Commack Road
(KPK)
Stop West on First Street
First Street at Railroad Avenue
(STJ)
Stop West on First Street
First Street at Shenandoah
Boulevard (NES) [Added
9-2-1986]
Stop East on First Street
First Street at Sixth Avenue (STJ)
[Amended 1-23-2001]
Stop East on First Street
Fisher Road at Abbey Drive
(COM) [Added 8-9-2011]
Stop North/South on Fisher
Road
Fisher Road at Parkway Drive
North (COM) [Added 6-24-1986]
Stop South on Fisher Road
Five Acre Court at Landing
Avenue (SMT)
Stop West on Five Acre Court
Fleetwood Road at Beverly Road
(COM) [Added 9-22-1992]
Stop East/West on Fleetwood
Road
Fleetwood Road at Pine Meadow
Place (COM) [Added 9-22-1992]
Stop East/West on Fleetwood
Road
Fleetwood Road at Timber Ridge
Drive (COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop North on Fleetwood Road
Floral Lane at Bayberry Drive
(STJ)
Stop East on Floral Lane
Florence Avenue at Jerome Street
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Florence
Avenue
Florence Avenue at William Street
(SMT) [Amended 3-10-1998]
Stop East/West on Florence
Avenue
Florence Street at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop East on Florence Street
Florence Street at Meryl Lane
(NES)
Stop West on Florence Street
Florida Avenue at Harned Road
(COM)
Stop West on Florida Avenue
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1063
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Florida Avenue at Old Pine Lane
(COM) [Added 6-11-1996]
Stop East/West on Florida
Avenue
Florida Avenue at Shinebone Lane
(COM) [Added 6-11-1996]
Stop East/West on Florida
Avenue
Flynn Road at Old Dock Road
(KPK) [Added 6-12-2001]
Stop West on Flynn Road
Foltman Street at Browns Road
(NES)
Stop East on Foltman Street
Foothill Lane at Amherst Lane
(SMT) [Added 5-3-1988]
Stop East on Foothill Lane
Foothill Lane at Leslie Lane (SMT)
[Added 8-12-1986]
Stop North on Foothill Lane
Fordham Drive at New York
Avenue (SMT)
Stop East on Fordham Drive
Forest Avenue at Browns Road
(NES)
Stop South on Forest Avenue
Forest Avenue at Cedar Avenue
(NES)
Stop North on Forest Avenue
Forest Avenue at Laurelton
Avenue (NES)
Stop North/South on Forest
Avenue
Forest Avenue at Lindell Avenue
(NES)
Stop North/South on Forest
Avenue
Forest Lane at Brooksite Drive
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Forest Lane
Forest Lane at Merrivale Drive
(SMT)
Stop West on Forest Lane
Forest Lane at Tanglewood Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Forest Lane
Forest Road at Woodland Drive
(KPK)
Stop North on Forest Road
Fort Salonga School driveway at
Sunken Meadow Road (KPK)
[Added 10-7-1986]
Stop South on Fort Salonga
School driveway
Fourth Avenue at First Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Fourth
Avenue
Fourth Avenue at Fourth Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Fourth
Avenue
Fourth Avenue at Maple Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Fourth Avenue
Fourth Avenue at Old Commack
Road (KPK)
Stop North on Fourth Avenue
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1064
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Fourth Avenue at Railroad Avenue
(STJ)
Stop North on Fourth Avenue
Fourth Avenue at Second Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Fourth
Avenue
Fourth Avenue at Sixth Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Fourth
Avenue
Fourth Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ)
Stop South on Fourth Avenue
Fourth Street at Cambon Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East on Fourth Street
Fourth Street at Fifth Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Fourth
Street
Fourth Street at First Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Fourth
Street
Fourth Street at Lake Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Fourth
Street
Fourth Street at Lincoln Avenue
(STJ)
Stop West on Fourth Street
Fourth Street at Seventh Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Fourth
Street
Fourth Street at Shenandoah
Boulevard (NES) [Added
9-2-1986]
Stop East/West on Fourth
Street
Fourth street at Third Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Fourth
Street
Fourth Street at Washington
Avenue (STJ)
Stop East/West on Fourth
Street
Fox Lane at Hubbell Street (COM)
[Added 7-26-1988]
Stop North on Fox Lane
Fox Lane at Johnson Street (COM) Stop South on Fox Lane
Fox Lane at Mt. Pleasant Road
(SMT)
Stop West on Fox Lane
Francis Street at Gaynor Avenue
(NES)
Stop North on Francis Street
Francis Street at Janet Court
(NES) [Added 5-12-1998]
Stop North/South on Francis
Street
Franklin Street at Blackman
Street (SMT)
Stop North on Franklin Street
Franklin Street at Howell Drive
(SMT)
Stop North/South on Franklin
Street
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1065
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Franklin Street at St. Nicholas
Avenue (SMT) [Added
5-14-2002]
Stop East on Franklin Street
Frank Street at St. Nicholas
Avenue (SMT)
Stop East/VVest on Frank
Street
Friendly Road at Annetta Avenue
(NES)
Stop South on Friendly Road
Friendly Road at Rhoda Avenue
(NES)
Stop North on Friendly Road
Fulton Boulevard at Kings Park
Road (COM)
Stop West on Fulton Boulevard
Fulton Boulevard at Lafayette
Avenue (COM) [Added
3-21-2006]
Stop East/West on Fulton
Boulevard
Fulton Boulevard at Roosevelt
Avenue (COM) [Added
5-16-2000]
Stop East/West on Fulton
Boulevard
Fulton Boulevard at Washington
Boulevard (SMT)
Stop North on Fulton
Boulevard
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Galahad Lane at Browns Road
(NES)
Stop North on Galahad Lane
Galahad Lane at Prince Charming
Road (western intersection) (NES)
[Added 10-11-1988]
Stop North on Galahad Lane
Galehurst Lane at Heide Court
(STJ) [Added 10-11-19941
Stop East on Galehurst Lane
Galehurst Lane at Hobson Avenue
(STJ)
Stop West on Galehurst Lane
Gamay Court at Annandale Road
(COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop East on Gamay Court
Gannet Drive at Partridge Drive
(COM) [Added 5-22-2008]
Stop East/West on Gannet
Drive
Gannet Drive at Penguin Lane
(COM) [Added 8-15-2002]
Stop East/West on Gannet
Drive
Gannet Drive at Wicks Path
(COM)
Stop West on Gannet Drive
Gardenia Drive at Daisy Lane
(COM)
Stop West on Gardenia Drive
Gardenia Drive at Laurel Lane
(COM) [Added 7-26-1988]
Stop East on Gardenia Drive
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1066
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Garden Street at Eklund
Boulevard (NES) [Added
5-22-1984]
Stop North on Garden Street
Garden Street at Magnolia Drive
(NES) [Added 11-21-2006]
Stop North and south on
Garden Street
Garfield Court at Lincoln Avenue
(NES) [Added 5-3-1994]
Stop South on Garfield Court
Garvey Drive at Mt. Pleasant Road
(HPG)
Stop East on Garvey Drive
Garvey Drive at South Plaisted
Avenue (HPG)
Stop South on Garvey Drive
Gatewood Drive at Glenwood
Drive (HPG)
Stop South on Gatewood Drive
Gaynor Avenue at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop East on Gaynor Avenue
Gaynor Avenue at Leary Lane
(NES)
Stop East/West on Gaynor
Avenue
Gaynor Avenue at Meryl Lane
(NES)
Stop East/West on Gaynor
Avenue
Gaynor Avenue at Southern
Boulevard (NES)
Stop West on Gaynor Avenue
Gehrig Street at Old Indian Head
Road (COM) [Added 6-10-1997]
Stop East on Gehrig Street
Gehrig Street at Ruth Boulevard
(COM)
Stop East/West on Gehrig
Street
Gemini Lane at Southern
Boulevard (NES) [Repealed
9-22-1987]
Genesee Drive at Schuyler Drive
(eastern intersection) (COM)
[Added 12-2-2008]
Stop East on Genesee Drive
Genesee Drive at Schuyler Drive
(western intersection) (COM)
[Added 10-20-1992]
Stop East/West on Genesee
Drive
George Street at Annette Avenue
(SMT)
Stop South on George Street
George Street at Caroline Avenue
(SMT)
Stop North/South on George
Street
George Street at Florence Avenue
(SMT)
Stop North/South on George
Street
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1067
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
George Street at Rhoda Avenue
(SMT)
Stop North on George Street
Gibbs Pond Road at Eklund
Boulevard (NES) [Added
11-20-1990; repealed
6-9-1992]
Gibbs Pond Road at Hill Avenue
(NES) [Added 5-21-2015]
Stop South on Gibbs Pond
Road
Gibbs Pond Road at Locksley Lane
(NES) [Added 11-20-1990]
Stop North/South on Gibbs
Pond
Gibbs Pond Road at Prince
Charming Road (NES) [Added
11-20-1990]
Stop North/South on Gibbs
Pond
Gibbs Pond Road at Steuben
Boulevard (NES) [Added
11-20-1990]
Stop North/South on Gibbs
Pond
Gibbs Pond Road at Stone Edge
Lane (NES) [Added 6-9-1992]
Stop North/South on Gibbs
Pond Road
Gilbert Avenue at Ridgley Road
(SMT) [Added 9-11-1990]
Stop East/VVest on Gilbert
Avenue
Gilbert Avenue at Terry Road
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Gilbert
Avenue
Gilmore Lane at Kohr Road (KPK) Stop East on Gilmore Lane
Gina Court at Midwood Avenue
(NES) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop West on Gina Court
Gingerbread Road at Enchanted
Forest Road (northern
intersection) (KPK) [Added
11-9-1999]
Stop North on Gingerbread
Road
Gingerbread Road at Enchanted
Forest Road (southern
intersection) (KPK) [Added
11-9-1999]
Stop North/South on
Gingerbread Road
Gingerbread Road at Old
Northport Road (SMT) [Added
11-9-1999; amended
9-11-2007]
Stop South on Gingerbread
Road
Glamore Court at Nissequogue
River Road (SMT)
Stop West on Glamore Court
Glenfield Lane at Alexander
Avenue (NES) [Added
10-20-1987]
Stop East on Glenfield Lane
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1068
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Glen Hill Court at Rosanne Court
(NES)
Stop West on Glen Hill Court
Glenmere Lane at Tulipwood
Drive (southern intersection)
(COM) [Added 3-23-2004]
Stop East on Glenmere Lane
Glenrich Drive at Edgewood
Avenue (SMT) [Repealed
1-25-1994]
Glenrich Drive South at Edgewood
Avenue (SMT) [Added
5-25-1993; repealed
1-25-1994]
Glenrich Drive South at Hartsdale
Street (SMT) [Added 5-25-1993]
Stop South on Glenrich Drive
Glenridge Lane at Melody Lane
(SMT) [Added 3-12-1985]
Stop South on Glenridge Lane
Glenridge Lane at Springbriar
Lane (SMT) [Added 11-9-1989]
Stop North on Glenridge Lane
Glenview Avenue at Hastings
Drive (KPK)
Stop South on Glenview
Avenue
Glenview Avenue at Ridge Road
(KPK) [Added 10-7-2003]
Stop North/South on Glenview
Avenue
Glenview Avenue at Timber Lane
(KPK) [Added 10-7-2003]
Stop North/South on Glenview
Avenue
Glenwood Drive at Autumn Drive
(HPG)
Stop East on Glenwood Drive
Glenwood Drive at Dewberry
Place (HPG)
Stop East/West on Glenwood
Drive
Gordon Gate at Cambon Avenue
(STJ) [Added 7-14-1992]
Stop West on Gordon Gate
Gordon Gate at King Arthur Court
North (STJ) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop East on Gordon Gate
Gorham Lane at Sherbrook Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Gorham Lane
Gotham Court at Fairfield Drive
(STJ) [Added 5-24-1988]
Stop East on Gotham Court
Grace Court at Lake Avenue South
(NES)
Stop East on Grace Court
Graham Place at Margaret Avenue
[Added 3-26-2002]
Stop South on Graham Place
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1069
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Grandview Lane at Grassy Pond
Drive (SMT) [Added
12-10-2002]
Stop East/West on Grandview
Lane
Grandview Lane at Laurel Drive
(PNS)
Stop East/West on Grandview
Lane
Grandview Lane at Ledgewood
Drive (PNS)
Stop East/West on Grandview
Lane
Grandview Lane at Old Willets
Path (PNS) [Repealed
12-23-1986]
Grandview Lane at Pineridge
Drive (PNS)
Stop East/West on Grandview
Lane
Grandview Lane at Wyandanch
Boulevard (PNS)
Stop West on Grandview Lane
Grant Avenue at Harding Street
(NES) [Added 4-27-1993]
Stop East on Grant Avenue
Grant Avenue at Seventh Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Grant
Avenue
Grant Avenue at Terry Road (NES) Stop West on Grant Avenue
Grant Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ)
Stop South on Grant Avenue
Grassy Lane at Seaver Lane
(SMT)
Stop North on Grassy Lane
Grassy Lane at Tanglewood Drive
(SMT)
Stop South on Grassy Lane
Grassy Pond Drive at Averly Place
(SMT) [Added 6-9-1992]
Stop North/South on Grassy
Pond Drive
Grassy Pond Drive at Grandview
Lane (SMT)
Stop South on Grassy Pond
Drive
Grassy Pond Drive South at Lone
Oak Path (SMT) [Added
12-27-1984]
Stop North on Grassy Pond
Drive South
Great Hollow Junior High School
driveway at Southern Boulevard
(NES) [Added 7-12-1994;
repealed 8-31-1999]
Great Oak Road at Oakfield Road
(STJ) [Added 7-14-1992]
Stop South on Great Oak Road
Greenfield Lane at Hayrick Lane
(COM) [Added 5-2-1989]
Stop West on Greenfield Lane
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1070
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Greenwich Road at Morewood
Drive (COM)
Stop North on Greenwich Road
Greenwich Road at Parnell Drive
(COM)
Stop South on Greenwich Road
Greenwich Road at Stuyvesant
Lane (SMT) [Added 9-24-1996]
Stop North/South on
Greenwich Road
Greenwood Lane at Elderwood
Drive North (STJ) [Added
7-24-1990]
Stop North on Greenwood
Lane
Greenwood Lane at Old Wood
Road (STJ) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop South on Greenwood
Lane
Greis Avenue at Steuben
Boulevard (NES)
Stop West on Greis Avenue
Grendon Lane at Montrose Drive
(COM)
Stop South on Grendon Lane
Grendon Lane at Roxbury Drive
(COM)
Stop North on Grendon Lane
Grill Drive at Borrell Court (SMT)
[Added 5-25-1993]
Stop South on Grill Drive
Grill Drive at Edgewood Avenue
(SMT) [Added 5-25-1993]
Stop North on Grill Drive
Gristmill Drive at Boxwood Drive
(KPK)
Stop North on Gristmill Drive
Gristmill Drive at Ravenwood
Drive (KPK) [Added 5-2-1989]
Stop East on Gristmill Drive
Grouse Place at Partridge Drive
(COM)
Stop West on Grouse Place
Grove Avenue at Lake Avenue
(STJ)
Stop West on Grove Avenue
Grove Road at Washington Drive
(KPK)
Stop North/South on Grove
Road
Grove Road at Woodland Drive
(KPK)
Stop North/South on Grove
Road
Guinevere Lane at Canterbury
Lane (NES) [Added 4-27-1993]
Stop North on Guinevere Lane
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Haig Place at Ashland Drive (KPK) Stop East on Haig Place
Haig Place at Roundtree Drive
(SMT)
Stop South on Haig Place
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1071
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Half Acre Court at Edgewood
Avenue (SMT)
Stop North on Half Acre Court
Half Hollow Road and Old
Commack Road at Scholar Lane
(COM)
Stop North/South on Half
Hollow Road and Old
Commack Road
Half Hollow Road at Somers Lane
(COM)
Stop North on Half Hollow
Road
Hallock Avenue at Larsen Avenue
(SMT) [Added 6-23-1987;
repealed 10-20-1992]
Hallock Avenue at Martha Lane/
Rosalia Court (SMT) [Added
5-12-1998]
Stop North/South on Hallock
Avenue
Hallock Avenue at North Avenue
(SMT) [Added 10-20-1992]
Stop North/South on Hallock
Avenue
Hallock Avenue at South Avenue
(SMT) [Added 6-23-1987]
Stop North/South on Hallock
Avenue
Hamilton Street at St. Nicholas
Avenue (SMT) [Added
11-19-2002]
Stop West on Hamilton Street
Hampton Avenue at Browns Road
(NES)
Stop West on Hampton Avenue
Hampton Avenue at Forest Avenue
(NES)
Stop East/West on Hampton
Avenue
Hampton Avenue at Hawthorne
Street (NES)
Stop East/West on Hampton
Avenue
Hampton Avenue at Seawanhaka
Avenue (NES)
Stop East on Hampton Avenue
Hampton Street at MacKay Drive
(HPG) [Added 7-11-2006]
Stop East on Hampton Street
Hampton Street at Old Willets
Path (HPG)
Stop West on Hampton Street
Hancock Street at St. Johnland
Road (KPK)
Stop West on Hancock Street
Harbor Hills Road at Moriches
Road (STJ) [Added 3-6-1990]
Stop North/South on Harbor
Hills Road
Harbor Oaks Drive at Oak Hill
Lane (KPK) [Added 5-26-1987]
Stop West on Harbor Oaks
Drive
Harbor Oaks Drive at Twin Oaks
Drive (KPK) [Added 5-26-1987]
Stop East on Harbor Oaks
Drive
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1072
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Harding Street at Hayes Street
(NES) [Added 4-27-1993]
Stop South on Harding Street
Harmon Place at South Plaisted
Avenue (HPG) [Added 9-3-2019]
Stop North and South on South
Plaisted Avenue
Harness Road at Edgewood
Avenue (SMT) [Added
2-21-1989]
Stop South on Harness Road
Harris Court at Washington
Boulevard (COM) [Added
11-19-1991]
Stop South on Harris Court
Harvard Lane at Cornell Drive
South (COM) [Added 9-23-2003]
Stop East on Harvard Lane
Harvest Lane at Hayrick Lane
(COM) [Added 5-2-1989]
Stop East on Harvest Lane
Harvest Lane at Splitrail Place
(COM) [Added 4-23-1985]
Stop North/South on Harvest
Lane
Haskell Lane at Lonnie Lane
(SMT) [Added 6-11-1996]
Stop West on Haskell Lane
Hastings Drive at Bread and
Cheese Hollow Road (KPK)
Stop West on Hastings Drive
Hastings Drive at Glenview
Avenue (KPK) [Added
4-26-2007]
Stop East and west on
Hastings Drive
Hastings Drive at Ridgewood
Lane (KPK) [Added 4-26-2018]
Stop East and west on
Hastings Drive
Havemeyer Lane at Oatley Place
and Ott Place (COM) [Added
7-22-1997]
Stop East/West on Havemeyer
Lane
Havemeyer Lane at Ruth
Boulevard (COM)
Stop East/West on Havemeyer
Lane
Havemeyer Lane at Rye Place
(COM)
Stop East/West on Havemeyer
Lane
Hawkins Avenue at Edgewater
Avenue (SMT)
Stop North on Hawkins Avenue
Hawk Lane at Eagle Lane (HPG) Stop South on Hawk Lane
Hawthorne Avenue at Browns
Road (NES)
Stop South on Hawthorne
Avenue
Hawthorne Drive at Juniper
Avenue (SMT) [Added 1-6-1987]
Stop West on Hawthorne Drive
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1073
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Hawthorne Road at St. Johnland
Road (KPK) [Amended
9-19-1988]
Stop East on Hawthorne Road
Hawthorne Road at Washington
Drive (KPK) [Added 5-24-1988;
amended 6-21-1988]
Stop North/South on
Hawthorne Road
Hawthorne Road at Woodland
Drive (KPK) [Added 9-19-1988]
Stop North/South on
Hawthorne Road
Hayrick Lane at Barley Place
(COM)
Stop North/South on Hayrick
Lane
Hayrick Lane at Carmel Road
(COM) [Added 7-11-1995]
Stop West on Hayrick Lane
Hayrick Lane at Farmstead Road
(COM) [Added 8-25-1998]
Stop North/South on Hayrick
Lane
Hayrick Lane at Greenfield Lane
(COM)
Stop North/South on Hayrick
Lane
Hayrick Lane at Oatley Place
(COM) [Added 5-15-2001]
Stop South and west on
Hayrick Lane
Hayrick Lane at Pebble Place
(COM) [Added 8-25-1998]
Stop North/South on Pebble
Place
Hayrick Lane at Rye Place (COM) Stop East/West on Hayrick
Lane
Hayrick Lane West at Scholar
Lane (COM)
Stop North on Hayrick Lane
West
Hazel Drive at Lone Oak Path
(SMT)
Stop North on Hazel Drive
Heather Crescent at Hayrick Lane
(COM) [Added 5-2-1989]
Stop East on Heather Crescent
Heather Drive at Twin Oaks Drive
(KPK)
Stop West on Heather Drive
Heidie Court at Astor Avenue
(STJ) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop East on Heidie Court
Heidie Court South at Hobson
Avenue (STJ) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop West on Heidie Court
South
Heights Road at Brewster Avenue
(FTS) [Added 5-25-1993]
Stop North/South on Heights
Road
Helen Avenue at George Street
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Helen
Avenue
Helen Avenue at Jerome Street
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Helen
Avenue
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1074
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Helen Avenue at South Avenue
(SMT) [Added 9-28-1993]
Stop West on Helen Avenue
Helen Avenue at William Street
(SMT) [Amended 3-10-1998]
Stop East/West on Helen
Avenue
Helen Court at Francis Street
(NES) [Added 9-27-1994]
Stop East on Helen Court
Hemlock Drive at Riviera (KPK) Stop North on Hemlock Drive
Hemlock Drive at St. Johnland
Road (KPK)
Stop North/South on Hemlock
Drive
Henry Street at Old Dock Road
(KPK)
Stop North on Henry Street
Henry Street at Veterans Lane
(KP) [Added 8-20-1996]
Stop North/South on Henry
Street
Heritage Place at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop West on Heritage Place
Hickory Lane at Brooksite Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Hickory Lane
Hidden Ponds Circle at Hidden
Ponds Circle (SMT) [Added
8-26-1992]
Stop South/West/East on
Hidden Ponds Circle
Hidden Ponds Circle at Hidden
Ponds Circle (SMT) (northern
intersection) [Added 8-26-1992]
Stop North/West/East on
Hidden Ponds Circle
Hidden Ponds Circle at Pond View
Lane (SMT) [Added 8-26-1992]
Stop South on Hidden Ponds
Circle
Higbie Drive at Brooksite Drive
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Higbie Drive
Higbie Drive at Juniper Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Higbie Drive
High Gate Drive at Neil Drive
(SMT) [Added 6-22-1993]
Stop East and west on High
Gate Drive
Highland Drive at Riviera Drive
(KPK) [Added 2-24-1998]
Stop North on Highland Drive
Highland Drive at Rosewood Road
(KPK)
Stop North/South on Highland
Drive
Highland Place at Shenandoah
Boulevard (NES) [Added
9-2-1986]
Stop East on Highland Place
High Woods Road at Old Mill Road
(SMT)
Stop West on High Woods Road
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1075
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Hilden Street at Black Gum Tree
Lane (KPK) [Added 5-15-2001]
Stop East and south on Hilden
Street
Hilden Street at Kohr Road (KPK) Stop West on Hilden Street
Hilden Street at Twin Oaks Drive
(KPK)
Stop West on Hilden Street
Hileen Drive at Eighth Avenue
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Hileen Drive
Hileen Drive at Fifth Avenue
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Hileen Drive
Hill Avenue at Gibbs Pond Road
(NES)
Stop West on Hill Avenue
Hill Avenue at Lindron Avenue
(SMT) [Added 8-27-1991]
Stop North on Hill Avenue
Hill Avenue at Spectacle Lake
Drive (NES) (eastern intersection)
[Added 2-14-1985]
Stop East on Hill Avenue
Hillcrest Drive West at Fairview
Street [Added 10-13-1998]
Stop West on Hillcrest Drive
Hillcrest Drive West at Hillcrest
Drive (NES) [Added 8-12-1986]
Stop East on Hillcrest Drive
West
Hill Lane at Ridge Road (SMT)
[Added 8-14-1984]
Stop South on Hill Lane
Hillside Avenue at Aesop Lane
(STJ) [Added 7-14-1992]
Stop North/South on Hillside
Avenue
Hillside Avenue at Carol Lane
(STJ) [Added 7-12-1988]
Stop North/South on Hillside
Avenue
Hillside Avenue at Sailor Street
(STJ) [Added 7-12-1988]
Stop North/South on Hillside
Avenue
Hillside Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ)
Stop North on Hillside Avenue
Hills Park Lane at Old Willets Path Stop East on Hills Park Lane
Hills Park Lane at Woodland Lane
(PNS) [Added 8-12-1986]
Stop North on Hills Park Lane
Hilltop Drive at Dillmont Drive
(SMT) [Added 5-2-1989]
Stop South on Hilltop Drive
Hilltop Drive at Knob Hill Drive
(SMT) [Added 6-11-1996]
Stop North on Hilltop Drive
Hillview Court at Fleetwood Road
(COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop West on Hillview Court
Hindes Court at Plymouth
Boulevard (COM)
Stop West on Hindes Court
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1076
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Hobson Avenue at Christina Court
(STJ) [Added 7-14-1992]
Stop North/South on Hobson
Avenue
Hobson Avenue at Galehurst Lane
(STJ) [Added 4-12-1988]
Stop North/South on Hobson
Avenue
Hobson Avenue at Hope Place
(STJ) [Added 7-14-1992]
Stop North/South on Hobson
Avenue
Hobson Avenue at Oak Street
(STJ) [Added 11-26-1985]
Stop North/South on Hobson
Avenue
Hobson Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ)
Stop North on Hobson Avenue
Hoffman Drive at Old Commack
Road (KPK)
Stop West on Hoffman Drive
Hofstra Dive at Fifty Acre Road
South (SMT) [Added 10-7-1986]
Stop East on Hofstra Drive
Holiday Park Drive at Cardinal
Lane (HPG) [Repealed
9-5-2000]
Holiday Park Drive at Cardinal
Lane (HPG)
Stop North/South on Holiday
Park Drive
Holiday Park Drive at Cardinal
Lane (western intersection) (HPG)
[Added 9-5-2000]
Stop North on Holiday Park
Drive
Holiday Park Drive at New
Highway (HPG)
Stop North on Holiday Park
Drive
Holly Drive at Grassy Pond Drive
South (SMT) [Added
12-27-1984]
Stop East on Holly Drive
Holly Drive at Ledgewood Drive
(SMT) [Added 5-25-1993]
Stop East/West on Holly Drive
Holly Drive at White Oak Drive
(PNS)
Stop West on Holly Drive
Holly Lane at Brooksite Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Holly Lane
Hollywood Drive at Parnell Drive
(COM)
Stop North on Hollywood Drive
Hoover Avenue at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop West on Hoover Avenue
Hope Place at Hobson Avenue
(STJ) [Added 2-9-1988;
amended 7-14-1992]
Stop West on Hope Place
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1077
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Howell Drive at Baylor Drive
(SMT) [Amended 6-28-1988;
7-14-1992]
Stop North/South on Howell
Drive
Howell Drive at Blackman Street
(SMT) [Added 3-21-2006]
Stop North on Howell Drive
Howell Drive at East Hill Drive
(SMT) [Added 6-28-1988;
repealed 7-14-1992]
Howell Drive at East Hill Drive
(SMT) [Added 7-14-1992]
Stop North/South on Howell
Drive
Howell Drive at Franklin Street
(SMT)
Stop East on Howell Drive
Howell Drive at Ingram Court
(SMT) [Added 3-21-2006]
Stop South on Howell Drive
Howell Drive at Marquette Drive
(SMT) [Amended 6-28-1988;
7-14-1992]
Stop North/South on Howell
Drive
Hoyt Farm entrance at lot aisle
(COM) [Added 10-13-1998]
Stop South on Hoyt Farm
entrance
Hubbell Street at Fox Lane (COM)
[Amended 7-26-1988;
9-19-1988]
Stop East/West on Hubbell
Street
Hubbell Street at Ruth Boulevard
(COM)
Stop East on Hubbell Street
Hubbell Street at Terry Lane
(COM) [Amended 7-26-1988;
9-19-1988]
Stop West on Hubbell Street
Hubbell Street at Town Line Road
(COM)
Stop West on Hubbell Street
Huber Place at Sailer Street (STJ) Stop North on Huber Place
Hudson Drive at Drake Lane
(KPK) [Added 10-25-2005]
Stop West on Hudson Drive
Hudson Drive at First Avenue
(KPK)
Stop West on Hudson Drive
Hudson Drive at Lewis Lane (KPK)
[Added 10-25-2005]
Stop East on Hudson Drive
Hunter Drive at New York Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Hunter Drive
Hunter Lane at Southern
Boulevard (NES) [Added
3-6-1990]
Stop West on Hunter Lane
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1078
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Hunter Place at Cornell Drive
(COM) [Added 10-25-1988]
Stop North on Hunter Place
Hunter Place at Sandy Hollow
Drive (southern intersection)
(COM) [Added 12-17-2009]
Stop South on Hunter Place
Huntington Avenue at Bay Street
(KPK) [Added 5-25-1993]
Stop West on Huntington
Avenue
Hurtin Boulevard at Aron Street
(SMT) [Added 7-16-2019]
Stop East and West on Hurtin
Boulevard
Hurtin Boulevard at Barnes Street
(Pia Boulevard) (SMT)
Stop East/West on Hurtin
Boulevard
Hurtin Boulevard at Reeves Street
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Hurtin
Boulevard
Hyacinth Lane at Walter Court
(COM)
Stop South on Hyacinth Lane
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Ingelore Court at Eckernkamp
Drive (SMT)
Stop South on Ingelore Court
Ingram Court at Howell Drive
(SMT) [Added 5-3-1994]
Stop East on Ingram Court
Inwood Road at Arrowood Drive
(STJ) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop West on Inwood Road
Inwood Road at Elderwood Drive
(STJ) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop East on Inwood Road
Iris Lane at Verbena Drive (COM) Stop North on Iris Lane
Iris Lane at Walter Court (COM) Stop South on Iris Lane
Iroquois Lane at Pawnee Drive
(COM)
Stop North on Iroquois Lane
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Jackson Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ)
Stop North/South on Jackson
Avenue
Jackson Street at Hayes Street
(NES) [Added 4-27-1993]
Stop North on Jackson Street
James Place at Jefferson Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East on James Place
Jayne Court at Lake Avenue South
(NES)
Stop East on Jayne Court
Jay Way at David Lane (STJ)
[Added 4-11-1995]
Stop North on Jay Way
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1079
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Jefferson Avenue at Annemarie
Drive (STJ) [Added 4-8-1997]
Stop North/South on Jefferson
Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at Fourth Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Jefferson
Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at Railroad
Avenue (STJ)
Stop North on Jefferson
Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at Roseville
Avenue (STJ) [Added 7-12-1988]
Stop North/South on Jefferson
Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at Sherwood
Drive (STJ) [Added 6-10-1997]
Stop North/South on Jefferson
Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at Sixth Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Jefferson
Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at Takats Lane
(STJ) [Added 5-25-2004]
Stop North/South on Jefferson
Avenue
Jefferson Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ)
Stop North/South on Jefferson
Avenue
Jefferson Street and Uncas Street
(NES) [Added 2-6-1990]
Stop South on Jefferson Street
Jenna Court/Old Commack Road
(KPK) [Added 6-12-2001]
Stop South on Jenna Court
Jennifer Road at Amsterdam Road
(SMT) [Added 7-22-1986]
Stop East on Jennifer Road
Jerome Street at Annette Avenue
(SMT)
Stop South on Jerome Street
Jill Court at Fleetwood Road
(COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop West on Jill Court
Jill Court at Wichard Boulevard
(COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop South on Jill Court
Johnson Avenue South at Old
Commack Road (KPK)
Stop South on Johnson Avenue
South
Johnson Street at Ruth Boulevard
(COM)
Stop East on Johnson Street
John Street at St. Nicholas Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on John Street
Josephine Lane at northern
intersection of Meadow Glen Road
(KPK) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop Westbound traffic on
Josephine Lane
Josephine Lane North at Meadow
Glen Road (KPK)
Stop West on Josephine Lane
North
Josephine Lane South at Meadow
Glen Road (KPK)
Stop West on Josephine Lane
South
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1080
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Joseph Place at Edith Lane (NES)
[Added 6-29-1999]
Stop North/South on Joseph
Place
June Street at Mt. Pleasant Road
(SMT)
Stop West on June Street
Juniper Avenue at Edgewater
Avenue (SMT)
Stop North on Juniper Avenue
Juniper Avenue at Hawthorne
Drive (SMT) [Added 1-6-1987]
Stop North/South on Juniper
Avenue
Juniper Avenue at Sweetbriar
Drive (SMT) [Added 5-16-2000]
Stop North/South on Juniper
Avenue
Juniper Avenue at Wildwood Lane
(SMT) [Added 1-6-1987]
Stop North/South on Juniper
Avenue
Juniper Road at Birch Road (KPK) Stop East/West on Juniper
Road
Juniper Road at Washington Drive
(KPK)
Stop North/South on Juniper
Road
Juniper Road at Woodland Drive
(KPK)
Stop North/South on Juniper
Road
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Karl Avenue at Redwood Avenue
(SMT)
Stop North on Karl Avenue
Kelly Court at Church Street
(KPK)
Stop West on Kelly Court
Kemper Court at Mills Pond Road
(STJ) [Added 8-20-1996]
Stop West on Kemper Court
Kempf Street at Browns Road
(NES)
Stop East on Kempf Street
Kennedy Drive at Marcus
Boulevard (HPG)
Stop West on Kennedy Drive
Kenwood Lane at Elderwood Drive
North (STJ) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop South on Kenwood Lane
Ketcham Avenue at Arlington
Avenue (STJ)
Stop West on Ketcham Avenue
Ketcham Avenue at Jefferson
Avenue (STJ)
Stop East on Ketcham Avenue
Kim Place at Lawrence Road
(KPK) [Added 3-12-1985]
Stop West on Kim Place
Kim Place at Nan Place ((KPK)
[Added 5-15-2001]
Stop East/West on Kim Place
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1081
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
King Arthur Court at Hillside
Avenue (STJ)
Stop East on King Arthur Court
Kings Highway at Columbus
Avenue (KPK) [Added 9-7-1993]
Stop South on Kings Highway
Kings Highway at Huntington
Avenue (KPK) [Added
12-28-2004]
Stop North/South on Kings
Highway
Kings Park Central Business
District Parking Lot driveway at
Renwick Avenue (KPK)
Stop West on Kings Park
Central Business District
Parking Lot driveway
Kings Park Commuter Field exit at
Carlson Avenue (KPK) [Added
1-5-1988]
Stop West on commuter field
exit
King Street at Lou Avenue (KPK) Stop North on King Street
Knight Lane at Boxwood Drive
(KPK)
Stop South on Knight Lane
Knoll Road at Abbot Road (SMT) Stop South on Knoll Road
Knoll Road at Plymouth Boulevard
(COM)
Stop East on Knoll Road
Knolltop Drive at Gibbs Pond Road
(NES)
Stop West at Knolltop Drive
Knollwood Lane at Grassy Pond
Drive (SMT) [Added 4-10-2018]
Stop North at Knollwood Lane
Knollwood Lane at Ledgewood
Drive (PNS)
Stop West on Knollwood Lane
Kohlsaat Court at Edgewood
Avenue (SMT) [Added
10-3-2000]
Stop South on Kohlsaat Court
Kohr Road at Sunken Meadow
Road (KPK)
Stop North on Kohr Road
Kristi Lane at Cornelia Lane
(NES)
Stop South on Kristi Lane
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Lafayette Avenue at Browns Road
(NES)
Stop West on Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue at Fulton
Boulevard (SMT) [Added
1-7-1986]
Stop South on Lafayette
Avenue
Lake Avenue at Oak Street (STJ)
[Added 1-19-2012]
Stop South on Lake Avenue
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1082
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Lake Avenue at Roseville Avenue
(STJ) [Added 1-19-2012]
Stop North on Lake Avenue
Lake Avenue South at Beau Jol
Court (NES) [Added
10-22-2002]
Stop North/South on Lake
Avenue
Lake Avenue South at Burgundy
Lane/Nesconset Avenue (NES)
[Added 10-22-2002]
Stop North/South on Lake
Avenue
Lake Avenue South at Gaynor
Avenue (NES) [Added
10-22-2002]
Stop North/South on Lake
Avenue
Lake Avenue South at Gibbs Pond
Road (NES)
Stop North on Lake Avenue
South
Lake Avenue South at Margaret
Avenue (NES) [Added
6-29-1999]
Stop North/South on Lake
Avenue South
Lakeview Avenue at Browns Road
(NES)
Stop West on Lakeview Avenue
Lakeview Drive at Rosewood Road
(KPK) [Added 6-9-1992]
Stop South on Lakeview Drive
Lancaster Avenue at Leydon
Street (NES) [Added 3-11-2008]
Stop North/South on Lancaster
Avenue
Lancaster Avenue at Pierson
Street (NES)
Stop North on Lancaster
Avenue
Lancelot Court at Storybook Lane
(STJ)
Stop North on Lancelot Court
100 Landing Avenue, exit lanes
(Gold's Gym, Healing Hands,
Tutor Time) (SMT) [Added
6-11-2002]
Stop East on exit lanes
Landing Avenue at Landing Road
(KPK)
Stop North on Landing Avenue
Landing Meadow Road at Oakside
Drive (SMT)
Stop North/South on Landing
Meadow Road
Landing Meadow Road at Oakside
Drive (SMT) [Added
10-27-1987]
Stop East/West on Oakside
Drive
Landing Meadow Road at Stony
Hill Path (southern intersection)
(SMT) [Added 7-12-1988]
Stop East/West on Landing
Meadow Road
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1083
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Landing Meadow Road at
Wandering Way (SMT) [Added
3-12-1985; amended
4-25-1995]
Stop North/East on Landing
Meadow Road
Landing Meadow Road North at
Landing Avenue (SMT)
Stop West on Landing Meadow
Road North
Landing Meadow Road South at
Landing Avenue (SMT)
Stop West on Landing Meadow
Road South
Landview Drive at Carriage Drive
(KPK) [Added 8-12-1986]
Stop South on Landview Drive
Landview Drive at Gristmill Drive
(KPK)
Stop West on Landview Drive
Larch Lane at Brooksite Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Larch Lane
Lark Place at Executive Drive
(HPG) [Added 4-25-2019]
Stop North on Lark Place
Larkspur Drive at Cygnet Drive
(SMT) [Added 8-23-1988]
Stop South on Larkspur Drive
Larkspur Drive at Mark Drive
(SMT) [Added 6-9-1992]
Stop North/South on Larkspur
Drive
Larkspur Drive at New Mill Road
(SMT)
Stop North on Larkspur Drive
Larsen Avenue at Hallock Avenue
(SMT) [Added 1-6-1987]
Stop West on Larsen Avenue
LaSalle Lane at Balboa Drive
(KPK) [Added 7-28-1998]
Stop West on LaSalle Lane
Laser Court at Wireless Boulevard
(HPG) [Added 11-22-1988]
Stop North on Laser Court
Laura Court at Southern
Boulevard (NES)
Stop East on Laura Court
Laurel Drive at Lone Oak Path
(SMT) [Added 2-26-2002]
Stop North/South on Laurel
Drive
Laurel Drive at Old Hauppauge
(SMT, PNS) [Added 8-12-1986]
Stop South on Laurel Drive
Laurel Drive at Wyandanch
Boulevard (SMT, PNS)
Stop West on Laurel Drive
Laurel Lane at Shirley Court
(COM)
Stop South on Laurel Lane
Laurel Lane at Walter Court
(COM)
Stop North on Laurel Lane
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1084
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Laurel Road at Birch Road (KPK)
[Added 9-19-1988]
Stop North on Laurel Road
Laurel Road at Lincoln Drive
(KPK) [Added 9-19-1988]
Stop South on Laurel Road
Laurelton Avenue at Browns Road
(NES)
Stop West on Laurelton Avenue
Laurelton Avenue at St. James
Parkway (NES)
Stop East/West on Laurelton
Avenue
Laurelton Avenue at Seawanhaka
Avenue (NES)
Stop East/West on Laurelton
Avenue
Laurinda Drive at New Highway
(COM)
Stop South on Laurinda Drive
Laurinda Drive at Retta Lane
(eastern intersection) (COM)
[Added 2-6-2018]
Stop North/South on Laurinda
Drive
Laurinda Drive at Retta Lane
(western intersection) (COM)
[Added 2-6-2018]
Stop East/West on Laurinda
Drive
Lawrence Avenue at Maple
Avenue (SMT) [Repealed
1-9-2001]
Lawrence Road at Bay Street
(KPK) [Added 3-31-1998]
Stop North on Lawrence Road
Lawrence Road at Boxwood Drive
(KPK) [Added 4-13-2004]
Stop North/South on Lawrence
Road
Lawrence Road at Cusick Avenue
(KPK) [Added 3-31-1998]
Stop South on Lawrence Road
Lawrence Road at Kim Place
(KPK) [Added 3-31-1998]
Stop North/South on Lawrence
Road
Lawrence Road at Meadow Road
(KPK)
Stop North/South on Lawrence
Road
Lawrence Road at Old Northport
Road (KPK) [Added 7-11-1995;
repealed 1-9-2001]
Lawrence Road southbound right
turn channelization at Old
Northport Road (KPK) [Added
7-25-1995]
Yield South on Lawrence Road
west side of traffic island
Lawrence Road at Primrose Lane
(KPK) [Added 6-28-2005]
Stop North and south on
Lawrence Road
Leaf Court at Kohr Road (KPK)
[Added 5-25-1993]
Stop East on Leaf Court
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1085
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Leary Lane at Gaynor Avenue
(NES)
Stop South on Leary Lane
Ledgewood Drive at Churchill
Lane (PNS)
Stop North/South on
Ledgewood Drive
Ledgewood Drive at Holly Drive
(PNS)
Stop North/South on
Ledgewood Drive
Ledgewood Drive at Mobrey Lane
(PNS)
Stop North/South on
Ledgewood Drive
Leeland Drive at Executive Drive
(HPG) [Added 4-25-2019]
Stop South on Leeland Drive
Leeland Drive at New Highway
(HPG)
Stop North on Leeland Drive
Legion Drive at Holly Drive (PNS)
[Added 8-14-1984]
Stop South on Legion Drive
Legion Drive at Lone Oak Path
(PNS)
Stop North on Legion Drive
Lehigh Drive at Howell Drive
(SMT) [Added 1-18-2007]
Stop West on Lehigh Drive
Leonard Street at St. Nicholas
Avenue (SMT)
Stop East/West on Leonard
Street
Leonard Street at South Hillside
Avenue (NES)
Stop West on Leonard Street
Leslie Court at Leslie Lane (SMT)
[Added 2-5-1985]
Stop North on Leslie Court
Leslie Lane at Foothill Lane (SMT)
[Added 8-12-1986]
Stop East/West on Leslie Lane
Leslie Lane at Mike Lane (SMT)
[Added 2-5-1985]
Stop East on Leslie Lane
Leslie Lane at Villa Lane (COM) Stop East on Leslie Lane
Lewis Lane at Hudson Drive (KPK)
[Added 10-25-2005]
Stop South on Lewis Lane
Leydon Street at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop West on Leydon Street
Leydon Street at Lancaster
Avenue (NES) [Added
3-11-2008]
Stop East on Leydon Street
Libby Road at South Plaisted
Avenue (HPG)
Stop East on Libby Road
Lt. John A. Olsen Lane at
Moriches Road (STJ)
Stop East on Lt. John A. Olsen
Lane
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1086
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Lilac Lane at Brooksite Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Lilac Lane
Lilac Lane at Forest Brook
Elementary School parking lot
aisle (SMT) [Added 11-10-1998]
Stop West on Lilac Lane
Lillian Road and Carl Court (NES)
[Added 9-26-2000]
Stop North and south on Lillian
Road
Lillian Road at Eklund Boulevard
(NES)
Stop North/South on Lillian
Road
Lillian Road at Gibbs Pond Road
(NES)
Stop West on Lillian Road
Lillian Road at Nichols Road
(NES)
Stop North on Lillian Road
Lincoln Avenue at Cedar Street
(COM)
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Avenue
Lincoln Avenue at Chassyl Road
(COM)
Stop South on Lincoln Avenue
Lincoln Avenue at Fifth Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Avenue
Lincoln Avenue at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop West on Lincoln Avenue
Lincoln Avenue at Mayfair Road
(NES) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop East on Lincoln Avenue
Lincoln Avenue at Railroad
Avenue (STJ)
Stop North on Lincoln Avenue
Lincoln Avenue at Seventh Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Lincoln
Avenue
Lincoln Avenue at Terry Road
(NES)
Stop West on Lincoln Avenue
Lincoln Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ)
Stop South on Lincoln Avenue
Lincoln Drive at Cedar Road
(KPK)
Stop West on Lincoln Drive
Lincoln Drive at Hawthorne Road
(KPK) [Added 9-19-1988]
Stop West on Lincoln Drive
Lincoln Drive at Juniper Road
(KPK) [Added 9-19-1988]
Stop East on Lincoln Drive
Lincoln Drive at St. Johnland Road
(KPK)
Stop East on Lincoln Drive
Lincoln Street at Lindron Avenue
(SMT)
Stop South on Lincoln Street
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1087
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Linda Lane at White Birch Lane
(COM)
Stop North on Linda Lane
Lindell Avenue at Browns Road
(NES)
Stop West on Lindell Avenue
Lindell Avenue at Forest Avenue
(NES) [Added 6-11-1996]
Stop East on Lindell Avenue
Lindell Avenue at Seawanhaka
Avenue (NES)
Stop East/West on Lindell
Avenue
Linden Avenue at Old Road (KPK)
[Added 11-29-2007]
Stop South on Linden Avenue
Linden Place at Elm Avenue
(SMT) [Added 1-21-2010]
Stop East on Linden Place
Linden Place at Maple Avenue
(SMT)
Stop West on Linden Place
Lindron Avenue at Hill Lane
(SMT) [Added 6-28-2005]
Stop East and west on Lindron
Avenue
Lindron Avenue at Plymouth
Boulevard (COM)
Stop West on Lindron Avenue
Lindsey Place at Long House Way
(COM) [Added 2-26-2002]
Stop South on Lindsey Place
Links Road at Croft Lane (PNS)
[Added 9-25-2008]
Stop East on Links Road
Links Road at Old Willets Path
(PNS)
Stop West on Links Road
Linwood Lane at Woodfield
Avenue (KPK)
Stop West on Linwood Lane
Lisa Court at Heights Road (KPK) Stop South on Lisa Court
Lisa Court at South Hillside
Avenue (NES)
Stop West on Lisa Court
Lizetta Street at Hurtin Boulevard
(SMT) [Added 11-23-1999]
Stop South on Lizetta Street
Locksley Lane at Gibbs Pond
(NES) [Added 11-20-1990]
Stop North on Locksley Lane
Locust Drive at St. Johnland Road
(KPK)
Stop North/South on Locust
Drive
Locust Street at Oak Street (NES) Stop South on Locust Street
Loft Road at Croft Lane (PNS) Stop East on Loft Road
Loft Road at Old Willets Path
(PNS)
Stop West on Loft Road
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1088
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Lone Oak Path at Laurel Drive
(PNS)
Stop East/West on Lone Oak
Path
Lone Oak Path at Ledgewood
Drive (PNS)
Stop East/West on Lone Oak
Path
Lone Oak Path at White Oak Drive
(SMT) [Added 4-29-2003]
Stop East/West on Lone Oak
Path
Lone Oak Path at Pine Ridge Drive
(SMT) [Added 4-29-2003]
Stop East/West on Lone Oak
Path
Lone Oak Path at Wyandanch
Boulevard (PNS)
Stop West on Lone Oak Path
Long Beach Road at Marina
Access Road on or about April 15
through November 15 (STJ)
[Added 4-17-1995]
Stop East on Long Beach Road
Long Bow Lane at Town Line Road
(COM)
Stop West on Long Bow Lane
Longfellow Drive at Landing Road
(KPK)
Stop South on Longfellow
Drive
Longfellow Drive at Rosewood
Road (KPK)
Stop North/South on
Longfellow Drive
Longfellow Drive at Tulip Drive
(KPK) [Added 7-9-1985]
Stop North/South on
Longfellow Drive
Longfellow Drive at Walnut Road
(KPK)
Stop North/South on
Longfellow Drive
Long Hill Road at Nissequogue
River Road (SMT)
Stop West on Long Hill Road
Long House Way at Crest Lane
(KPK) [Added 10-7-1997]
Stop East/West on Long House
Way
Long House Way at Tecumseh
Court (KPK) [Added 10-7-1997]
Stop East/West on Long House
Way
Long House Way/Bury Court at
Roxbury Drive (COM) [Added
3-16-2000]
Stop South on Long House
Way/ Bury Court
Long Meadow Road at Fleetwood
Road (COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop South and east on Long
Meadow Road
Lonni Lane at Dillmont Drive
(SMT) [Added 5-2-1989]
Stop West on Lonni Lane
Looking Glass Court at
Whispering Woods Drive (SMT)
[Added 6-22-1999]
Stop West on Looking Glass
Court
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1089
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Lordly Court at Lawrence Road
(KPK)
Stop East on Lordly Court
Lori Drive at Knollcrest Road
(NES) [Added 12-28-1999]
Stop West on Lori Drive
Lorraine Court at Lindron Avenue
(SMT) [Added 3-12-1985]
Stop South on Lorraine Court
Lou Avenue at Avenue B (KPK)
[Added 7-2-1992]
Stop East/West on Lou Avenue
Lou Avenue at Bennett Street
(KPK) [Added 10-20-1992]
Stop North on Lou Avenue
Lou Avenue at Cedar Street (KPK) Stop East/West on Lou Avenue
Lou Avenue at Dawson Avenue
(KPK) [Added 10-20-1992]
Stop South on Lou Avenue
Louise Court at Francis Street
(NES) [Added 9-27-1994]
Stop East on Louise Court
Louis Place at Bobann Drive
(NES) [Added 10-26-1999]
Stop East on Louis Place
Lower Road at Oakside Road
(SMT)
Stop North on Lower Road
Lyda Drive at Gibbs Pond Road
(NES)
Stop East on Lyda Drive
Lynch Lane at Edgar Drive (SMT)
[Added 6-11-1996]
Stop West on Lynch Lane
Lynch Lane at Hilltop Drive (SMT)
[Added 6-11-1996]
Stop East on Lynch Lane
Lyn Oak Lane at Country Oaks
Drive (KPK) [Added 5-26-1987]
Stop West on Lyn Oak Lane
Lyn Oak Lane at Twin Oaks Drive
(KPK) [Added 5-26-1987]
Stop East on Lyn Oak Lane
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Ma Bell Lane at Elm Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Ma Bell Lane
Ma Bell Lane at Maple Avenue
(SMT)
Stop West on Ma Bell Lane
MacArthur Lane at Laurel Drive
(SMT) [Added 7-23-1985]
Stop West on MacArthur Lane
MacKay Drive at Old Willets path
(HPG)
Stop West on MacKay Drive
MacKay Drive at Salem Path
(HPG)
Stop North/South on MacKay
Drive
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1090
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Madison Street at Browns Road
(NES)
Stop East on Madison Street
Madison Street at St. Johnland
Road (KPK)
Stop West on Madison Street
Magellan Avenue at Cook Street
(KPK)
Stop West on Magellan Avenue
Magellan Avenue at Meadow Road
(KPK)
Stop North on Magellan
Avenue
Magnolia Avenue at Browns Road
(NES) [Repealed 8-12-1986]
Magnolia Avenue at Browns Road
(NES) [Added 7-14-1992]
Stop East/West on Magnolia
Avenue
Magnolia Avenue at Garden Street
(NES) [Added 8-14-1984]
Stop East/West on Magnolia
Avenue
Magnolia Drive at Rivera Drive
(KPK) [Added 3-24-1987]
Stop North on Magnolia Drive
Magnolia Avenue at St. James
Parkway (NES) [Added
6-3-1986]
Stop West on Magnolia Avenue
Magnolia Drive at St. Johnland
Road (KPK)
Stop North/South on Magnolia
Drive
Magnolia Drive at Verbena Drive
(COM) [Added 5-16-2000]
Stop North on Magnolia Drive
Magnolia Drive at Walter Court
(COM)
Stop South on Magnolia Drive
Mall Drive at Moreland Road
(HPG) [Added 11-22-1988]
Stop East on Mall Drive
Manor Place at Asbury Drive
(SMT) [Added 9-24-2002]
Stop North on Manor Place
Manor Road at Karl Avenue (SMT) Stop West on Manor Road
Manor Road at Landing Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Manor Road
Map Lane at Apple Lane (COM)
[Added 10-11-1988]
Stop West on Map Lane
Maple Avenue at Cedar Street
(KPK)
Stop East on Maple Avenue
Maple Drive at Lake Avenue (STJ) Stop West on Maple Drive
Maple Drive at Lincoln Drive
(KPK) [Added 9-19-1988]
Stop South on Maple Avenue
Maple Drive at Moriches Road
(STJ)
Stop East on Maple Drive
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1091
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Maple Glen Lane at Southern
Boulevard (NES)
Stop East on Maple Glen Lane
Maple Glen Lane at Suburban
Lane (NES) [Added 9-26-2006]
Stop South on Maple Glen
Lane
Maplelawn Drive at Valleywood
Road (COM) [Added 5-7-1991]
Stop North on Maplelawn
Drive
Maple Road at Birch Road (KPK)
[Added 4-21-1987]
Stop East/West on Maple Road
Maple Road at St. Johnland Road
(KPK)
Stop East on Maple Road
Mapleview Place at Eighth Avenue
(KPK) [Added 7-11-1995]
Stop West on Mapleview Place
Mapleview Place at Eighth Avenue
(KPK) [Added 12-11-1984]
Stop West on Mapleview Road
Marcella Court at Winston Drive
(PNS)
Stop East on Marcella Court
Marchant Drive at Sammis Street
(STJ) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop North on Marchant Drive
Mare Lane at Pinetree Court
(COM) [Added 3-12-1985]
Stop North on Mare Lane
Margaret Avenue at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop East on Margaret Avenue
Margaret Avenue at Nichols Road
(NES)
Stop East on Margaret Avenue
Margaret Drive at Gibbs Pond
Road (NES)
Stop West on Margaret Drive
Margaret Drive at Steuben
Boulevard (NES) [Added
5-24-1988; amended
6-21-1988]
Stop East on Margaret Drive
Marie Court at Marie Crescent
(COM) [Added 9-18-1990]
Stop East on Marie Court
Marie Crescent at New Highway
(COM)
Stop North on Marie Crescent
Marie Crescent at Parkway Drive
North (COM)
Stop Stop on Marie Crescent
Marie Crescent at Regina Drive
(COM) [Added 5-25-1993]
Stop North/South on Marie
Crescent
Marie Crescent at Rita Crescent
(COM) [Added 5-25-1993]
Stop North/South on Marie
Crescent
Marilyn Drive at West Drive (KPK) Stop West on Marilyn Drive
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1092
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Marina Access Road at East Boat
Ramp parking lot (STJ) [Added
5-6-1997]
Yield South on Marina Access
Road
Marina Access Road at Long
Beach Road (STJ) [Added
4-17-1995]
Stop North on Marina Access
Road
Marion Street at Midwood Avenue
(NES) [Added 10-24-1989]
Stop East on Marion Street
Marion Street at Nichols Road
(NES)
Stop South on Marion Street
Mark Drive at Brookside Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Mark Drive
Mark Drive at Larkspur Drive
(SMT) [Added 6-9-1992]
Stop West on Mark Drive
Mark Drive at Teal Lane (SMT)
[Added 5-25-1993; repealed
9-3-1996]
Mark Lane at Nichols Road (NES)
[Added 4-11-1995]
Stop South on Mark Lane
Marlan Court at Pia Boulevard
(SMT)
Stop North on Marlan Court
Marquette Drive at Fifty Acre
Road South (SMT) [Added
10-11-1988]
Stop East on Marquette Drive
Marquette Drive at Howell Drive
(SMT) [Added 7-14-1992]
Stop West on Marquette Drive
Marshmallow Drive at Carmel
Road (COM) [Added 2-20-1996]
Stop East on Marshmallow
Drive
Marshmallow Drive at Town Line
Road (COM)
Stop West on Marshmallow
Drive
Martha Lane at Hallock Avenue
(SM
Stop West on Martha Lane
Martingale Gate at Bread and
Cheese Hollow Road (KPK)
[Added 8-25-1998]
Stop West on Martingale Gate
Marvin Drive at Eugene Drive
(KPK) [Added 6-9-1992]
Stop East/West on Marvin
Drive
Marvin Drive at Fifth Avenue
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Marvin
Drive
Marwood Drive at Executive Drive
(HPG) [Added 4-25-2019]
Stop South on Marwood Drive
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1093
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Marwood Drive at New Highway
(HPG)
Stop North on Marwood Drive
Maureen Drive at Garvey Drive
(HPG)
Stop South on Maureen Drive
Max Way at Long House Way
(COM) [Added 2-26-2002]
Stop South on Max Way
Mayfair Court at Mayfair Road
(NES) [Added 2-9-1999]
Stop West on Mayfair Court
Mayfair Road at Lincoln Avenue
(NES) [Added 6-10-1997]
Stop North/South on Mayfair
Road
Mayflower Avenue at Edgewater
Avenue (SMT)
Stop North on Mayflower
Avenue
Mayflower Avenue at Hawthorne
Drive (SMT) [Added 6-26-1990]
Stop South on Mayflower
Avenue
Maylin Court at Hilltop Drive
(SMT) [Added 6-11-1996]
Stop West on Maylin Court
Maywood Court at Elderwood
Drive (STJ) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop North on Maywood Court
McArthur Lane at Bayberry Lane
(PNS)
Stop East/West on McArthur
Lane
McArthur Lane at Grassy Pond
Drive (PNS)
Stop East on McArthur Lane
McArthur Lane at Ledgewood
Drive (PNS)
Stop East/West on McArthur
Lane
McArthur Lane at Ledgewood
Drive (SMT) [Added 8-14-1990]
Stop East/West on McArthur
Lane
McArthur Lane at Winston Drive
(PNS)
Stop East/West on McArthur
Lane
McKinley Street at Northern
Boulevard (STJ)
Stop East on McKinley Street
McKinley Street at St. James
Avenue (STJ) [Added 6-22-2004]
Stop West on McKinley Street
McLain Drive at Meadow Road
(SMT)
Stop South on McLain Drive
Meadow Court at White Cliff Lane
(NES) [Added 1-21-2003]
Stop South on Meadow Court
Meadow Glen Road at Josephine
Lane (south intersection)(KPK)
[Added 4-24-2001]
Stop North on Meadow Glen
Road
Meadow Glen Road at Orchard
Drive (KPK)
Stop South on Meadow Glen
Road
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1094
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Meadow Glen Road at Pup's Path
(KPK) [Added 4-24-2001]
Stop South on Meadow Glen
Road
Meadow Glen Road at Sunken
Meadow Road (KPK) [Added
2-26-2002]
Stop North on Meadow Glen
Road
Meadow Lane at Woodhollow
Lane (KPK) [Added 9-25-2001]
Stop East/West on Meadowood
Lane
Meadowood Lane at Meadow Glen
Road (KPK)
Stop West on Meadowood Lane
Meadowood Lane at Old SR25A
(KPK)
Stop East on Meadowood Lane
Meadow Road at Dillmont Drive
(SMT) [Added 9-23-1997]
Stop East/West on Meadow
Road
Meadow Road at Gardiner Road/
Ridge Road (SMT) [Added
11-21-1989]
Yield Southeast on Meadow
Road making right turn
Meadow Road at Old Northport
Road (SMT)
Stop South on Meadow Road
Meadow Road at Pine Acre Drive
(SMT) [Added 9-23-1997]
Stop East/West on Meadow
Road
Meadow Road at West Drive (KPK)
(right turn channelization lane)
[Added 12-10-1991]
Yield East on Meadow Road
right turn lane
Meadow Road West at First
Avenue (KPK)
Stop West on Meadow Road
West
Melody Lane at Gingerbread Road
(KPK) [Added 11-9-1999]
Stop West on Melody Lane
Melody Lane at Meadow Road
(SMT) [Added 3-12-1985]
Stop East on Melody Lane
Melrose Lane at Bethany Drive
(KPK) [Added 12-1989]
Stop South on Melrose Lane
Merrivale Drive at Sunset Lane
(HPG) [Added 12-17-2013]
Stop North/South on Merrivale
Drive
Meryl Lane at Gaynor Avenue
(NES)
Stop South on Meryl Lane
Meyer Lane at Sheryl Crescent
(SMT)
Stop South on Meyer Lane
Miami Place at Rainbow Drive
(HPG) [Added 11-13-2001]
Stop East on Miami Place
Michael Place at Gibbs Pond Road
(NES)
Stop West on Michael Place
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1095
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Midvale Drive at Bowman Lane
(KPK) [Added 9-22-1992]
Stop North on Midvale Drive
Midwood Avenue at Chapman
Road (NES)
Stop South on Midwood
Avenue
Midwood Avenue at Chivalry Lane
(NES)
Stop North on Midwood
Avenue
Midwood Avenue at Gibbs Pond
Road (NES)
Stop North on Midwood
Avenue
Midwood Avenue at Marion Street
(NES) [Added 7-16-2019]
Stop North and South on
Midwood Avenue
Midwood Avenue at Nesconset
Avenue (NES) [Added 7-8-2003]
Stop North and South on
Midwood Avenue
Midwood Avenue at Nichols Road
(NES)
Stop South on Midwood
Avenue
Midwood Place at Canterbury
Lane (NES)
Stop North/South on Midwood
Avenue
Mike Lane at Peppermill Court
(SMT) [Added 2-5-1985]
Stop North on Mike Lane
Mike Lane at Villa Lane (SMT)
[Added 2-5-1985]
Stop East on Mike Lane
Milemore Court at Milemore
Drive (KPK) [Added 12-9-1997]
Stop North on Milemore Court
Milemore Drive at Bread and
Cheese Hollow Road (KPK)
[Added 12-9-1997]
Stop West on Milemore Drive
Millan Avenue at Oak Street
(NES)
Stop South on Millan Avenue
Mill Dam Road at New Mill Road
(SMT)
Stop South on Mill Dam Road
Milleridge Lane at Edgewood
Avenue (SMT)
Stop South on Milleridge Lane
Mills Path at Schoolhouse Road
(NES)
Stop East on Mills Path
Mills Pond Road at Bayberry/
Arrowood Drive (STJ) [Added
6-22-2017]
Stop North/South on Mills
Pond Road
Mills Pond Road at Copper Beech/
Wellwood Road (STJ) [Added
6-22-2017]
Stop North/South on Mills
Pond Road
Mills Pond Road at Moriches Road
(STJ)
Stop South on Mills Pond Road
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1096
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Mina Place at Boxwood Drive
(KPK) [Added 9-5-2017]
Stop West on Mina Place
Mina Place at King Road (KPK)
[Added 9-19-1988]
Stop East on Mina Place
Mobrey Lane at Bayberry Lane
(SMT) [Added 8-10-2004]
Stop East/West on Mobrey
Lane
Mobrey Lane at Grassy Pond
Drive (PNS)
Stop East/West on Mobrey
Lane
Mobrey Lane at Laurel Drive
(PNS)
Stop West on Mobrey Lane
Mobrey Lane at Ledgewood Drive
(PNS)
Stop East/West on Mobrey
Lane
Mobrey Lane at Old Willets Path
(PNS)
Stop East on Mobrey Lane
Mobrey Lane at Pineridge Drive
(PNS)
Stop East/West on Mobrey
Lane
Modular Avenue at Mall Drive
(HPG)
Stop West on Modular Avenue
Modular Avenue at Moreland
Road (COM)
Stop East on Modular Avenue
Mohegan Lane at New Highway
(COM)
Stop South on Mohegan Lane
Mohegan Lane at Sioux Drive
(COM) [Added 10-24-2006]
Stop North on Mohegan Lane
Mon Repos Lane at eastern
intersection with Park Circle
(NES) [Added 11-19-1996;
repealed 12-14-1999]
Monroe Street at Browns Road
(NES)
Stop East on Monroe Street
Monroe Street at St. Nicholas
Avenue (SMT) [Added
7-14-1987; amended
7-14-1992]
Stop East on Monroe Street
Montclair Avenue at Rutherford
Street (STJ)
Stop North/South on Montclair
Avenue
Montrose Drive at Byron Road
(COM)
Stop South on Montrose Drive
Montrose Drive at Roxbury Drive
(COM)
Stop North on Montrose Drive
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1097
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Moonlit Court at High Gate Drive
(SMT) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop North on Moonlit Court
Moreland Road at Parkway Drive
South (HPG) [Added 6-4-1985]
Stop North on Moreland Road
Morewood Drive at Charter Lane
(SMT) [Added 7-2-1992]
Stop North/South on
Morewood Drive
Morewood Drive at Greenwich
Road (COM) [Added 4-8-1986]
Stop East/West on Morewood
Drive
Morewood Drive at Parnell Drive
(SMT) [Added 4-5-1988;
amended 7-14-1992]
Stop North/South on
Morewood Drive
Morewood Drive at Plymouth
Boulevard (COM)
Stop East on Morewood Drive
Morgan Court at Brooksite Drive
(SMT) [Added 5-27-1997]
Stop West on Morgan Court
Moriches Road at Lake Avenue
(STJ) [Added 7-23-1985;
repealed 1-28-1997]
Moriches Road at Lake Avenue
(STJ) [Added 7-23-1985;
repealed 1-28-1997]
Moriches Road/Mills Pond Road/
Evon Lane (STJ) [Added
3-31-1998]
Stop East/West on Moriches
Road
Mott Court at Astor Avenue (STJ)
[Added 9-23-1997]
Stop East on Mott Court
Mountain Laurel Lane at Country
Oaks Drive (KPK) [Added
5-26-1987]
Stop West on Mountain Laurel
Lane
Mountain Laurel Lane at Twin
Oaks Drive (KPK) [Added
5-26-1987]
Stop East on Mountain Laurel
Lane
Mount Pleasant Road at Adrienne
Lane (HPG) [Added 10-1-1985]
Stop North/South on Mount
Pleasant Road
Mount Pleasant Road at Garvey
Drive (HPG) [Added 10-1-1985]
Stop North/South on Mount
Pleasant Road
Mulberry Drive at Belford Lane
(SMT) [Added 5-12-1998]
Stop West on Mulberry Drive
Mulberry Drive at Parnell Drive
(COM)
Stop North on Mulberry Drive
Munsee Way at Long House Way
(COM) [Added 2-26-2002]
Stop South on Munsee Way
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1098
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Myles Court at Fleetwood Road
(COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop South on Myles Court
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Nancy Lane at Nichols Road
(NES)
Stop South on Nancy Lane
Nan Place at Kim Place (KPK)
[Added 3-12-1985]
Stop North on Nan Place
Nan Place at Tammi Drive (KPK)
[Added 2-10-1998]
Stop South on Nan Place
Narcissus Road at Birch Road
(KPK) [Added 9-19-1988]
Stop South on Narcissus Road
Naro Lane at Josephine Lane
(KPK) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop Northbound traffic on
Naro Lane
Naro Lane at Paddock Drive (KPK)
[Added 4-11-1995]
Stop South on Naro Lane
Neil Drive at High Gate Drive
(SMT)
Stop North/South on Neil Drive
Neil Drive at Oakside Road (SMT) Stop North/South on Neil Drive
Neil Drive at River Heights Drive
(SMT)
Stop South on Neil Drive
Nesconset Avenue at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop West on Nesconset
Avenue
Nesconset Avenue at Midwood
Avenue (NES)
Stop East on Nesconset
Avenue
Neslo Drive at Southern
Boulevard (NES)
Stop West on Neslo Drive
New Dairy Lane at Cedar Street
(KPK)
Stop West on New Dairy Lane
New Dairy Lane at Park Avenue
(KPK)
Stop South on New Dairy Lane
New Highway at Old Willets Path
(PNS)
Stop North on New Highway
New Highway (north leg) at
Harned Road (COM)
Yield North on New Highway
New Mill Road at Larkspur Drive
(SMT) [Added 5-25-1993]
Stop East/West on New Mill
Road
New Mill Road at Mill Dam Road/
Teal Lane (SMT) [Added
5-25-1993]
Stop East/West on New Mill
Road
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1099
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
New York Avenue at Colonial
Drive (SMT) [Added 9-24-1985]
Stop North/South on New York
Avenue
New York Avenue at Fordham
Drive (SMT) [Added 8-22-2000]
Stop North/South on New York
Avenue
New York Avenue at Harvard
Avenue (SMT) [Added
8-27-1985]
Stop North/South on New York
Avenue
New York Avenue at Wildwood
Lane (SMT)
Stop South on New York
Avenue
Nicholas Court at Brown's Road
(NES) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop South on Nicholas Court
Nicholas Lane at South Plaisted
Avenue (HPG)
Stop West on Nicholas Lane
Nicola Lane at Browns Road
(NES) [Added 2-7-2012]
Stop West on Nicola Lane
Nicola Lane at Hillside Avenue
(NES) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop East on Nicola Lane
Nicolette Court at Cornell Drive
(COM) [Added 10-25-1988]
Stop South on Nicolette Court
Nimitz Road at Jefferson Avenue
(STJ)
Stop West on Nimitz Road
Nimitz Road at Lake Avenue (STJ) Stop East on Nimitz Road
Ninth Avenue at Old Commack
Road (KPK)
Stop North on Ninth Avenue
Noel Place at Eckernkamp Drive
(SMT) [Added 6-12-1984]
Stop North on Noel Place
Noel Place at Summerset Drive
(SMT) [Added 6-12-1984]
Stop South on Noel Place
Noel Place at Summerset Drive
(SMT) [Added 9-26-1986;
repealed 7-14-1992]
Nolan Court at Mt. Pleasant Road
(SMT)
Stop West on Nolan Court
Normandy Court at Barbera Road
(COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop North on Normandy
Court
North Avenue at Hallock Avenue
(NES)
Stop North/South on North
Avenue
North Ingelore Court at River
Heights Drive (SMT) [Added
12-21-1993]
Yield South on North Ingelore
Court
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1100
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Northern Boulevard at Cleveland
Street (STJ) [Added 7-12-1988]
Stop North/South on Northern
Boulevard
Northern Boulevard at Railroad
Avenue (STJ) [Added 6-9-1992]
Stop North on Northern
Boulevard
Northern Boulevard at Roseville
Avenue (STJ)
Stop North/South on Northern
Boulevard
Northern Boulevard at School
Street (STJ) [Added 7-12-1988]
Stop North/South on Northern
Boulevard
Northern Boulevard at Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ) [Repealed
11-23-1993]
North Field Drive at Bread and
Cheese Hollow Road (KPK)
Stop, West on North Field Drive
North Hoffman Lane at South
Plaisted Avenue (HPG)
Stop North on North Hoffman
Lane
North Ingelore Court at Oakside
Road (SMT)
Stop North on North Ingelore
Court
North Lane at Hidden Ponds
Circle (SMT) [Added 8-26-1992]
Stop South on North Lane
Northside Circle at Ledgewood
Drive (SMT) [Added 11-9-1989]
Stop West on Northside Circle
North Third Street at Oak Street
(NES)
Stop North on North Third
Street
Norton Drive at Rose Street (NPK)
[Repealed 7-14-1992]
Norton Drive at Rose Street
(SMT) [Added 8-9-1988]
Stop South on North Drive
Norton Drive at Spruce Street
(KPK)
Stop North on Norton Drive
Norwalk Lane at Belford Lane
(SMT) [Added 5-12-1998]
Stop East on Norwalk Lane
Norwalk Lane at Morewood Drive
(COM)
Stop West on Norwalk Lane
Nottingham Court North at Gibbs
Pond Road (NES)
Stop North on Nottingham
Court North
Nowick Lane at Oakside Road
(SMT)
Stop South on Nowick Lane
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1101
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Oak Avenue at Lawrence Avenue
(SMT)
Stop South on Oak Avenue
Oakdale Avenue and Browns Road
(NES)
Stop East on Oakdale Avenue
Oak Drive at Steuben Boulevard
(NES) [Added 11-28-1989]
Stop West on Oak Drive
Oak Hill Lane at Cedar Place
(KPK)
Stop South on Oak Hill Lane
Oak Hill Lane at Sunken Meadow
Road (KPK)
Stop North on Oak Hill Lane
Oak Lane at Sunken Meadow
Road (KPK)
Stop North on Oak Lane
Oaklawn Drive at Valley Wood
Road (PNS)
Stop North on Oaklawn Drive
Oak Meadow Road at Fleetwood
Road (COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop South on Fleetwood Road
Oak Meadow Road at Long
Meadow Road (COM) [Added
2-21-1989]
Stop North on Oak Meadow
Road
Oakside Drive North at Landing
Avenue (SMT)
Stop West on Oakside Drive
North
Oakside Drive South at Landing
Avenue (SMT)
Stop West on Oakside Drive
South
Oakside Road at Landing Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Oakside Road
Oakside Road at Neil Drive (SMT) Stop East/West on Oakside
Road
Oakside Road at North Ingelore
Court (SMT)
Stop East/West on Oakside
Road
Oak Street at Astor Avenue (STJ) Stop East on Oak Street
Oak Street at Hobson Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Oak Street
Oak Street at Lake Avenue (STJ) Stop West on Oak Street
Oak Street at Sunny Road (STJ)
[Added 1-19-2012]
Stop East and West on Oak
Street
Oak Street at St. Johnland Road
(KPK)
Stop West on Oak Street
Oatley Place at Havemeyer Lane
(COM)
Stop South on Oatley Place
Oatley Place at Hayrick Lane
(COM)
Stop North on Oatley Place
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1102
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Old Commack Road at Eighth
Avenue (KPK)
Stop East on Old Commack
Road
Old Commack Road at Johnson
Avenue South (KPK)
Stop West on Old Commack
Road
Old Commack Road at Old
Northport Road (KPK) [Repealed
12-5-1995]
Old Indian Head Road at Old
Indian Head Road (KPK) [Added
2-28-2006]
Stop South on Old Indian Road
Old Indian Head Road at Old
Northport Road (KPK)
Stop South on Old Indian Head
Road
Old Indian Head Road at Vance
Street (COM) [Added
7-22-1997]
Stop North/South on Old
Indian Head Road
Old Mill Road at River Road
(SMT)
Stop South on Old Mill Road
Old Northport Road at Central
Road (SMT) [Added 9-11-2007]
Stop West on Old Northport
Road
Old Northport Road at
Gingerbread Road (SMT) [Added
9-11-2007]
Stop East on Old Northport
Road
Old Northport Road at Town Line
Road (COM) [Added 10-8-1991]
Stop West on Old Northport
Road
Old Pine Lane at Florida Avenue
(COM) [Added 7-12-1994]
Stop South on Old Pine Lane
Old Pine Lane at Parkway Drive
South (COM)
Stop North on Old Pine Lane
Old Road at Linden Avenue (KPK)
[Added 11-29-2007]
Stop East/West on Old Road
Old Road at Old Indian Head Road
(KPK) [Amended 11-18-2003]
Stop West on Old Road
Old Road and Old Northport Road
(KPK)
Stop South on Old Road
Old Willets Path at Grandview
Lane (SMT) [Added 10-31-1985;
repealed 12-9-1986]
Old Willets Path at Woodland Lane
(SMT) [Added 10-31-1985;
repealed 12-9-1986]
Old Wood Road at Arrowood Drive
(STJ) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop West on Old Wood Road
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1103
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Old Wood Road at Elderwood
Drive East (STJ) [Added
7-24-1990]
Stop East on Old Wood Road
Orchard Avenue at Roseville
Avenue (STJ)
Stop North on Orchard Avenue
Orchard Avenue at Rutherford
Street (STJ) [Added 7-2-1992]
Stop South on Orchard Avenue
Orchard Drive at Bread and
Cheese Hollow Road (KPK)
Stop West on Orchard Drive
Orchard Drive at Meadow Glen
Road (KPK)
Stop South on Orchard Drive
Orchard Drive at Salonga Woods
Road (KPK) [Added 12-12-2017]
Stop East/West on Orchard
Drive
Orchid Drive at St. Johnland Road
(KPK)
Stop South on Orchid Drive
Orchid Lane at Astor Court (COM)
[Added 11-25-1997]
Stop North on Orchid Lane
Orchid Lane at Walter Court
(COM)
Stop South on Orchid Lane
Oreste Street at Lindron Avenue
(STM) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop North on Oreste Street
Oriole Street at New Highway
(HPG)
Stop West on Oriole Street
Osage Lane at Nichols Road
(NES)
Stop North on Osage Lane
Osage Lane at Tall Pines Lane
(NES) [Added 1-31-1989]
Stop South on Osage Lane
Oser Avenue at Parkway Drive
South (HPG) [Added 7-9-1991]
Stop West on Oser Avenue
O'Shea Lane at Roseville Avenue
(STJ) [Added 4-27-1993]
Stop North on O'Shea Lane
Ott Place at Havemeyer Lane
(COM)
Stop North on Ott Place
Ott Place at Terry Lane (COM)
[Added 1-28-1986]
Stop South on Ott Place
Owl Lane at Cardinal Lane (HPG) Stop South on Owl Lane
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1104
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Paddock Drive at Meadow Glen
Road (KPK) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop West on Paddock Drive
Palin Place at Dorothy Lane (KPK)
[Added 4-27-1993; 2-22-2018]
Stop East on Palin Place
Palin Place at Ravenwood Drive
(KPK) [Added 6-24-1997]
Stop West on Palin Place
Palmer Lane at Crocus Lane
(SMT) [Added 8-9-1988]
Stop East on Palmer Lane
Palmer Lane at Pickwick Drive
(COM)
Stop West on Palmer Lane
Park Avenue at Lake Avenue (STJ) Stop West on Park Avenue
Park Avenue at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop East on Park Avenue
Park Avenue at Lou Avenue (KPK) Stop West on Park Avenue
Park Circle at eastern intersection
with Mon Repos Lane (NES)
[Added 11-19-1996; repealed
12-14-1999]
Park Circle at western
intersection with Mon Repos Lane
(NES) [Added 12-14-1999]
Stop North on Park Circle
Parkside Drive at Haig Place
(KPK) [Added 6-10-1997]
Stop West on Parkside Drive
Parkway Drive North at Fisher
Road (COM)
Stop East/West on Parkway
Drive North
Parkway Drive North at Harned
Road (COM)
Stop West on Parkway Drive
North
Parkway Drive North at New
Highway (COM)
Stop North/South on Parkway
Drive North
Parkway Drive South at Florida
Avenue (COM) [Added
7-12-1994]
Stop South on Parkway Drive
South
Parkway Drive South at Moreland
Road (HPG) [Added 6-4-1985]
Stop East/West on Parkway
Drive South
Parkway Drive South at New
Highway (COM) [Added
2-4-1986]
Stop East on Parkway Drive
South
Parkway Drive South at New
Highway (COM)
Stop North on Parkway Drive
South
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1105
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Parkway Drive South at New
Highway (COM) [Repealed
2-4-1986]
Parkway Drive South at Old Pine
Lane (SMT)
Stop East/West on Parkway
Drive South
Parkway Drive South at Oser
Avenue (HPG) [Repealed
6-4-1985]
Park Woods Lane at
Springmeadow Drive (KPK)
[Added 3-12-1985]
Stop North on Park Woods
Lane
Parla Court at Meadow Glen Road
(KPK) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop East on Parla Court
Parnell Drive at Concord Lane
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Parnell
Drive
Parnell Drive at Greenwich Road
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Parnell
Drive
Parnell Drive at Morewood Drive
(COM)
Stop West on Parnell Drive
Parnell Drive at Plymouth
Boulevard (COM)
Stop East/West on Parnell
Drive
Parnell Drive at Weston Lane
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Parnell
Drive
Partridge Drive at Gannet Drive
(COM)
Stop South on Partridge Drive
Partridge Drive at Ronde Drive
(COM)
Stop North on Partridge Drive
Patton Road at Jefferson Avenue
(STJ)
Stop West on Patton Road
Patton Road at Lake Avenue (STJ) Stop East on Patton Road
Pauline Place at Rainbow Drive
(HPG) [Added 11-13-2001]
Stop South on Pauline Place
Pawnee Drive at Harned Road
(COM)
Stop West on Pawnee Drive
Pawnee Drive at Iroquois Lane
(COM) [Added 6-9-2020]
Stop East/West on Pawnee
Drive
Pawnee Drive at Seneca Drive
(COM)
Stop North/South on Pawnee
Drive
Peacock Lane at Gannet Drive
(COM)
Stop South on Peacock Lane
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1106
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Pear Court at Bayberry Drive
(STJ)
Stop West on Pear Court
Pebble Place at Hayrick Lane
(COM) [Added 6-20-1989]
Stop East on Pebble Place
Peconic Court at Long House Way
(COM) [Added 2-26-2002]
Stop North on Peconic Court
Penguin Lane at Gannet Drive
(COM)
Stop South on Penguin Lane
Peony Lane at Astor Court (COM)
[Added 11-25-1997]
Stop North on Peony Lane
Peony Lane at Rose Court (COM)
[Added 3-26-2009]
Stop North/South on Peony
Lane
Peony Lane at Walter Court
(COM)
Stop South on Peony Lane
Peppermill Court at Fulton
Boulevard
Stop West on Peppermill Court
Peppermint Road at Marshmallow
Drive (COM)
Stop South on Peppermint
Road
Percy Street at Lawrence Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Percy Street
Persimmon Court at Lillian Road
(NES)
Stop South on Persimmon
Court
Peter Court at Mills Pond Road
(STJ) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop East on Peter Court
Pheasant Drive at Gannet Drive
(COM) [Added 9-21-1993]
Stop East on Pheasant Drive
Philson Court at Wichard
Boulevard (SMT) [Added
8-25-1987; repealed
7-14-1992]
Philson Court at Wichard
Boulevard (SMT) [Added
8-25-1987; amended
7-14-1992]
Stop North on Philson Court
Phyllis Court at St. Johnland Road
(KPK)
Stop East on Phyllis Court
Pia Boulevard (Barnes Street) at
Hurtin Boulevard (SMT)
Stop North/South on Pia
Boulevard
Pierrepont Street at Clinton
Avenue (STJ)
Stop North on Pierrepont
Street
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1107
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Pierson Street at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop West on Pierson Street
Pickwick Drive at Palmer Lane
(COM) [Added 9-6-2016]
Stop North/South on Pickwick
Drive
Pimlico Court at Old Commack
Road (COM)
Stop West on Pimlico Court
Pimlico Drive at Belmar Lane
(COM) [Added 1-22-1985]
Stop South on Pimlico Drive
Pine Acre Drive at Hilltop Drive
(SMT) [Added 6-11-1996]
Stop East on Pine Acre Drive
Pine Acre Drive at Meadow Road
(SMT)
Stop West on Pine Acre Drive
Pine Drive at Steuben Boulevard
(NES) [Added 11-28-1989]
Stop West on Pine Drive
Pine Hollow Road at Autumn
Drive (HPG)
Stop North on Pine Hollow
Road
Pine Hollow Road at New
Highway (HPG)
Stop South on Pine Hollow
Road
Pineland Street at Eklund
Boulevard (NES) [Added
5-22-1984]
Stop North on Pineland Street
Pineland Street at Magnolia
Avenue (NES) [Added
9-22-1987]
Stop North/South on Pineland
Street
Pine Meadow Place at Fleetwood
Road (COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop North on Pine Meadow
Place
Pine Meadow Place at Jill Court
(COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop South on Pine Meadow
Place
Pine Ridge Drive at Grandview
Lane (SMT) [Added 12-10-2002]
Stop North/South on Pine
Ridge Drive
Pine Ridge Drive at Lone Oak Path
(SMT) [Added 4-17-1995]
Stop South on Pine Ridge Drive
Pine Ridge Drive at McArthur
Lane (SMT) [Added 8-24-1993]
Stop North on Pine Ridge
Drive
Pine Ridge Drive at Mobrey Lane
(SMT) [Added 4-26-2007]
Stop North and south on Pine
Ridge Drive
Pine Street at Sunny Road (STJ)
[Added 8-25-1998]
Stop East on Pine Street
Pinetree Court at Old Commack
Road (KPK) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop West on Pinetree Court
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1108
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Pinewood Court at Midwood
Avenue (NES) [Added 9-4-1984]
Stop West on Pinewood Court
Pinewood Drive at Cedarwood
Lane (COM) [Added 3-3-2015]
Stop North on Pinewood Drive
Pittoni Drive at Fisher Road
(COM) [Added 9-18-1990]
Stop East on Pittoni Drive
Pittoni Drive at Marie Crescent
(COM)
Stop West on Pittoni Drive
Plaisted Avenue at Cross Street
(SMT)
Stop North on Plaisted Avenue
Plaisted Avenue at Ray Lane
(SMT) [Added 4-8-1997]
Stop North/South on Plaisted
Avenue
Plane Tree Lane at Bayberry Drive
(STJ)
Stop South on Plane Tree Lane
Plane Tree Lane at Mills Pond
Road (STJ)
Stop East on Plane Tree Lane
Plant Avenue at Kennedy Drive
(HPG)
Stop South on Plant Avenue
Plant Avenue at Oser Avenue
(HPG)
Stop North on Plant Avenue
Pleasant Drive at Gibbs Pond
Road (NES)
Stop East on Pleasant Drive
Plowboy Path at Harvest Lane
(COM) [Added 4-23-1985]
Stop East on Plowboy Path
Plowboy Path at Hayrick Lane
(COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop West on Plowboy Path
Plum Tree Lane at Cottonwood
Drive (COM) [Added
11-18-1986]
Stop East on Plum Tree Lane
Plymouth Boulevard at Abbot
Road (SMT) [Added 5-15-2001;
amended 7-10-2001]
Stop South on Plymouth
Boulevard
Plymouth Boulevard at Central
Road (SMT) [Added 11-10-1998]
Stop North/South on Plymouth
Boulevard
Plymouth Boulevard at Lindron
Avenue (SMT) [Added
5-15-2001]
Stop North/South on Plymouth
Boulevard
Plymouth Boulevard at Morewood
Drive (SMT)
Stop North/South on Plymouth
Boulevard
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1109
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Plymouth Boulevard at Old
Northport Road (KPK) [Added
7-11-1995; repealed 1-9-2001]
Plymouth Boulevard at Parnell
Drive (SMT)
Stop North/South on Plymouth
Boulevard
Plymouth Boulevard at Quaker
Lane (SMT)
Stop North/South on Plymouth
Boulevard
Plymouth Boulevard at Ridge
Road (SMT) [Added 7-10-2001]
Stop North on Plymouth
Boulevard
Plymouth Boulevard at Timber
Ridge Drive (COM) [Added
11-7-1995]
Stop North/South on Plymouth
Boulevard
Plymouth Boulevard at
Whispering Woods Drive (north
intersection) (SMT) [Added
3-12-2002; repealed
7-18-2002]
Plymouth Boulevard at
Whispering Woods Drive (north
intersection) (SMT) [Added
8-15-2002]
Stop North on Plymouth
Boulevard
Plymouth Boulevard at
Whispering Woods Drive (south
intersection) (SMT) [Added
3-12-2002]
Stop North/South on Plymouth
Boulevard
Ponderosa Lane at Osage Lane
(NES) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop East on Ponderosa Lane
Ponderosa Lane at Tall Pines Lane
(NES) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop South on Ponderosa Lane
Pond View Lane at Hidden Ponds
Circle (SMT) [Added 8-26-1992]
Stop South on Pond View Lane
Poplar Drive at Hilltop Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Poplar Drive
Poplar Drive at Meadow Road
(SMT)
Stop West on Poplar Drive
Poplar Lane at Crabapple Lane
(COM) [Added 9-8-1998]
Stop South on Poplar Lane
Poppy Lane at Shirley Court
(COM)
Stop South on Poppy Lane
Poppy Lane at Walter Court
(COM)
Stop North on Poppy Lane
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1110
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Primrose Lane at Amapola Lane
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Primrose
Lane
Primrose Lane at Ashland Drive
(KPK)
Stop East on Primrose Lane
Primrose Lane at Cactus Lane
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Primrose
Lane
Primrose Lane at Lawrence Road
(KPK)
Stop West on Primrose Lane
Prince Charming Road at Galahad
Lane (eastern intersection) (NES)
[Added 10-11-1988]
Stop East on Prince Charming
Road
Prince Charming Road at Gibbs
Pond Road (NES)
Stop West on Prince Charming
Road
Princeton Avenue at Harvard Lane
(SMT) [Added 9-11-1990]
Stop North on Princeton
Avenue
Princeton Avenue at Wildwood
Lane (SMT) [Added 9-11-1990]
Stop South on Princeton
Avenue
Prospect Street at Atterbury Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Prospect Street
Prospect Street at Edgewood
Avenue (SMT)
Stop North on Prospect Street
Pups Path at Meadow Glen Road
(KPK)
Stop East on Pups Path
Purdue Lane at Howell Drive
(SMT) [Added 7-11-1995]
Stop East on Purdue Lane
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Quail Place at Raven Drive (COM) Stop East on Quail Place
Quail Place at Wicks Path (COM) Stop West on Quail Place
Quaker Lane at Plymouth
Boulevard (COM)
Stop East on Quaker Lane
Quantuck Court at Long House
Way (COM) [Added 2-26-2002]
Stop North on Quantuck Court
Queens Avenue at Lawrence Road
(KPK) [Added 1-21-1986]
Stop West on Queens Avenue
Quist Lane at Lake Avenue South
(NES)
Stop West on Quist Lane
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1111
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Radburn Drive at Sommers Lane
(COM)
Stop South on Radburn Drive
Radcliffe Road at Harvard Road
(COM)
Stop East on Radcliffe Road
Radcliffe Road at Kings Park Road
(COM)
Stop West on Radcliffe Road
Railroad Avenue at Lake Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Railroad
Avenue
Railroad Avenue at Moriches Road
(STJ)
Stop East on Railroad Avenue
Railroad Avenue at Northern
Boulevard (STJ)
Stop East/West on Railroad
Avenue
Rainbow Drive at Bow Drive
(HPG) [Added 11-13-2001]
Stop East on Rainbow Drive
Rainbow Drive at Mt. Pleasant
Road (SMT)
Stop West on Rainbow Drive
Rainbow Drive at Reed Street
(HPG) [Added 4-8-2003]
Stop East/West on Rainbow
Drive
Raleigh Lane at Balboa Drive
(KPK) [Added 7-28-1998]
Stop South on Raleigh Lane
Ramondo Lane North at
Morewood Drive (COM)
Stop North on Ramondo Lane
North
Ramondo Lane South at
Morewood Drive (COM)
Stop West on Ramondo Lane
South
Ramsey Road at Sommers Lane
(COM)
Stop South on Ramsey Road
Ranson Street at Northern
Boulevard (STJ)
Stop East on Ranson Street
Ranson Street at Tredwell Avenue
(STJ) [Added 5-9-1989]
Stop West on Ranson Street
Raven Drive at Gannet Drive
(COM)
Stop South on Raven Drive
Raven Drive at Ronde Drive
(COM)
Stop North on Raven Drive
Ravenwood Drive at Boxwood
Drive (KPK) [Added 5-2-1989;
repealed 6-24-1997]
Ravenwood Drive at Boxwood
Drive (north intersection) (KPK)
[Added 6-24-1997]
Stop North on Ravenwood
Drive
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1112
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Ravenwood Drive at Carriage
Drive (KPK) [Added 6-24-1997]
Stop North/South on
Ravenwood Drive
Ravenwood Drive at Grist Mill
Road (KPK) [Added 6-24-1997]
Stop North/South on
Ravenwood Drive
Ray Lane at Plaisted Avenue
(SMT) [Added 4-8-1997]
Stop East on Ray Lane
Raynier Place at Bobann Drive
(NES)
Stop East on Raynier Place
Raynier Place at Roy Drive (NES) Stop West on Raynier Place
Reagan Court at Astor Avenue
(STJ) [Added 10-23-2001]
Stop East on Reagan Court
Red Leaf Lane at Deepdale Lane
(COM) [Added 7-22-1997]
Stop East/West on Red Leaf
Lane
Red Leaf Lane at Shinbone Lane
(COM)
Stop East on Red Leaf Lane
Redwood Lane at Landing Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Redwood Lane
Reed Street at Rainbow Drive
(HPG) [Added 11-13-2001]
Stop South on Reed Street
Reeves Street at Hurtin Boulevard
(SMT)
Stop North/South on Reeves
Street
Regal Court at Glenrich Drive
(STJ)
Stop East on Regal Court
Regency Court at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop East on Regency Court
Regina Drive at Marie Crescent
(COM) [Added 9-18-1990]
Stop West on Regina Drive
Remsen Street at Clinton Avenue
(STJ)
Stop North on Remsen Street
Rensselaer Drive at Yates Avenue
(COM) [Added 8-23-1988]
Stop East/West on Rensselaer
Drive
Retta Lane at Laurinda Drive
(eastern intersection) (COM)
[Added 2-6-2018]
Stop East on Retta Drive
Retta Lane at Laurinda Drive
(western intersection) (COM)
[Added 2-6-2018]
Stop North on Retta Drive
Reydon Way at Montrose Drive
(COM)
Stop West on Reydon Way
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1113
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Rhoda Avenue at Southern
Boulevard (NES) [Repealed
9-22-1987]
Rhoda Avenue at Summit Drive
(NES)
Stop East/West on Rhoda
Avenue
Rhoda Avenue at William Street
(SMT) [Amended 3-10-1998]
Stop East/West on Rhoda
Avenue
Rhonda Lane at Marie Crescent
(COM) [Added 9-18-1990]
Stop West on Rhonda Lane
Ricefield Lane at Davids Drive
(HPG) [Added 6-20-1989]
Stop South on Ricefield Lane
Ricefield Lane at Parkway Drive
South (HPG)
Stop North on Ricefield Lane
Rice Lane at Howell Drive (SMT)
[Added 12-16-1998]
Stop East on Rice Lane
Richie Court South at Cinderella
Lane (STJ)
Stop South on Richie Court
South
Ridgely Road at Gilbert Avenue
(SMT)
Stop North/South on Ridgely
Road
Ridgely Road at Steven Place
(SMT) [Added 12-13-2011]
Stop South on Ridgely Road
Ridge Road at Glenview Avenue
(KPK) [Added 10-7-2003]
Stop West on Ridge Road
Ridge Road at Hill Lane (SMT)
[Added 4-21-1987; amended
4-28-1987]
Stop East/West on Ridge Road
Ridge Road at Woodfield Avenue
(FTS) [Added 9-29-1998]
Stop East on Ridge Road
Ridgewood Lane at Hastings
Drive (KPK) [Added 4-26-2018]
Stop South on Ridgewood Lane
Riesling Court at Jill Court (COM)
[Added 2-21-1989]
Stop West on Riesling Court
Rita Crescent at Marie Crescent
(COM) [Added 9-18-1990]
Stop West on Rita Crescent
River Heights Court at River
Heights Drive (SMT) [Added
11-24-1998]
Stop South on River Heights
Court
River Heights Drive at
Eckernkamp Drive (SMT) [Added
2-1-1994]
Stop South on River Heights
Drive
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1114
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
River Heights Drive at Ingelore
Court (SMT) [Added 2-1-1994]
Stop South on River Heights
Drive
River Heights Drive at Neil Drive
(SMT) [Added 4-4-2006]
Stop East/West on River
Heights Drive
River Heights Drive at North
Ingelore Court (SMT) [Added
12-21-1993]
Stop North on River Heights
Drive
River Heights Drive at River
Heights Court (SMT) [Added
11-24-1998]
Stop East/West on River
Heights Drive
River Heights Drive at Stengel
Place (SMT) [Added 4-4-2006]
Stop East/West on River
Heights Drive
Riverview Terrace at Oakside
Drive (SMT) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop North on Riverview
Terrace
Roanoke Court at Long House
Way (COM) [Added 2-26-2002]
Stop South on Roanoke Court
Rolling Hills Drive at Nichols
Road (NES) [Added 4-27-1993]
Stop North on Rolling Hills
Drive
Romeo Drive at Central Road
(SMT) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop West on Romeo Drive
Ronde Drive at Fernwood Drive
(COM) [Added 11-13-2007]
Stop East/West on Ronde Drive
Ronde Drive at Penquin Lane
(COM) [Added 11-13-2007]
Stop East on Ronde Drive
Roosevelt Avenue at Fulton
Boulevard (COM) [Added
7-2-1992]
Stop South on Roosevelt
Avenue
Roosevelt Avenue at Wichard
Boulevard (COM) [Added
8-25-1987; repealed
7-14-1992]
Roosevelt Avenue at Wichard
Boulevard (COM) [Added
7-14-1992]
Stop North on Roosevelt
Avenue
Roseanne Court at Glen Hill Court
(NES) [Added 5-16-2000]
Stop South on Roseanne Court
Rose Court at Peony Lane (COM)
[Added 3-26-2009]
Stop West on Rose Court
Rose Court at Wyandanch
Boulevard (SMT) [Added
10-8-1991]
Stop East/West on Rose Court
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1115
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Rose Lane at Brooksite Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Rose Lane
Rose Lane at Forest Brook
Elementary School parking lot
aisle (SMT) [Added 12-14-1999]
Stop West on Rose Lane
Rose Street at Burnham Street
(SMT)
Stop East/West on Rose Street
Rose Street at Landing Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Rose Street
Rose Street Drive at Norton Drive
(SMT) [Added 7-14-1992]
Stop East/West on Rose Street
Rose Street at Norton Street
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Rose Street
Rose Street at St. Nicholas Street
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Rose Street
Roseville Avenue at Arlington
Avenue (STJ) [Added 6-22-2004]
Stop East/West on Roseville
Avenue
Roseville Avenue at Jefferson
Avenue (STJ)
Stop East/West on Roseville
Avenue
Roseville Avenue at Lake Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East on Roseville Avenue
Rosewood Road at Beaver Drive
(KPK) [Added 6-10-1997]
Stop East/West on Rosewood
Road
Rosewood Road at Highland Drive
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Rosewood
Road
Rosewood Road at Landing Road
(KPK)
Stop South on Rosewood Road
Rosewood Road at Longfellow
Drive (KPK)
Stop East/West on Rosewood
Road
Rosewood Road at Violet Road
(KPK)
Stop North on Rosewood Road
Roundabout Road at Bridlepath
Road (SMT)
Stop South on Roundabout
Road
Roundabout Road at Nissequogue
River Road (SMT)
Stop East on Roundabout Road
Roundabout Road at Woodland
Road (SMT)
Stop North/South on
Roundabout Road
Rowan Street at St. Johnland
Road (KPK)
Stop West on Rowan Street
Roxbury Drive at Belmar Lane
(COM) [Added 10-8-2002]
Stop North/South on Roxbury
Drive
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1116
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Roxbury Drive at Byron Road
(KPK) [Added 9-24-1996]
Stop North/South on Roxbury
Drive
Roxbury Drive at Crest Lane
(COM) [Added 9-12-2006]
Stop East and west on Roxbury
Drive
Roxbury Drive at Grendon Lane
(COM)
Stop East/West on Roxbury
Drive
Roxbury Drive at Long House
Way/Bury Court (COM) [Added
3-16-2000]
Stop East/West on Roxbury
Drive
Roxbury Drive at Montrose Drive
(COM)
Stop East/West on Roxbury
Drive
Roxbury Drive at Radburn Drive
(COM) [Added 6-9-1992]
Stop South on Roxbury Drive
Royal Court at Nichols Road
(NES) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop South on Royal Court
Roy Drive at Nichols Road (NES) Stop South on Roy Drive
Rumford Road at Bristol Lane
(KPK)
Stop North on Rumford Road
Rumford Road at Bristol Lane
(KPK) [Added 5-23-1989]
Stop South on Rumford Road
Rumford Road at Clover Lane
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Rumford
Road
Rumford Road at Columbine Lane
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Rumford
Road
Rumford Road at Cosmo Place
(KPK) [Added 7-11-1985]
Stop East/West on Rumford
Road
Rumford Road at Ware Place
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Rumford
Road
Rumford Road at Wink Place
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Rumford
Road
Ruth Boulevard at Gehrig Street
(COM)
Stop North/South on Ruth
Boulevard
Ruth Boulevard at Havemeyer
Lane (COM)
Stop North on Ruth Boulevard
Ruth Boulevard at Speaker Street
(COM)
Stop North/South on Ruth
Boulevard
Ruth Boulevard at Terry Lane
(COM)
Stop North/South on Ruth
Boulevard
Rutherford Street at Arlington
Avenue (STJ)
Stop East on Rutherford Street
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1117
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Rutherford Street at Montclair
Avenue (STJ) [Added 8-25-1998]
Stop East/West on Rutherford
Street
Ruth Street at St. Nicholas
Avenue (SMT)
Stop East/West on Ruth Street
Rutland Gate at Old Willets Path
(HPG)
Stop West on Rutland Gate
Rye Place at Harvest Lane (COM)
[Added 1-3-1995]
Stop North on Rye Place
Rye Place at Havemeyer Lane
(COM)
Stop South on Rye Place
Rye Place at Hayrick Lane (COM) Stop North/South on Rye Place
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Saber Land at Ravenwood Drive
(KPK) [Added 6-24-1997]
Stop East on Saber Lane
Sachem Hill Place at Nissequogue
River Road (SMT)
Stop East on Sachem Hill Place
Sagebrush Lane at Jasmine Lane
(KPK)
Stop South on Sagebrush Lane
Saggese Lane at Standish Place
(NES) [Added 11-27-2001]
Stop North on Saggese Lane
Sailor Street at Cambon Avenue
(STJ)
Stop West on Sailor Street
Sailor Street at Hillside Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East on Sailor Street
St. James Avenue at Railroad
Avenue (STJ)
Stop North on St. James
Avenue
St. James Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ)
Stop North/South on St. James
Avenue
St. James Avenue South at
Rutherford Street (STJ) [Added
3-7-1995]
Stop South on St. James
Avenue
St. James Parkway at Cedar
Avenue (NES)
Stop North on St. James
Parkway
St. James Parkway at Hampton
Avenue (NES) [Added
6-13-2000]
Stop North/South on St. James
Parkway
St. James Parkway at Magnolia
Avenue (NES) [Added 6-3-1986]
Stop South on St. James
Parkway
St. James Post Office exit, Lake
Avenue (STJ) [Added 4-27-1993]
Stop West on exit
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1118
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
St. Nicholas Avenue at Hancock
Street (SMT) [Added
11-28-1991]
Stop North on St. Nicholas
Avenue
St. Nicholas Avenue at Monroe
Street (SMT) [Added 7-14-1992]
Stop North/South on St.
Nicholas Avenue
St. Nicholas Avenue at Rose
Street (SMT)
Stop North/South on St.
Nicholas Avenue
St. Nicholas Avenue at Spruce
Street (KPK)
Stop North/South on St.
Nicholas Avenue
Salem Path at MacKay Drive
(HPG)
Stop West on Salem Path
Sally's Path at Meadow Glen Road
(KPK) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop East on Sally's Path
Salonga Woods Road at Orchard
Drive (KPK) [Added 12-12-2017]
Stop South on Salonga Woods
Drive
Salt Hay Way at Landing Meadow
Road (SMT) [Added 5-7-1991]
Stop North on Salt Hay Way
Salvatore Court at Nichols Road
(NES)
Stop South on Salvatore Court
Sammis Street at Fifty Acre Road
South (SMT) [Added 9-11-1990]
Stop West on Sammis Street
Samuel Street at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop West on Samuel Street
Samuel Street/Quenzer Street
(NES) [Added 5-25-2017]
Stop East on Samuel Street
Sandalwood Drive at Mt. Pleasant
Road (SMT)
Stop West on Sandalwood
Drive
Sandpiper Court at New Mill Road
(SMT)
Stop South on Sandpiper Court
Sandra Drive at Adrienne Lane
(SMT) [Added 11-29-2007]
Stop North on Sandra Drive
Sandy Hill Road at Kings Park
Road (COM) [Added 11-9-1989]
Stop West on Sandy Hill Road
Sandy Hollow Drive at Hunter
Place (southern intersection)
(COM) [Added 12-17-2009]
Stop East/West on Sanday
Hollow Drive
Sandy Hollow Drive at Siracusa
Boulevard (COM) [Added
10-8-2002]
Stop West on Sandy Hollow
Drive
Sansun Lane at Hillside Avenue
(STJ) [Added 3-12-1985]
Stop West on Sansun Lane
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1119
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Saturn Boulevard at Sequoia
Drive (HPG)
Stop East/West on Saturn
Boulevard
Saturn Boulevard at South
Plaisted Avenue (HPG) [Added
5-2-1989]
Stop East on Saturn Boulevard
Saturn Boulevard at Torlen Court
(HPG)
Stop South on Saturn
Boulevard
Scholar Lane at Half Hollow Road
and Old Commack Road (COM)
Stop East on Scholar Lane
School Street at Northern
Boulevard (STJ)
Stop East on School Street
School Street at Tredwell Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on School
Street
Schubert Drive at Grassy Pond
Drive South (SMT) [Added
12-27-1984]
Stop East on Schubert Drive
Schubert Drive at Ledgewood
Drive (PNS)
Stop West on Schubert Drive
Schuyler Drive at Genesee Drive
(eastern intersection) (COM)
[Added 12-2-2008]
Stop North/South on Schuyler
Drive
Schuyler Drive at Genesee Drive
(western intersection) (COM)
[Added 10-20-1992]
Stop South on Schuyler Drive
Scott Drive at Sheryl Crescent
(SMT)
Stop North on Scott Drive
Scott Lane at Redwood Lane
(SMT) [Amended 8-12-1986;
5-26-1998]
Stop East on Scott Lane
Seatuck Court at Long House Way
(COM) [Added 2-26-2002]
Stop North on Seatuck Court
Seaver Lane at Fawn Place (SMT) Stop East on Seaver Lane
Seawanhaka Avenue at Cedar
Avenue (NES)
Stop North on Seawanhaka
Avenue
Seawanhaka Avenue at Lakeview
Avenue (NES)
Stop South on Seawanhaka
Avenue
Seawanhaka Avenue at Magnolia
Avenue (NES)
Stop North/South on
Seawanhaka Avenue
Second Avenue at First Street
(STJ)
Stop North on Second Avenue
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1120
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Second Avenue at Fourth Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Second
Avenue
Second Avenue at Railroad Street
(STJ)
Stop North on Second Avenue
Second Avenue at Second Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Second
Avenue
Second Avenue at Sixth Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Second
Avenue
Second Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ)
Stop South on Second Avenue
Second Street at Fifth Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Second
Street
Second Street at First Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Second
Street
Second Street at Fourth Avenue
(KPK) [Added 6-27-1989]
Stop West on Second Street
Second Street at Lake Avenue
(STJ) [Amended 12-23-1986;
repealed 7-9-1991]
Second Street at Moriches Road
(STJ)
Stop East on Second Street
Second Street at Seventh Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Second
Street
Second Street at Shenandoah
Boulevard (NES) [Added
9-2-1986]
Stop East/West on Second
Street
Second Street at Third Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Second
Street
Selmar Court at Kohr Road (KPK) Stop East on Selmar Court
Seminole Drive at Wicks Path
(COM)
Stop East on Seminole Drive
Seneca Drive at Pawnee Drive
(COM) [Added 7-2-1992]
Stop West on Seneca Drive
Seneca Drive at Wicks Path
(COM)
Stop East on Seneca Drive
Sequoia Drive at Saturn
Boulevard (HPG)
Stop South on Sequoia Drive
Sequoia Drive at Space Way
(HPG) [Added 10-11-2005]
Stop North/South on Sequoia
Drive
Sesame Street at Lawrence Road
(KPK) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop Westbound traffic on
Sesame Street
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1121
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Seventh Avenue at Fifth Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Seventh
Avenue
Seventh Avenue at Maple Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Seventh Avenue
Seventh Avenue at Moriches Road
(STJ)
Stop North on Seventh Avenue
Seventh Avenue at Old Commack
Road (KPK)
Stop North on Seventh Avenue
Seventh Avenue at Seventh Street
(STJ) [Added 10-11-2005]
Stop North/South on Seventh
Avenue
Seventh Avenue at Third Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Seventh
Avenue
Seventh Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ)
Stop South on Seventh Avenue
Seventh Street at Cambon Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East on Seventh Street
Seventh Street at Fourth Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Seventh
Street
Seventh Street at Jefferson
Avenue (STJ)
Stop East/West on Seventh
Street
Seventh Street at Lake Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Seventh
Street
Seventh Street at Northern
Boulevard (STJ)
Stop West on Seventh Street
Seventh Street at Second Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Seventh
Street
Seventh Street at Seventh Avenue
(STJ)
Stop West on Seventh Street
Seventh Street at Sixth Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East on Seventh Street
Shady Lane at Brooksite Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Shady Lane
Shaker Ridge Lane at Scholar
Lane (COM)
Stop North on Shaker Ridge
Lane
Shandon Road at Fleetwood Road
(COM) [Added 2-21-1989;
amended 11-19-1991]
Stop East on Shandon Road
Shandon Road at Kings Park Road
(COM) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop West on Shandon Road
Shay Drive at Cook Street (KPK)
[Added 3-20-1984]
Stop East on Shay Drive
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1122
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Sheffield Court at Gibbs Pond
Road (NES) [Added 3-12-1985]
Stop West on Sheffield Court
Shelley Drive at Cornell Drive
(COM) [Added 10-25-1988]
Stop South on Shelley Drive
Shelley Drive at Cornell Drive
(COM) [Added 10-25-1988]
Stop West on Shelley Drive
Shenandoah Boulevard at Brown
Road (NES)
Stop North/South on
Shenandoah Boulevard
Shenandoah Boulevard at Fifth
Street (NES) [Added 6-11-1996]
Stop North/South on
Shenandoah Boulevard
Shenandoah Boulevard at Nichols
Road (NES)
Stop South on Shenandoah
Boulevard
Shenandoah Boulevard at Second
Street (NES) [Added 6-11-1996]
Stop North/South on
Shenandoah Boulevard
Shenandoah Boulevard North at
Yardley Lane (NES) [Added
6-27-2006]
Stop North/South on
Shenandoah Boulevard
North
Sheppard Lane at Annetta Avenue
(NES) [Added 11-24-1998]
Stop North/South on Sheppard
Lane
Sheppard Lane at Rhoda Avenue
(NES)
Stop North on Sheppard Lane
Sheppard Lane at Sycamore Drive
(NES) [Added 5-31-2005]
Stop North/South on Sheppard
Lane
Sherbrooke Drive at Sterling Lane
(SMT) [Added 12-15-2015]
Stop West on Sherbrooke Drive
Sherry Lane at Mt. Pleasant Road
(HPG)
Stop East on Sherry Lane
Sherry Lane at North Hoffman
Lane (HPG)
Stop West on Sherry Lane
Sherwood Drive at Jefferson
Avenue (STJ) [Added 9-25-1984]
Stop West on Sherwood Drive
Sherwood Drive at Lake Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East on Sherwood Drive
Sheryl Crescent at Derby Place
(KPK)
Stop North on Sheryl Crescent
Sheryl Crescent at Meyer Lane
(KPK) [Added 3-5-2013]
Stop West on Sheryl Crescent
Sheryl Crescent at Scott Drive
(KPK) (northern intersection)
[Added 3-5-2013]
Stop East on Sheryl Crescent
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1123
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Sheryl Crescent at Winslow Lane
(KPK)
Stop East on Sheryl Crescent
Sheryl Crescent at Winslow Lane
(southern intersection) (SMT)
[Added 8-12-2008]
Stop East/West on Sheryl
Crescent
Shinbone Lane at Cedarwood
Lane (COM) [Added 6-28-2005]
Stop North/South on Shinbone
Lane
Shinbone Lane and Florida
Avenue (COM)
Stop North on Shinbone Lane
Shinbone Lane at Suttonwood
Lane (COM) [Added 6-28-2005]
Stop North/South on Shinbone
Lane
Shinnecock Court at Long House
Way (COM) [Added 2-26-2002]
Stop North on Shinnecock
Court
Shirley Court at Bayberry Lane
(SMT) [Added 12-28-2004]
Stop East on Shirley Court
Shirley Court at Broadview Drive
(COM)
Stop East/West on Shirley
Court
Shirley Court at Crocus Lane
(COM) [Added 9-17-1991]
Stop East/West on Shirley
Court
Shirley Court at Laurel Drive
(PNS)
Stop East/West on Shirley
Court
Shirley Court at Laurel Lane
(COM) [Added 11-13-2007]
Stop East/West on Shirley
Court
Shirley Court at Walter Court
(COM)
Stop North/South on Shirley
Court
Shirley Court at Wyandanch
Boulevard (PNS)
Stop East/West on Shirley
Court
Shore View Court at Lake Avenue
South (NES) [Added 9-24-2002]
Stop East on Shore View Court
Short Court at Regency Court
(NES) [Added 6-22-1999]
Stop South on Short Court
Silo Road at Harvest Lane Stop South on Silo Road
Silo Road at Scholar Lane (COM) Stop North on Silo Road
Silver Pond Circle at Long House
Way (COM) [Added 2-26-2002]
Stop North on Silver Pond
Circle
Sioux Drive at Iroquois Lane
(COM)
Stop West on Sioux Drive
Sioux Drive at Wicks Path (COM) Stop East on Sioux Drive
Siracusa Boulevard at Cornell
Drive South (COM) [Added
10-23-1984]
Stop North on Siracusa
Boulevard
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1124
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Siracusa Boulevard at Sandy
Hollow Drive (COM) [Added
12-18-2008]
Stop North/South on Siracusa
Boulevard
Sixth Avenue at Fourth Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Sixth
Avenue
Sixth Avenue at Maple Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Sixth Avenue
Sixth Avenue at Moriches Road
(STJ)
Stop North on Sixth Avenue
Sixth Avenue at Old Commack
Road (KPK)
Stop North on Sixth Avenue
Sixth Avenue at Second Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Sixth
Avenue
Sixth Avenue at Sixth Street (STJ) Stop North/South on Sixth
Avenue
Sixth Avenue at Woodlawn Avenue
(STJ)
Stop South on Sixth Avenue
Sixth Street at Cambon Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East on Sixth Street
Sixth Street at Fifth Avenue (STJ) Stop East/West on Sixth Street
Sixth Street at First Avenue (STJ) Stop East/West on Sixth Street
Sixth Street at Grant Avenue (STJ) Stop West on Sixth Street
Sixth Street at Lake Avenue (STJ) Stop East/West on Sixth Street
Sixth Street at Lincoln Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Sixth Street
Sixth Street at Shenandoah
Boulevard (NES) [Added
9-2-1986]
Stop East/West on Sixth Street
Sixth Street at Seventh Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Sixth Street
Sixth Street at Third Avenue (STJ) Stop East/West on Sixth Street
Sixth Street at Washington
Avenue (STJ)
Stop East/West on Sixth Street
Skunks Hollow Road at Thompson
Hill Road (STJ) [Added
4-22-2003]
Stop North on Skunks Hollow
Road
Sleepy Hollow Court at Meadow
Glen Road (KPK) [Added
3-30-1999]
Stop West on Sleepy Hollow
Court
Smith Street at Eklund Boulevard
(NES) [Added 5-22-1984]
Stop South on Smith Street
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1125
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Smith Street at Madison Street
(NES) [Added 4-27-2004]
Stop North/South on Smith
Street
Smith Street at Nichols Road
(NES)
Stop North on Smith Street
Somerset Drive at Balsam Lane
(COM)
Stop East/West on Somerset
Drive
Somerset Drive at Bethany Drive
(COM) [Added 8-22-2000]
Stop East/West on Somerset
Drive
Somerset Drive at Wenmore Road
(COM)
Stop North on Somerset Drive
Somers Lane at Half Hollow Road
(COM)
Stop West on Somers Lane
Sorrel Hill Lane at Autumn Drive
(HPG)
Stop South on Sorrel Hill Lane
South Avenue at Hallock Avenue
(SMT) [Amended 6-23-1987]
Stop East/West on South
Avenue
Southern Boulevard at Diane
Court/Rhoda Avenue (NES)
[Added 9-22-1987]
Stop West on Diane Court
Southern Boulevard at Diane
Court/Rhoda Avenue (NES)
[Added 9-22-1987]
Stop East on Rhoda Avenue
Southern Boulevard at Diane
Court/Rhoda Avenue (NFS)
[Added 9-22-1987]
Stop North/South on Southern
Boulevard
Southern Boulevard at Gemini
Lane (NES) [Added 9-22-1987]
Stop East on Gemini Lane
Southern Boulevard at Gemini
Lane (NES) [Added 9-22-1987]
Stop North/South on Southern
Boulevard
South Hillside Avenue at Browns
Road (NES)
Stop South on South Hillside
Avenue
South Hillside Avenue at Eighth
Street (NES) [Added 5-26-1987]
Stop North/South on South
Hillside Avenue
South Lot Road at Nissequogue
River Road (SMT)
Stop East on South Lot Road
South Plaisted Avenue at Garvey
Drive (HPG) [Added 9-22-1992]
Stop East/West on South
Plaisted Avenue
South Plaisted Avenue at Harmon
Place (HPG) [Added 9-3-2019]
Stop East on Harmon Place
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1126
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
South Plaisted Avenue at North
Hoffman Lane (HPG) [Added
8-11-1987; repealed
9-22-1992]
South Plaisted Avenue at North
Hoffman Lane (HPG) [Added
8-14-2001]
Stop East/West on South
Plaisted Avenue
South Plaisted Avenue at Saturn
Boulevard (HPG)
Stop North/South on South
Plaisted Avenue
South Pond Lane at West Pond
Court (SMT) [Added 8-26-1992]
Stop West on South Pond Lane
Space Way at Clifford Boulevard
(HPG)
Stop East on Space Way
Space Way at Sequoia Drive
(HPG) [Added 10-11-2005]
Stop West on Space Way
Sparrow Lane at Eagle Lane
(HPG) [Added 8-9-1988]
Stop South on Sparrow Lane
Sparton Lane at Tyram Street
(COM)
Stop North on Sparton Lane
Speaker Street at Ruth Boulevard
(COM)
Stop East on Speaker Street
Spectacle Lake Drive at Hill
Avenue (western intersection)
(NSC) [Added 12-6-1988]
Stop South on Spectacle Lake
Drive
Split Rail Lane at Hayrick Lane
(COM) [Added 5-2-1989;
repealed 7-14-1992]
Split Rail Place (COM) [Added
7-14-1992]
Stop East on Split Rail Place
Split Rail Place at Harvest Lane
(COM)
Stop West on Split Rail Place
Springbriar Lane at Meadow Road
(SMT) [Added 11-9-1989]
Stop East on Springbriar Lane
Springbriar Lane at Terri Road
(SMT) [Added 8-25-1998]
Stop East/West on Springbriar
Lane
Springbriar Lane at Tony Drive
(KPK) [Added 6-22-2004]
Stop North/South on
Springbriar Lane
Springmeadow Court at
Springmeadow Drive (KPK)
[Added 7-22-1986]
Stop North on Springmeadow
Court
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1127
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Springmeadow Drive at Old
Commack Road (KPK) [Added
3-12-1985]
Stop North on Springmeadow
Drive
Springmeadow Drive South at Old
Commack Road (KPK) [Added
7-22-1986]
Stop West on Springmeadow
Drive South
Spruce Drive at Steuben
Boulevard (NES) [Added
10-11-1988]
Stop North/South on Spruce
Drive
Spruce Street at Landing Avenue
(KPK)
Stop East on Spruce Street
Spruce Street at St. Johnland
Road (KPK)
Stop West on Spruce Street
Spruce Street at St. Nicholas
Avenue (KPK)
Stop East/West on Spruce
Street
Spruce Street at Norton Drive
(KPK) [Added 4-27-2004]
Stop East/West on Spruce
Street
Squire Lane at Bowman Lane
(KPK) [Added 12-14-1999]
Stop South on Squire Lane
Squire Path at Harness Road (STJ)
[Added 4-11-1995]
Stop West on Squire Path
Stacey Lane at Dana Lane (COM) Stop South on Stacey Lane
Standish Place at Southern
Boulevard (NES)
Stop East on Standish Place
Stanley Place at South Plaisted
Avenue (SMT)
Stop West on Stanley Place
Stanwich Road at Morewood
Drive (COM)
Stop East on Stanwich Road
Stardom Court at Hobson Avenue
(STJ)
Stop West on Stardom Court
Starlight Drive at Pickwich Drive
(COM)
Stop North on Starlight Drive
Stengel Place at Eckernkamp
Drive (SMT)
Stop North/South on Stengel
Place
Stengel Place at River Heights
Drive (SMT) [Added
10-12-1999]
Stop North on Stengel Place
Stengel Place at Summerset Drive
(SMT) [Added 6-12-1984]
Stop South on Stengel Place
Sterling Lane at Cross Street
(SMT) [Added 12-15-2015]
Stop North on Sterling Lane
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1128
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Steuben Boulevard at Gibbs Pond
Road (NES)
Stop North on Steuben
Boulevard
Steuben Boulevard at Margaret
Drive (NES) [Added 5-24-1988;
amended 6-21-1988]
Stop North/South on Steuben
Boulevard
Steven Place at Buxton Way (HPG)
[Added 7-14-1992]
Stop North/South on Steven
Place
Steven Place at Terry Road (SMT) Stop East on Steven Place
Stirrup Lane at Paddock Drive
(KPK) [Added 4-11-1995]
Stop North on Stirrup Lane
Stone Edge Lane at Gibbs Pond
Road (NES)
Stop East on Stone Edge Lane
Stone Edge Lane at Woodview
Drive (NES)
Stop West on Stone Edge Lane
Stonehenge Apartments, north
and south exits to Jefferson
Avenue (STJ) [Added
12-26-1989]
Stop East from Stonehenge
Apartments
Stony Hill Path at Landing
Meadow Road (SMT) [Amended
3-12-1985]
Stop North/South on Stony Hill
Path
Stony Wood Road at Florida
Avenue (COM) [Added
7-12-1994]
Stop South on Stony Wood
Road
Storybook Lane at Hillside Avenue
(STJ)
Stop West on Storybook Lane
Storyland Road at Cinderella Lane
(STJ)
Stop North on Storyland Road
Strawberry Knoll Court at
Milemore Drive (KPK) [Added
12-9-1997]
Stop North on Strawberry
Knoll Court
Strongs Court at Atterbury Drive
(SMT) [Added 11-20-1990]
Stop West on Strongs Court
Stuyvesant Lane at Greenwich
Road (SMT) [Added 6-11-1996]
Stop North on Stuyvesant Lane
Stuyvesant Lane at Morewood
Drive (COM)
Stop South on Stuyvesant Lane
Suffolk Court at Adams Avenue
(HPG) [Amended 5-22-1984]
Stop West on Suffolk Court
Summerfield Drive at Browns
Road (NES)
Stop South on Summerfield
Drive
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1129
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Summerset Drive at Noel Place
(SMT) [Added 7-14-1992]
Stop East/West on Summerset
Drive
Summit Drive at Annetta Avenue
(NES) [Added 7-14-1992]
Stop North/South on Summit
Drive
Summit Drive at Rhoda Avenue
(NES) [Added 12-6-1988;
amended 7-14-1992]
Stop North/South on Summit
Drive
Summit Drive at Standish Place
(NES)
Stop North on Summit Drive
Sundale Court at Blydenburgh
Avenue
Stop North on Sundale Court
Sunflower Drive at Autumn Drive
(HPG)
Stop South on Sunflower Drive
Sunhill Road at Lincoln Avenue
(NES) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop North/South on Sunhill
Road
Sunhill Road at Valiant Court
(NES) [Added 4-22-2010]
Stop North/South on Sunhill
Road
Sunken Meadow Road at Bread
and Cheese Hollow Road (KPK)
Stop West on Sunken Meadow
Road
Sunken Meadow Road at Breezy
Hill Drive (KPK)
Stop East/West on Sunken
Meadow Road
Sunken Meadow Road at Meadow
Glen Road (KPK) [Amended
2-26-2002]
Stop East/South on Sunken
Meadow Road
Sunny Road at Oak Street (STJ) Stop North/South on Sunny
Road
Sunny Road at Pine Street (STJ)
[Added 8-25-1998]
Stop North/South on Sunny
Road
Sunrise Lane at Brooksite Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Sunrise Lane
Sunset Lane at Brooksite Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Sunset Lane
Sunset Lane at Merrivale Drive
(HPG)
Stop West on Sunset Lane
Susan Court at Shirley Court
(COM)
Stop North on Susan Court
Susan Drive at Meadow Glen
Road (KPK)
Stop East on Susan Drive
Swan Lane at Eagle Lane (HPG)
[Added 8-9-1988]
Stop South on Swan Lane
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1130
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Sweet Briar Drive at Brooksite
Drive (SMT)
Stop West on Sweet Briar
Drive
Sweet Briar Drive at Burlington
Boulevard (SMT) [Added
6-26-1990]
Stop East on Sweet Briar Drive
Sweet Briar Drive at Juniper
Avenue (SMT)
Stop East/West on Sweet Briar
Drive
Sycamore Drive at Sheppard Lane
(NES) [Added 10-7-2003]
Stop East on Sycamore Drive
Sycamore Drive at Terry Road
(NES)
Stop West on Sycamore Drive
Sycamore Lane at White Birch
Lane (COM)
Stop South on Sycamore Lane
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Tackan Elementary School
Driveway at Midwood Avenue
(NES) [Added 5-7-1991]
Stop West on Tackan
Elementary School
Driveway
Taffy Court at Old Commack Road
(KPK)
Stop South on Taffy Court
Taft Drive at Asbury Drive (SMT)
[Added 9-24-2002]
Stop North on Taft Drive
Takats Lane at Jefferson Avenue
(STJ) [Added 5-25-2004]
Stop West on Takats Lane
Talbot Lane at Greenwich Road
(SMT) [Added 6-11-1996]
Stop East on Talbot Lane
Talbot Lane at Morewood Drive
(COM)
Stop West on Talbot Lane
Tallmadge Road at Bread and
Cheese Hollow
Stop West on Tallmadge Road
Road (KPK)
Tall Pines Lane at Gibbs Ponds
Road (NES)
Stop West on Tall Pines Lane
Tall Pines Lane at Osage Lane
(NES) [Added 1-31-1989]
Stop East/West on Tall Pines
Lane
Tall Tree Lane at Brook Lane
(SMT)
Stop South on Tall Tree Lane
Tammi Drive at Tony Drive (NPK)
[Added 2-10-1998]
Stop West on Tammi Drive
Tanglewood Drive at Haven Lane
(SMT)
Stop East on Tanglewood Drive
Tanyard Place at Trescott Path
(KPK)
Stop North on Tanyard Place
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1131
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Tara Lane at White Birch Lane
(COM)
Stop South on Tara Lane
Tarleton Court at Truxton Lane
(KPK) [Added 10-7-1986]
Stop West on Tarleton Court
Tarleton Lane at Trescott Path
(KPK) [Added 5-7-1991]
Stop South on Tarleton Lane
Tarleton Lane at Truxton Lane
(KPK) [Added 10-7-1986]
Stop East on Tarleton Lane
Teal Lane at Mark Drive (SMT) Stop South on Teal Lane
Teal Lane at New Mill Road (SMT) Stop North on Teal Lane
Teapot Lane at Edgewood Avenue
(SMT)
Stop South on Teapot Lane
Teapot Lane at Landing Avenue
(SMT)
Stop West on Teapot Lane
Tecumseh Court at Long House
Way (KPK) [Added 10-7-1997]
Stop North on Tecumseh Court
Tern Place at Ronde Drive (COM) Stop South on Tern Place
Terrace Drive at Dewberry Place
(HPG) [Added 7-10-2001]
Stop East on Terrace Drive
Terri Drive at Kim Place (KPK)
[Added 9-22-1992]
Stop North on Terri Drive
Terry Lane at Hubbell Street
(COM) [Added 2-28-1989]
Stop South on Terry Lane
Terry Lane at Ruth Boulevard
(COM)
Stop East on Terry Lane
Terry Road at Gilbert Avenue
[Added 2-5-2013]
Stop North/South on Terry
Road
Terry Road at Steven Place (HPG)
[Added 7-30-1991]
Stop North/South on Terry
Road
Terry Road (westbound) at Terry
Road (southbound)
(channelization at Smithtown
Boulevard) (NES) [Added
2-11-1992]
Yield West on Terry Road
(intersection
channelization)
Terry Road at Washington Avenue
(HPG) [Added 7-30-1991]
Stop North/South on Terry
Road
Thatch Pond Road at Edgewood
Avenue (SMT)
Stop South on Thatch Pond
Road
Theodore Avenue at Broadway
(SMT)
Stop North/South on Theodore
Avenue
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1132
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Theodore Avenue at Columbus
Avenue (SMT) [Added 9-8-1987;
amended 7-14-1992]
Stop North on Theodore
Avenue
The Spout at Teapot Lane (SMT)
[Added 7-26-1988]
Stop West on The Spout
Third Avenue at Fifth Street (STJ) Stop North/South on Third
Avenue
Third Avenue at First Street (STJ) Stop North on Third Avenue
Third Avenue at Seventh Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Third
Avenue
Third Avenue at Third Street (STJ) Stop North/South on Third
Avenue
Third Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ)
Stop South on Third Avenue
Third Street at Cambon Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East on Third Street
Third Street at Fourth Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Third Street
Third Street at Lake Avenue (STJ) Stop East/West on Third Street
Third Street at Railroad Avenue
(STJ)
Stop West on Third Street
Third Street at Second Avenue
(STJ)
Stop East/West on Third Street
Third Street at Shenandoah
Boulevard (NES) [Added
9-2-1986]
Stop West on Third Street
Third Street at Sixth Avenue (STJ) Stop East/West on Third Street
Thompson Hill Road at Skunks
Hollow Road (STJ) [Added
4-22-2003]
Stop East and West on
Thompson Hill Road
Thompson Street at Old Dock
Road (KPK)
Stop North on Thompson
Street
Three Sisters Road at Harbor
Road (STJ) [Added 7-9-1991]
Stop North on Three Sisters
Road
Three Sisters Road at Thompson
Hill Road (STJ) [Added
5-6-1997]
Stop East on Three Sisters
Road
Tide Mill Road at Nissequogue
River Road (SMT)
Stop East on Tide Mill Road
Tiffany Lane at Sherbrook Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Tiffany Lane
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1133
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Tillotson Avenue at Northern
Boulevard (STJ)
Stop East on Tillotson Avenue
Tillotson Avenue at Remsen Street
(STJ)
Stop West on Tillotson Avenue
Timberbrook Road at Brookfield
Road (FTS) [Added 5-25-1993]
Stop South on Timberbrook
Road
Timber Croft Way at Old Willets
Path (SMT) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop East on Timber Croft Way
Timber Croft Way at Wild Run
(SMT) [Added 2-21-1989;
2-10-1998]
Stop West on Timber Croft Way
Timber Lane at Bread and Cheese
Hollow Road (KPK)
Stop West on Timber Lane
Timber Lane at Glenview Avenue
(KPK) [Added 10-7-2003]
Stop East/West on Timber
Avenue
Timber Ridge Drive at Annandale
Road (COM) (eastern location)
[Added 7-11-1995]
Stop East/West on Timber
Ridge Drive
Timber Ridge Drive at Annadale
Road (western intersection)
(COM) [Added 5-16-2000]
Stop East/West on Timber
Ridge Drive
Timber Ridge Drive at Fleetwood
Road (east intersection) [Added
11-19-1991]
Stop East/West on Timber
Ridge Road
Timber Ridge Drive at Indian
Head Road (COM) [Added
2-21-1989]
Stop West on Timber Ridge
Drive
Timber Ridge Drive at Plymouth
Boulevard (COM) [Added
7-11-1995]
Stop East on Timber Ridge
Drive
Timothy Court at Ledgewood
Drive (PNS)
Stop East on Timothy Court
Town Hall Driveway (central) 250
feet north of Main Street (SR 25/
25A) at Redwood Lane (SMT)
[Added 7-2-1992]
Stop West on Driveway
Town Hall Parking Field,
northeast exit at Redwood Lane
(SMT) [Added 12-12-1989]
Stop North from Parking Field
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1134
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Town Hall Parking Lot Exit 92 feet
north of Main Street (SR 25/25A)
at Redwood Lane (SMT) [Added
6-9-1992]
Stop West on driveway
Townline Road at Wagon Way
(NES) [Added 4-12-2005]
Stop East and west on
Townline Road
Townline Road at Williamsburgh
Lane Lane (NES) [Added
4-12-2005]
Stop East and west on
Townline Road
Town Line Road at Old Northport
Road (COM) [Added 7-26-1988;
repealed 10-8-1991]
Tredwell Avenue at Cleveland
Street (STJ)
Stop North/South on Tredwell
Avenue
Tredwell Avenue at McKinley
Street (STJ) [Added 6-22-2004]
Stop North on Tredwell Avenue
Tredwell Avenue at Roseville
Avenue (STJ)
Stop South on Tredwell Avenue
Tredwell Avenue at School Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on Tredwell
Avenue
Tredwell Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ)
Stop North/South on Tredwell
Avenue
Treetop Path/Knollcrest Road
(NES) [Added 6-23-1998]
Stop West on Treetop Path
Tree Top Terrace at Landing
Meadow Road (SMT) [Added
3-12-1985]
Stop North on Tree Top
Terrace
Trent Court at Burham Drive
(SMT) [Added 8-13-1991]
Stop West on Trent Court
Trent Lane at Burham Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Trent Lane
Trent Lane at St. Nicholas Avenue
(SMT)
Stop West on Trent Lane
Trescott Path at Sunken Meadow
Road (KPK)
Stop North on Trescott Path
Troon Road at Elderwood Drive
(STJ) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop West on Troon Road
Truval Lane at Browns Road
(NES)
Stop North on Truval Lane
Truval Lane at Raynier Place
(NES)
Stop South on Truval Lane
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1135
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Truxton Lane at Sunken Meadow
Road (KPK)
Stop North on Truxton Lane
Truxton Lane at Tarleton Lane/
Tarleton Court (KPK) [Added
11-18-2003]
Stop North/South on Truxton
Lane
Truxton Lane at Trescott Path
(KPK) [Added 5-7-1991]
Stop South on Truxton Lane
Truxton Lane at Tulane Court
(KPK) [Added 11-9-2004]
Stop North/South on Truxton
Lane
Tulane Court at Truxton Lane
(KPK) [Added 11-18-2003]
Stop West on Tulane Court
Tulip Drive at Alder Drive (KPK) Stop East/West on Tulip Drive
Tulip Drive at Cypress Drive
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Tulip Drive
Tulip Drive at Hemlock Drive
(KPK)
Stop West on Tulip Drive
Tulip Drive at Highland Drive
(KPK)
Stop East on Tulip Drive
Tulip Drive at Whittier Drive
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Tulip Drive
Tulip Lane at Astor Court (COM) Stop South on Tulip Lane
Tulip Street at Eklund Boulevard
(NES)
Stop South on Tulip Street
Tulip Street at Nichols Road
(NES)
Stop North on Tulip Street
Tulipwood Drive at Glenmere
Lane (southern intersection
(COM) [Added 3-23-2004]
Stop North/South on
Tulipwood Drive
Tulipwood Drive at Shinbone Lane
(COM)
Stop North on Tulipwood Road
Tusa Court at Edgewood Avenue
(SMT) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop North on Tusa Court
Tusculum Road at Cornell Drive
(COM) [Added 3-27-1984;
amended 10-25-1988]
Stop North on Tusculum Road
Tusculum Road at Harvard Lane
(COM) [Added 3-27-1984]
Stop South on Tusculum Road
Tween Court at Twixt Hills Road
(SMT) [Added 9-4-2018]
Stop West on Tween Court
Twilight Lane at Brooksite Drive
(SMT)
Stop East on Twilight Lane
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1136
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Twin Oaks Drive at Heather Lane
(KPK) [Added 6-10-1997]
Stop North/South on Twin
Oaks Drive
Twin Oaks Drive at Hilden Lane
(KPK) [Added 6-10-1997]
Stop East/South on Twin Oaks
Drive
Twin Oaks Drive at Kohr Road
(KPK)
Stop West on Twin Oaks Drive
Twin Oaks Drive at Mountain
Laurel Lane (KPK) [Added
6-10-1997]
Stop North/South on Twin
Oaks Drive
Twin Oaks Drive at Sunken
Meadow Road (KPK)
Stop North on Twin Oaks Drive
Twixt Hills Road at Edgewood
Avenue (SMT)
Stop South on Twixt Hills Road
Twixt Hills Road at Tween Court
(SMT) [Added 9-4-2018]
Stop North and south on Twixt
Hills Road
Tyler Road at Landing Meadow
Road (SMT) [Amended
8-28-1990]
Stop North on Tyler Road
Tyram Street at Montrose Drive
(COM)
Stop North on Tyram Street
Tyram Street at Montrose Drive
(COM)
Stop West on Tyram Street
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Upper Dock Road at Old Dock
Road (KPK)
Stop South on Upper Dock
Road
Ursular Court at Eckernkamp
Drive (SMT) [Added 10-8-1991]
Stop South on Ursular Court
Ursular Court at Stengel Place
(SMT) [Added 3-29-2007]
Stop West on Ursular Court
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Valant Court at Mobrey Lane
(COM)
Stop North on Valant Court
Val Court at Parkway Drive North
(COM)
Stop South on Val Court
Valiant Court at Sunhill Road
(NES) [Added 2-21-1989]
Stop East on Sunhill Road
Valley Avenue at Landing Meadow
Road (SMT)
Stop South on Valley Avenue
Valley Road at Broadview Avenue
(KPK) [Added 8-20-1996]
Stop West on Valley Road
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1137
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Valley Road at Kohr Road (KPK) Stop West on Valley Road
Valley Road at Woodvale Avenue
(KPK) [Added 5-2-1991]
Stop East on Valley Road
Valleywood Road at Broadview
Drive (SMT) [Added 4-26-2007]
Stop East and north on
Valleywood Road
Valleywood Road at Laurel Drive
(PNS)
Stop East on Valleywood Road
Valleywood Road at Maplelawn
Drive (PNS) [Added 5-7-1991]
Stop East/West on Valleywood
Road
Valleywood Road at Wyandanch
Boulevard (PNS)
Stop East/West on Valleywood
Road
Valmont Lane at New Highway
(COM)
Stop North on Valmont Lane
Van Buren Street at Clinton
Avenue (STJ)
Stop South on Van Buren
Street
Vance Street at Old Indian Head
Road (COM) [Added 6-10-1997]
Stop East on Vance Street
Vance Street at Ruth Boulevard
(COM)
Stop West on Vance Street
Vasser Place at New York Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Vasser Place
Verbena Drive at Astor Court
(COM)
Stop North on Verbena Drive
Verbena Drive at Magnolia Drive
(COM) [Added 5-16-2000]
Stop East/West on Verbena
Drive
Verbena Drive at the entrance to
Mayfair Shopping Center (COM)
[Added 5-23-2013]
Stop West on Verbena Drive
Verdi Street at St. Johnland Road
(KPK)
Stop West on Verdi Street
Verdi Street at St. Nicholas
Avenue (SMT) [Added
11-20-1990]
Stop East/West on Verdi Street
Veronica Court at Derby Place
(SMT) [Added 11-29-2007]
Stop South on Veronica Court
Veterans Lane at Church Street
(KPK)
Stop East on Veterans Lane
Veterans Lane at Henry Street
(KPK) [Added 5-7-1991]
Stop East/West on Veterans
Lane
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1138
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Veterans Memorial Park exit at
Moriches Road (STJ) [Added
9-7-1993]
Stop West on park exit
Vicar Court at Excalibur Lane
(NES)
Stop North on Vicar Court
Villa Lane at Stacey Lane (COM) Stop West on Villa Lane
Villa Lane at Stanwich Road
(COM) [Added 11-3-2015]
Stop North on Villa Lane
Vine Road at Juniper Road (KPK) Stop East on Vine Road
Vine Road at King Road (KPK)
[Added 9-19-1988]
Stop West on Vine Road
Vineyard Court at Mills Pond Road
(STJ) [Added 3-9-1999]
Stop West on Vineyard Court
Violet Lane at Shirley Court
(COM)
Stop East on Violet Lane
Violet Road at Highland Drive
(KPK)
Stop West on Violet Road
Vista Place at Cambon Place
(NES) [Added 1-21-2003]
Stop West on Vista Place
Vista Place at Unity Court (NES)
[Added 1-21-2003]
Stop East on Vista Place
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Wagon Way at Townline Road
(NES) [Added 4-12-2005]
Stop North on Wagon Way
Walnut Road at Landing Road
(KPK)
Stop South on Walnut Road
Walnut Road at Longfellow Drive
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Walnut Road
Walnut Road at St. Johnland Road
(KPK)
Stop West on Walnut Street
Walter Court at Poppy Lane
(COM) [Added 6-9-1992]
Stop East/West on Walter
Court
Walter Court at Shirley Court
(COM)
Stop East/West on Walter
Court
Walter Court at Wyandanch
Boulevard (COM)
Stop East on Walter Court
Walter Court at Zinnia Court
(COM) [Added 7-11-1995]
Stop South/West on Walter
Court
Walter Drive at Greis Avenue
(NES)
Stop North on Walter Drive
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1139
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Walter Drive at Steuben
Boulevard (NES) [Added
5-24-1988; amended
6-21-1988]
Stop South on Walter Drive
Wanda Lane at Torlen Court
(HPG)
Stop North on Wanda Lane
Wandering Way at Landing
Meadow Road (SMT) [Added
7-22-1986]
Stop West on Wandering Way
Waner Street at Old Indian Head
Road (COM) [Added 6-10-1997]
Stop East on Waner Street
Waner Street at Ruth Boulevard
(COM)
Stop West on Waner Street
Ware Place at Rumford Road
(KPK) [Added 7-11-1985]
Stop South on Ware Place
Wartburg Court at Wartburg Drive
(KPK) [Added 12-22-1987]
Stop East/West on Wartburg
Court
Wartburg Court at Wartburg Drive
(KPK) [Added 12-22-1987]
Stop North on Wartburg Drive
Wartburg Drive at Ardito Avenue
(KPK) [Added 6-12-1990]
Stop East/West on Wartburg
Drive
Wartburg Drive at First Avenue
(KPK) [Added 12-22-1987]
Stop East on Wartburg Drive
Washington Avenue at Fifth Street
(STJ)
Stop North/South on
Washington Avenue
Washington Avenue at Railroad
Avenue (STJ)
Stop North on Washington
Avenue
Washington Avenue at Seventh
Street (STJ)
Stop North/South on
Washington Avenue
Washington Avenue at Terry Road
(NES)
Stop West on Washington
Avenue
Washington Avenue at Third
Street (STJ)
Stop North/South on
Washington Avenue
Washington Avenue at Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ)
Stop South on Washington
Avenue
Washington Boulevard at Fulton
Boulevard (COM) [Added
11-19-1991]
Stop East on Washington
Boulevard
Washington Boulevard at Harris
Court (COM) [Added
11-19-1991]
Stop West on Washington
Boulevard
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1140
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Washington Boulevard at Kings
Park Road (COM)
Stop West on Washington
Boulevard
Washington Boulevard at
Plymouth Boulevard (COM)
Stop East on Washington
Boulevard
Washington Boulevard at
Roosevelt Avenue (COM)
Stop East/West on Washington
Boulevard
Washington Drive at Aspen Road
(KPK) [Added 7-14-1992]
Stop West on Washington Drive
Washington Drive at Birch Road
(KPK) [Added 5-7-2019]
Stop East on Birch Road
Washington Drive at Cedar Road
(KPK)
Stop East on Washington Drive
Washington Drive at Dogwood
Road (KPK)
Stop East/West on Washington
Drive
Washington Drive at Forest Road
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Washington
Drive
Washington Drive at Grove Road
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Washington
Drive
Washington Drive at Hawthorne
Road (KPK) [Repealed
6-21-1988]
Washington Drive at Juniper Road
(KPK)
Stop North on Washington
Drive
Washington Drive at St. Johnland
Road (KPK)
Stop East on Washington Drive
Waverly Avenue at New York
Avenue (SMT)
Stop East on Waverly Avenue
Wayfarer Lane at Riverview
Terrace (SMT) [Added
7-22-1986]
Stop East on Wayfarer Lane
Wayfarer Lane at Wandering Way
(SMT) [Added 7-22-1986]
Stop West on Wayfarer Lane
Wayside Lane at Morewood Drive
(COM)
Stop North on Wayside Lane
Wayside Lane at Parnell Drive
(COM)
Stop South on Wayside Lane
Wellwood Road at Elderwood
Drive West (STJ) [Added
7-24-1990]
Stop East on Wellwood Road
Wellwood Road at Mills Pond Road
(STJ) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop West on Wellwood Road
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1141
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Welsley Lane at Sherbrook Drive
(SMT)
Stop South on Welsley Lane
Wenmore Road at Kings Park
Road (COM)
Stou East on Wenmore Road
Wesleyan Road at Cornell Drive
(COM) [Added 4-4-1989]
Stop South on Wesleyan Road
Wesleyan Road at Kings Park
Road (COM)
Stop West on Wesleyan Road
Westbrook Drive at Estate Road
(SMT) [Added 4-7-1987]
Stop North on Westbrook Lane
West Drive at Magellan Avenue
(KPK)
Stop South on West Drive
West Drive at Meadow Road (KPK) Stop North on West Drive
Weston Lane at Parnell Drive
(COM)
Stop South on Weston Lane
Weston Lane at Plymouth
Boulevard (COM)
Stop East on Weston Lane
West Pond Court at Hidden Ponds
Circle (SMT) [Added 8-26-1992]
Stop North on West Pond Court
Westwood Lane at Haig Place
(KPK)
Stop West on Westwood Lane
Wexford Court at Northern
Boulevard (STJ)
Stop West on Wexford Lane
Whispering Woods Drive at
Plymouth Boulevard (northern
intersection) (SMT) [Added
6-22-1999]
Stop West on Whispering
Woods Drive
Whispering Woods Drive at
Plymouth Boulevard (southern
intersection) (SMT) [Added
6-22-1999]
Stop West on Whispering
Woods Drive
White Avenue at Sailer Street
(STJ)
Stop North on White Avenue
White Birch Lane at Cottonwood
Drive (COM)
Stop East on White Birch Lane
White Birch Lane at Elder Drive
(COM)
Stop East/West on White Birch
Lane
White Cliff Lane at Windwood
Drive (NES) [Added 1-21-2003]
Stop West on White Cliff Lane
White Oak Drive at Lone Oak Path
(SMT) [Added 2-12-2002]
Stop North on White Oak Drive
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1142
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
White Pine Court at Landing
Avenue (SMT) [Added
10-12-1999]
Stop East on White Pine Court
Whitney Gate at Edgewood
Avenue (SMT)
Stop South on Whitney Gate
Whittier Drive at Rosewood Drive
(KPK)
Stop South on Whittier Drive
Whittier Drive at Tulip Drive
(KPK)
Stop North/South on Whittier
Drive
Wichard Boulevard at Harris
Court (COM) [Added
10-24-2006]
Stop East and west on Wichard
Boulevard
Wichard Boulevard at Philson
Court (COM) [Added 7-14-1992]
Stop East/West on Wichard
Boulevard
Wichard Boulevard at Roosevelt
Avenue (COM) [Added
7-14-1992]
Stop East/West on Wichard
Boulevard
Wicks Path at Sioux Drive (COM) Stop South on Wicks Path
Wildwood Court at Arrowood
Drive (STJ) [Added 7-24-1990]
Stop North on Wildwood Court
Wildwood Lane at Juniper Avenue
(SMT)
Stop West on Wildwood Lane
Wildwood Lane at Maple Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Wildwood Lane
Williamsburgh Lane at Townline
Road (NES) [Added 4-12-2005]
Stop North on Williamsburgh
Lane
Williamsburgh Lane at Uncas
Street (NES) [Added 6-21-1984]
Stop South on Williamsburgh
Lane
William Street at Annette Avenue
(SMT) [Amended 3-10-1998]
Stop South on William Street
William Street at Catherine
Avenue (SMT) [Amended
3-10-1998]
Stop North on William Street
William Street at Florence Avenue
(SMT) [Added 3-10-1998]
Stop North/South on William
Street
Willow Lane at Twin Oaks Drive
(KPK)
Stop West on Willow Lane
Willow Street at Lawrence Avenue
(SMT)
Stop East on Willow Street
Wilson Avenue at Heritage Place
South (NES) [Added 9-26-2006]
Stop East on Wilson Avenue
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1143
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Wilson Avenue at Lake Avenue
South (NES)
Stop West on Wilson Avenue
Windham Crescent (northern
intersection) at Rumford Road
(KPK) [Added 8-24-1993]
Stop West on Windham
Crescent
Windham Crescent (southern
intersection) at Rumford Road
(KPK) [Added 8-24-1993]
Stop South on Windham
Crescent
Windwood Drive at Nichols Road
(NES) [Added 1-21-2003]
Stop South on Windwood Drive
Wink Place at Rumford Road
(KPK) [Added 8-9-1988]
Stop South on Wink Place
Winnecomac Circle at Old
Commack Road (COM) [Added
10-8-1996]
Stop West on Winnecomac
Circle
Winnecomac Circle at
Winnecomac Circle (COM)
[Added 10-8-1996]
Stop South on Winnecomac
Circle
Winslow Lane at Sheryl Crescent
(southern intersection) (SMT)
[Added 8-12-2008]
Stop South on Winslow Lane
Winston Drive at Mobrey Lane
(PNS)
Stop South on Winston Drive
Wireless Boulevard at Adams
Avenue (HPG) [Added
11-22-1988; repealed
9-29-1998]
Wireless Boulevard at Moreland
Road (HPG) [Added 11-22-1988;
repealed 8-14-2018]
Woodfield Avenue at Linwood
Lane (KPK) [Added 11-8-2005]
Stop North/South on Woodfield
Avenue
Woodhollow Lane at Meadowood
Lane (KPK)
Stop North on Woodhollow
Lane
Woodland Drive at Cedar Road
(KPK)
Stop East/West on Woodland
Drive
Woodland Drive at Grove Road
(KPK) [Added 9-19-1988]
Stop East/West on Woodland
Drive
Woodland Drive at Hawthorne
Road (KPK) [Repealed
9-19-1988]
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § G-1
1:1144
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Woodland Drive at Juniper Road
(KPK)
Stop West on Woodland Drive
Woodland Drive at Landing
Avenue (SMT)
Stop West on Woodland Drive
Woodland Drive at St. Johnland
Road (KPK)
Stop East on Woodland Drive
Woodland Lane at Old Willets Path
(PNS) [Repealed 12-23-1986]
Wood Lane at Tanglewood Drive
(SMT) [Amended 7-28-1992]
Stop West on Wood Lane
Woodlawn Avenue at Cambon
Avenue (STJ) [Added 9-8-2009]
Stop East/West on Woodlawn
Avenue
Woodlawn Avenue at Hillside
Avenue (STJ) [Added 9-8-2009]
Stop East/West on Woodlawn
Avenue
Woodlawn Avenue at Hobson
Avenue (STJ) [Added 4-5-2011]
Stop East/West on Woodlawn
Avenue
Woodmere Drive at Brookfield
Road (KPK) [Added 3-24-1992]
Stop North on Woodmere Drive
Woodrow Lane North at
Morewood Drive (COM)
Stop North on Woodrow Lane
North
Woodrow Lane South at
Morewood Drive (COM)
Stop West on Woodrow Lane
South
Woodvale Avenue at Sunken
Meadow Road (KPK)
Stop North on Woodvale
Avenue
Woodview Drive at Nichols Road
(NES)
Stop North on Woodview Drive
Wyandanch Boulevard at Astor
Court (SMT) [Amended
9-12-2006]
Stop North and south on
Wyandanch Boulevard
Wyandanch Boulevard at Laurel
Drive (PNS) [Repealed
8-12-1986]
Wyandanch Boulevard at Rose
Court (SMT) [Added 6-28-2005]
Stop North and south on
Wyandanch Boulevard
Wyandanch Boulevard at Shirley
Court (PNS)
Stop North/South on
Wyandanch Boulevard
Wysocki Court at Southern
Boulevard (NES)
Stop East on Wysocki Court
§ G-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § G-1
1:1145
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Yale Lane at Bowman Lane (KPK) Stop East on Yale Lane
Yardley Lane at Alexander Avenue
(NES)
Stop East on Yardley Lane
Yardley Lane at Shenandoah
Boulevard North (NES) [Added
9-24-1996]
Stop West on Yardley Lane
Yates Avenue at Rensselaer Drive
(COM)
Stop South on Yates Avenue
Yellow Brick Drive at Meadow
Glen Road (KPK)
Stop East on Yellow Brick
Drive
Intersection Sign Controlling Traffic
Zinnia Court at Pickwick Drive
(COM)
Stop South on Zinnia Court
Zinnia Court at Walter Court
(COM)
Stop North on Zinnia Court
Schedule H
SPEED LIMITS
§ H-1. Speed limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC2-9, the speed limits for the streets
or parts of streets described below shall be as indicated.
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Commack Road (CR4)(COM) 40 Between the south service road
of the Long Island Expressway
(SR495) and New Highway
Crooked Hill Road
(CR13)(COM)
40 Between the Long Island
Expressway (SR495) and
Commack Road (CR4)
Fairfield Drive (STJ) [Added
5-24-1988]
20 From Moriches Road to the
terminus of Fairfield Drive
Harned Road (County Road
14) (COM) [Added
12-4-1990; repealed
6-26-2001]
Hidden Ponds Circle (SMT)
[Added 8-26-1992]
20 From SR347 to Hidden Ponds
Circle
§ G-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § H-1
1:1146
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Indian Head Road (CR14)
(KPK) [Repealed
9-25-1990]
Indian Head Road (CR14)
(COM) (KPK) [Added
9-25-1990; repealed
3-22-1994]
Indian Head Road (CR14)
(COM) (KPK) [Added
3-22-1994; repealed
4-18-2006]
Indian Head Road (CR14)
(COM) (KPK) [Added
3-22-1994; repealed
4-18-2006]
Indian Head Road (CR14)
(COM) [Added 4-18-2006]
40 From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to
400 feet south of Old Indian Head
Road
Long Island Expressway
north and south service
roads (COM)
40 Between Crooked Hill Road
(CR13) and Commack Road (CR4)
North Lane (SMT) [Added
8-26-1992]
20 From Hidden Ponds Circle to its
terminus
Park roadway through Long
Beach and Otto Schubert
(Little Africa) Parks and the
Smithtown Marina [Added
7-8-1997]
25 Between the terminuses of Long
Beach Road and East Long Beach
Road
Pond View Lane (SMT)
[Added 8-26-1992]
20 From Hidden Ponds Circle to
Hidden Ponds Circle
Pulaski Road - East
Northport Road (CR11)
(KPK)
40 Between Bread and Cheese
Hollow Road and Sunken
Meadow Parkway
Rabro Drive (CR6) (HPG)
[Added 1-22-2015]
40 From Old Willets Path (CR108) to
the Islip Town line
Rosevale Avenue (CR93)
(NES)
40 Between Smithtown Boulevard
(CR16) and the Smithtown Town
line
South Pond Lane (SMT)
[Added 8-26-1992]
20 From West Pond Court to Hidden
Ponds Circle
§ H-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § H-1
1:1147
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Terry Road, Smithtown
Boulevard, Lake Shore Road
(County Road 16) (NES)
[Added 12-4-1990]
35 Between Middle Country Road
(SR25) and the Brookhaven town
line
Three Sisters Road (STJ)
[Added 6-10-2003]
25 From Moriches Road to
Thompson Hill Road
Town Commons Drive (SMT)
[Added 2-10-1998]
25 Between Terry Road (CR16) and
the Smithtown Bypass (SR347)
Town Line Road (CR76)
(HPG/NES) [Amended
1-9-1990]
35 Between SR111 and Southern
Boulevard
Vanderbilt Motor Parkway
(CR67) (COM)
40 Between the Huntington and Islip
Town lines
Wartburg Court (KPK)
Martin Luther Terrace
Apartments [Added
12-22-1987]
15 Between Fourth Avenue and east
terminus of Wartburg Drive
Martin Luther Terrace
Apartments [Added
12-22-1987]
15 Between First Avenue and
Wartburg Court
West Pond Court (SMT)
[Added 8-26-1992]
20 From Hidden Ponds Circle to its
terminus
Schedule I
SCHOOL SPEED LIMITS
§ I-1. School speed limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC2-10, school speed limits shall be
as indicated upon the streets or parts of streets described below.
§ H-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § I-1
1:1148
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Brown's Road (NES)
[Added 8-31-1999]
20 Nesconset Elementary School, from
25 feet east of Nicholas Court east
for 1,500 feet
Clinton Street (STJ)
[Added 8-23-1988]
20 Saints Phillip and James Elementary
School, from 120 feet west of
Northern Boulevard to 220 feet west
of Pierrepont Street
Edgewood Avenue
(SMT) [Repealed
9-8-1992]
Edgewood Avenue
(SMT) [Added
3-8-2005]
20 Nesaquake Middle School from 190
feet west of Harness Road west for
1,320 feet
Gibbs Pond Road (NES) 20 Nesconset Elementary School, from
Lake Avenue South south to 210 feet
north of Michael Place
Haig Place (KPK)
[Added 12-3-1996]
20 Parkview Elementary School, from
Roundtree Drive to 50 feet south of
Colby Drive
High Gate Drive (SMT)
[Repealed 2-4-1986]
Holly Drive (PNS) 20 Pines Elementary School, from 100
feet west of Ledgewood Drive west
for 950 feet
Indian Head Road
(CR14) (COM)
[Repealed 9-25-1990]
Indian Head Road
(CR14) (COM) [Added
9-25-1990; repealed
3-22-1994]
Indian Head Road
(CR14)(COM)(KPK)
[Added 3-22-1994;
repealed 4-18-2006]
Indian Head Road
(CR14) (COM) [Added
4-18-2006]
30 United Cerebral Palsy Learning
Center/Holy Family Regional School
from 1,600 feet north of Jericho
Turnpike (SR25) to Somerset Drive
§ I-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § I-1
1:1149
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Kings Park Road (COM)
[Amended 10-3-2000]
20 Indian Hollow Primary School, from
120 feet south of Wesleyan Road
north to 680 feet north of Wenmore
Road
Kings Park Road (COM)
[Repealed 10-3-2000]
Kohr Road - Church
Street (KPK)
20 Ralph J. Osgood Elementary School,
from 175 feet south of Old Dock
Road north for 950 feet
Lake Avenue (STJ) 20 St. James Elementary School, from
150 feet north of Maple Drive south
for 725 feet
Lawrence Avenue (SMT) 20 Smithtown Elementary School, from
130 feet south of Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) south for 1,100 feet
Lawrence Road (KPK)
[Added 9-7-2010]
20 Kings Park High School, from Lordly
Court to SR25A
Lawrence Road (KPK) 20 San Remo Elementary School, from
130 feet north of Boxwood Drive
north for 990 feet
Meadow Road (SMT)
[Added 8-23-1988]
20 Smithtown High School West/
Accompsett Junior High School/
Accompsett Elementary School,
from 340 feet east of Pine Acre
Drive to Old Northport Road
Midwood Avenue (NES) 20 Tackan Elementary School, from 325
feet south of Chapman Road south
to 300 feet south of Crusader Lane
Moriches Road (STJ) 20 Mills Pond Elementary School, from
215 feet north of Woodlawn Avenue
south for 950 feet
New Highway (COM) 20 Saw Mill Junior High School/Wood
Park Elementary School, from Wicks
Path west to 230 feet west of Marie
Crescent
New York Avenue (SMT) 20 New York Avenue Junior High
School, from Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) south for 960 feet
§ I-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § I-1
1:1150
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Old Dock Road (KPK) 20 Ralph J. Osgood Junior High School/
Ralph J. Osgood Elementary School,
from 150 feet west of Kohr Road -
Church Street east for 2,200 feet
Old Northport Road
(SMT) [Added
8-23-1988]
20 Smithtown High School West/
Accompsett Junior High School/
Accompsett Elementary School,
from 900 feet west of Plymouth
Boulevard to Meadow Road
Pierrepont Street (STJ)
[Added 8-23-1988]
20 Saints Phillip and James Elementary
School, from Clinton Avenue to
Cleremont Avenue
Pinewood Drive (COM) 20 Sagtikos Elementary School, from
415 feet northwest of Melwood
Drive west and north for 1,020 feet
Plaisted Avenue (SMT) 20 Mt. Pleasant Elementary School,
from 300 feet south of Ray Lane
north for 840 feet
Scholar Lane (COM)
[Repealed
11-30-1999]
Scholar Lane (COM) 20 Commack North High School, from
Town Line Road east to 90 feet east
of Silo Road
Smithtown Boulevard
(CR16) (NES) [Added
12-14-2010]
25 Cleary School, from 150 feet west of
Rosevale Avenue (CR93) to 100 feet
west of Locust Street
Southern Boulevard
(NES) [Repealed
9-8-1992]
Southern Boulevard
(NES) [Added
7-20-1999]
20 Great Hollow School, from 175 feet
south of Donnatella Lane to 25 feet
south of Wysocki Court
Sunken Meadow Road
(KPK)
20 Forth Salonga Elementary School,
from 150 feet west of Dolores Lane
east to Oak Lane
Tillotson Avenue (STJ)
[Added 8-23-1988]
20 Saints Phillip and James Elementary
School, from 120 feet west of
Northern Boulevard to school
§ I-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § I-1
1:1151
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Town Line Road (COM) 20 Commack North High School/North
Ridge Elementary School, from 230
feet south of Scholar Lane north to
Marshmallow Drive
Town Line Road (CR76)
(NES) [Added
1-20-1987]
25 Hauppauge Middle School, from 385
feet east of Opal Court to 600 feet
west of Opal Court
Wicks Path (COM) 20 Wood Park Elementary School, from
New Highway north for 625 feet
Woodlawn Avenue (STJ) 20 Mills Pond Elementary School, from
Moriches Road west for 635 feet
Woodlawn Avenue (STJ)
[Added 12-22-1992]
20 Smithtown Middle School, from
Tredwell Avenue west to 150 feet
east of Fifty Acre Road South
Schedule J
PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING
§ J-1. Parking, stopping and standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC3-5, the parking, stopping or
standing of vehicles is restricted as indicated in the following locations.
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Abbot Road/Both From terminus at
Morewood Park east for 220
feet (SMT) [Added
7-28-1987; amended
7-24-1990]
No parking All
Abbot Road/
North
From Plymouth Boulevard
west for 400 feet (SMT)
[Added 8-10-1993]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Abbot Road/
South
From 400 feet west of
Plymouth Boulevard to
Plymouth Boulevard (SMT)
[Added 8-10-1993]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Adams Avenue/
Both
From New Highway to
Vanderbilt Manor Parkway
(CR67) (HPG)
No parking All
§ I-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1152
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Adams Avenue/
East
Opposite Davids Drive
(HPG) [Added 5-26-1987;
repealed 11-24-1987]
South of Oser Avenue (HPG)
[Added 5-26-1987;
repealed 11-24-1987]
Adams Avenue/
West
North of Davis Drive (HPG)
[Added 5-26-1987;
repealed 11-24-1987]
South of Oser Avenue (HPG)
[Added 5-26-1987;
repealed 11-24-1987]
Adams Court/
Both [Repealed
5-22-1984]
Agren Lane/Both From Eklund Boulevard
south for 150 feet (NES)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Alder Drive/Both From 300 feet south of
Riviera Drive south for 100
feet (KPK) [Added
5-3-2016]
No parking All
Alexander
Avenue/Both
From Middle Country Road
(SR25) to Dover Hill Drive
(northern intersection)
(NES) [Added
11-19-2015]
No stopping All
Alfred Lane/East From Old Northport Road
north for 400 feet (SMT)
[Added 3-31-1993]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Alfred Lane/West From 500 feet north of Old
Northport Road south to Old
Northport Road (SMT)
[Added 3-31-1993]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Alice Lane/Both From north terminus to
south terminus (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Alice Lane/East From 300 feet south of
Ardra Court north for 210
feet (SMT) [Added
8-15-2013]
No parking All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1153
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Alpine Court/
Both
From west terminus east to
east terminus (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Andrea Lane/
Both
From Old Willets Path west
to Alice Lane (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Angela Court/
North
From Lake Avenue west for
120 feet (STJ) [Added
6-11-2019]
No parking
here to
corner
All
Apple Lane/Both From Crocus Lane south to
Veterans Memorial Highway
(PNS) [Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Ardra Court/
Both
From Alice Lane east/south
of Alpine Court (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Argyle Place/
Both
From Pine Ridge Drive east
to Grassy Pond Drive (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Arkay Drive/Both From Adams Avenue to
Marcus Boulevard (HPG)
No parking All
Arlington
Avenue/Both
From SR25 north for 1,100
feet (STJ) [Added
11-19-2015]
No stopping All
Arlington
Avenue/East
From SR25 north for 65 feet
(STJ) [Added 10-21-1997;
repealed 9-9-2014]
From 65 feet north of SR25
north for 85 feet (STJ)
[Added 9-6-2011;
repealed 9-9-2014]
From SR25 north for 700
feet (STJ) [Added
9-9-2014; repealed
11-19-2015]
From Rutherford Street to
Roseville Avenue (STJ)
[Added 4-26-2007]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Arlington
Avenue/West
From 65 feet north of SR25
(Middle Country Road) to
SR25 (STJ) [Added
10-21-1997; repealed
9-9-2014]
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1154
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 150 feet north of
SR25 south for 85 feet (STJ)
[Added 9-6-2011;
repealed 9-9-2014]
From Roseville Avenue to
Rutherford Street (STJ)
[Added 4-26-2007]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From 700 feet north of
SR25 south for 700 feet
(STJ) [Added 9-9-2014;
repealed 11-19-2015]
Arlyne Lane/East From Wesleyan Road north
to terminus (COM) [Added
3-30-1999]
No parking All
Arlyne Lane/
West
From terminus south to
Wesleyan Road (COM)
[Added 3-30-1999]
No parking All
Armon Street/
South
From Smith Street east for
160 feet (NES) [Added
8-28-1990]
No parking All
Arrowood Drive/
East
From 50 feet south of
Wildwood Court to 50 feet
north of Wildwood Court
(STJ) [Added 4-28-1992]
No parking All
Asbury Drive/
Both
From Plymouth Boulevard
west to the Smithtown Fire
Department western
property line (COM)
No parking,
fire zone
All
Astor Avenue/
Both
From Jericho Turnpike
north for 200 feet (STJ)
No parking All
Astor Drive/Both From Wyandanch Boulevard
west to Verbena Drive (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Atterbury Drive/
Both
From Prospect Street north
for 250 feet (SMT) [Added
11-27-1984]
No parking All
Aubutus Court/
Both
From Wyandanch Boulevard
west to to White Spruce
Circle (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1155
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Austin
Boulevard/Both
From Vanderbilt Motor
Parkway (CR67) north and
east to Moreland Road
(COM)
No parking All
Autumn Drive/
East
From Terrace Drive north
for 100 feet (HPG) [Added
3-4-1997]
No parking All
Avery Place/Both From Pine Drive east to
Grassy Pond Drive (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Azelia Court/
Both
From Walter Court west to
terminus (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Bank Avenue/
Both
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) north to
Redwood Lane (SMT)
2-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Bank Avenue/
East
From 80 feet north of Manor
Road North for 40 feet
(SMT) [Added 2-6-1990]
No parking All
Bank Avenue/
West
From 100 feet north of
Manor Road south for 60
feet (SMT) [Added
2-6-1990]
No parking All
Bayberry Lane/
Both
From Mobrey Lane North
west to Laurel Drive (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Beach Hill Drive/
Both [Repealed
8-14-2001]
Beach Hill Drive/
North
From eastern terminus to
100 feet west of Soundview
Drive (KPK) [Added
8-14-2001]
No parking All
Beach Hill Drive/
South
From Beverly Court east to
eastern terminus (KPK)
[Added 8-14-2001]
No parking All
Beechwood
Lane/East
[Repealed
3-5-1996]
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1156
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Beechwood
Lane/East
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25) north for 200 feet
(COM) [Added 3-5-1996]
No
stopping
All
From 200 feet of Jericho
Turnpike (SR25) north to
Elder Drive (COM) [Added
3-5-1996]
No parking All
Beechwood
Lane/West
[Repealed
3-5-1996]
Beechwood
Lane/West
From Elder Drive south for
225 feet (COM) [Added
3-5-1996; amended
6-20-1996; 6-18-2015]
No parking All
From 225 feet south of Elder
Drive south for 210 feet
(COM) [Added 3-5-1996]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m.
From 435 feet south of Elder
Drive south to Jericho
Turnpike (SR25) (COM)
[Added 3-5-1996]
No parking All
Bellemeade
Avenue/East
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) north for 325
feet (SMT) [Amended
4-21-1987]
No parking All
Bellemeade
Avenue/West
[Repealed
10-7-1986]
Bellemeade
Avenue/West
From Blydenburgh Avenue
south for 660 feet (SMT)
[Added 2-22-1994]
No parking All
From 30 feet north of Main
Street (SR25) to 125 feet
north of Main Street (SR25)
(SMT) [Added 10-7-1986;
repealed 7-11-1995]
From 50 feet north of Main
Street (SR25) south to Main
Street (SR25) (SMT) [Added
7-11-1995]
No
standing
here to
corner
All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1157
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 125 feet north of Main
Street (SR25) south for 75
feet (SMT) [Added
7-11-1995]
20-minute
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 125 feet north of Main
Street (SR25) to 300 feet
north of Main Street (SR25)
(SMT) [Added 10-7-1986]
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 330 feet north of Main
Street (SR25) to 550 feet
north of Main Street (SR25)
(SMT) [Added 10-7-1986;
amended 2-3-1987;
repealed 2-22-1994]
Belmont Drive/
Both
From Grassy Pond Drive
south west to Ledgewood
Drive (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Bethany Road/
East
From 500 feet north of
Ashlon Lane northeast for
315 feet (COM) [Added
5-6-2014; amended
11-19-2015]
No parking All
Bethany Road/
West
From 225 feet west of
Wenmore Road southwest for
400 feet (COM) [Added
5-6-2014; amended
11-19-2015]
No parking All
Bluegrass Lane/
East
From 425 feet south of
Hayrick Lane north for 180
feet (COM) [Added
8-15-2013]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Bluegrass Lane/
North [Added
10-24-1995;
repealed
8-15-2013]
Bluegrass Lane/
West
From Hayrick Lane south for
405 feet (COM) [Added
8-15-2013]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1158
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Blydenburgh
Avenue/Both
[Repealed
8-9-1988]
Blydenburgh
Avenue/North
From Landing Avenue east
for 225 feet (SMT) [Added
8-9-1988]
No parking All
Blydenburgh
Avenue/South
From Landing Avenue east
for 550 feet (SMT) [Added
8-9-1988]
No parking All
Bowman Lane/
East
From Knight Lane north for
225 feet (KPK) [Added
7-26-1988]
No parking All
Bowman Lane/
West
From Knight Lane north for
125 feet (KPK) [Added
7-26-1988]
No parking All
Bridlepath Road/
Both [Repealed
2-9-1993]
Bridlepath Road/
North
From 175 feet east of
Landing Avenue west to
Landing Avenue (SMT)
[Added 2-9-1993]
No parking All
Bridlepath Road/
South
From Landing Avenue east
for 175 feet (SMT) [Added
2-9-1993]
No parking All
From 550 feet east of Round
About Road east for 150 feet
(SMT) [Added 9-7-2010]
No parking All
Bridge Branch
Road/Both
From Ivy Hill Drive North for
140 feet to the northern
terminus (SMT)
No parking 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Bridge Branch
Road/Both
From Ivy Hill Drive North
through terminus (PNS)
[Added 2-20-1990]
No parking 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Broadview
Avenue/Both
From Kohr Road east for 200
feet (KPK)
No parking All
Broadview
Avenue/East
From 300 feet north of Valley
Road north for 50 feet (KPK)
[Added 2-15-2000]
No parking All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1159
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Broadview -
Valleywood
Road/Both
From Laurel Drive west/
north to Shirley Court (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Brook Avenue/
East [Added
4-23-1996;
repealed
11-4-2003]
Brook Avenue/
West [Added
4-23-1996;
repealed
11-4-2003]
Brook Court/
North
From 180 feet east of Maple
Avenue west for 180 feet
(SMT) [Added 3-5-1996]
No parking All
Brook Court/
South
From Maple Avenue east for
130 feet (SMT) [Added
3-5-1996]
No parking All
Brooks Avenue/
East
From Smithtown Boulevard
north for 60 feet (NES)
[Added 11-4-2003]
No
stopping
All
From 200 feet north of
Smithtown Boulevard north
for 175 feet (NES) [Added
11-4-2003]
No
stopping
8:30 a.m. to
5:30 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Brooks Avenue/
West
From 300 feet north of
Smithtown Boulevard south
for 90 feet (NES) [Added
11-4-2003]
No parking All
From 100 feet north of
Smithtown Boulevard to
Smithtown Boulevard (NES)
[Added 11-4-2003]
No
stopping
All
Brooksite Drive/
Both
From Sunset Lane north to
Twilight Lane (SMT)
No parking All
Brooksite Drive/
West
From Albatross Lane south
for 230 feet (SMT) [Added
8-14-1984]
No parking All
Browns Road/
East
Across from Armon Street
(NES) [Added 11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1160
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
North of Lafayette Avenue
(NES) [Added 11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Across from Oakdale Avenue
(NES) [Added 11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
North of Summerfield Drive
(NES) [Added 11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Browns Road/
North
From 90 feet east of Tiffany
Way to 50 feet west of
Tiffany Way (NES) [Added
4-12-2005]
No
standing
All
Browns Road/
South
From 2,200 feet east of Lake
Avenue South east for 200
feet (NES) [Added
5-24-1994]
No parking All
Browns Road/
West
South of Armon Street (NES)
[Added 11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
North of Cromwell Place
(NES) [Added 11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of Oakdale Avenue
(NES) [Added 11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of Old Nichols Road
(NES) [Added 11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Burr Avenue/
West
From 125 feet south of Main
Street (SR25A) to Main
Street (KPK) [Added
3-13-2007; amended
8-12-2008]
No parking All
Burr Avenue/
West
From Main Street (SR25A)
south for 50 feet (KPK)
[Added 3-13-2007]
No parking All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1161
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Cabot Court/
Both
From Adams Avenue east to
its terminus [Added
5-22-1984]
No parking All
Cambon Avenue/
East
From Middle Country Road
north for 200 feet [Added
9-15-2011]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Cambon Avenue/
West
From 200 feet north of
Middle Country Road south
for 200 feet [Added
9-15-2011]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Cambon Place/
Both
From Middle Country Road
(SR25) south for 390 feet
(STJ) [Added 8-12-86]
No
stopping
All
Camelia Place/
North
From opposite the east
curbline of Dewberry Place
westerly for 55 feet (HPG)
[Added 11-25-1986]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Camelia Place/
South
From western terminus east
for 19 feet (HPG) [Added
11-25-1986]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Camelia Place/
Western
terminus
From north curbline south
for 30 feet to south of
curbline (HPG) [Added
11-25-1986]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Carlson Avenue/
Both
From 50 feet south of Main
Street (SR25A) south for 50
feet (KPK) [Amended
12-14-2010]
15-minute
parking
6:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
From Main Street (SR25A)
south for 50 feet (KPK)
No parking All
Carlson Avenue/
South
From Commuter Parking
Field exit west for 40 feet
(KPK) [Added 4- 4-1989]
No
stopping
All
Carnegie Drive/
Both
From Fifty Acre Road south
to Navy Drive (SMT) [Added
9-8-2009]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Carow Place/
Both
From North Country Road
(SR25A) south to Clinton
Avenue (STJ)
No parking All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1162
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Cedar Street/
North
From 150 feet east of
Lincoln Avenue to Lincoln
Avenue (COM) [Added 11-
19-1991]
No parking All
Cedar Street/
South
From Lincoln Avenue east
for 150 feet (COM) [Added
11-19-1991]
No parking All
Central Road/
East
From Plymouth Boulevard
east to Smithtown High
School West entrance (SMT)
[Added 5-12-1992]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Central Road/
West
From Smithtown High
School entrance south to
Plymouth Boulevard (SMT)
[Added 2-23-1992]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Chestnut Court/
Both
From Apple Lane east to
terminus (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Chestnut Court/
South
From Whitman Hollow Park
west for 225 feet (COM)
No
stopping
All
Chestnut Street/
Both
From Smithtown Boulevard
(CR16) to Oak Street (NES)
[Added 5-9-2006]
No parking 11:00 p.m. to
4:00 a.m.,
Thursday
through
Saturday
Churchill Lane/
Both
From Bayberry Lane east to
Grassy Pond Drive (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Church Street/
Both [Repealed
12-26-1989]
Church Street/
East
From 25 feet north of
entrance/exit to Kelly Court
(KPK) [Added 12-26-1989]
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 45 feet south of Kings
Park Library entrance/exit to
25 feet north of entrance/exit
(KPK) [Added 12-26-1989]
No parking All
From Main Street (SR25A) to
45 feet south of Kings Park
Library entrance/exit (KPK)
[Added 12-26-1989]
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1163
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 235 feet north of Old
Dock Road north for 85 feet
(KPK) [Added 11-24-1998]
No
stopping
All
From 600 feet north of Old
Dock Road north for 310 feet
(KPK) [Added 11-24-1998]
No
stopping
All
From 40 feet south of Old
Dock Road south for 140 feet
(KPK) [Repealed
10-11-1994]
From 185 feet south of Old
Dock Road north for 145 feet
(KPK) [Added 10-11-1994]
No parking All
From 230 feet south of Old
Dock Road north for 45 feet
(KPK) [Added 10-11-1994]
No
stopping
All
From Old Dock Road south
for 40 feet (KPK)
No
standing
All
Church Street/
West
From 300 feet south of
Hilden Street south for 100
feet (KPK) [Added
8-15-2013]
No parking All
From Main Street (SR25A) to
Kelly Court (KPK) [Added
12-26-1989]
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Old Dock Road south
for 25 feet (KPK) [Repealed
10-3-1989]
Church Street
(Kohr
Road)/West
From 270 feet north of Old
Dock Road to 125 feet south
of Old Dock Road (KPK)
[Added 10-3-1989;
amended 8-11-1992]
No parking All
Cleveland
Street/North
From Northern Boulevard to
Tredwell Avenue (STJ)
[Added 3-29-2007]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From Tredwell Avenue to St.
James Avenue North (STJ)
[Added 12-13-2005]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Cleveland
Street/South
From St. James Avenue
North to Tredwell Avenue
(STJ) [Added 12-13-2005]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1164
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Tredwell Avenue to
Northern Boulevard (STJ)
[Added 3-29-2007]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Cleveland
Street/South
[Repealed
9-8-1992]
Clinton Avenue/
Both
From North Country Road
(SR25A) east to Remsen
Street (STJ)
No parking All
Clinton Avenue/
South
From Pierrepont Street to
Remsen Street (STJ)
No parking,
fire zone
All
Clover Drive/
Both
From Lone Oak Path south to
Veterans Memorial Highway
(PNS) [Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Clover Lane/
West
From Rumford Road south to
Sagebrush Lane (KPK)
[Added 6-7-1994]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Colgate Drive/
East
From 635 feet north of
Hofstra Drive north for 160
feet (SMT) [Added
10-3-2014]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From 875 feet north of
Hofstra Drive north to
Marquette Drive (SMT)
[Added 10-3-2014]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Colgate Drive/
West
From Marquette Drive south
for 615 feet (SMT) [Added
10-3-2014]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From 780 feet south of
Marquette Drive south to
Hofstra Drive (SMT) [Added
10-3-2014]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Colonial Drive/
Both
From Lone Oak Path south to
Old Hauppauge Road (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Columbine Lane/
Both [Added
3-24-1987;
repealed
6-8-1993]
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1165
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Columbine Lane/
East
From 530 feet south of
Jasmine Lane north to
Rumford Road (KPK) [Added
6-8-1993; amended
8-24-1993]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Columbine Lane/
West
From Rumford Road south
for 930 feet (KPK) [Added
6-8-1993; amended
8-24-1993]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Commack Road/
East
From 800 feet south of
Crooked Hill Road (CR13)
south for 1,000 feet (COM)
[Amended 6-25-1985]
No
stopping
All
From the north service road
of the Long Island
Expressway (SR495) north
for 1,200 feet (COM)
[Repealed 6-25-1985]
From the south service road
of the Long Island
Expressway (SR495) north
for 1,550 feet (COM) [Added
6-25-1985]
No
stopping
All
From the south service road
to the north service road of
the Long Island Expressway
(SR495) (COM) [Repealed
6-25-1985]
Commerce
Drive/Both
From Adams Avenue to
Moreland Road (HUP)
No parking All
Commerce
Drive/North
In front of Alladin Toy Motor
(HPC) [Added 5-26-1987,
repealed 11-24-1987]
In front of Coherent Co.
(HPG) [Added 5-26-1987;
repealed 11-24-1987]
Commerce
Drive/South
In front of Bavad Parc (HPG)
[Added 5-26-1987;
repealed 11-24-1987]
In front of Commerce Center
(HPG) [Repealed
11-24-1987]
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1166
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Concord Drive/
East
From Hastings Drive north
for 165 feet (FTS) [Added
3-12-1996]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Concord Drive/
West
From 475 feet north of
Hastings Drive south to
Hastings Drive (FTS)
[Added 3-12-1996]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Cornell Avenue/
Both
From Wildwood Lane north
for 150 feet (SMT)
No parking All
Corporate Drive/
Both
From Marcus Boulevard to
New Highway [Added
5-22-1984]
No parking All
Cottontail Court/
North
From terminus west to
Whispering Woods Drive
(SMT) [Added 8-12-1997]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Cottontail Court/
South
From Whispering Woods
Drive east to terminus (SMT)
[Added 8-12-1997]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Creek Road/Both From 300 feet west of Croft
Lane east to its terminus at
the Suffolk County Park
(PNS)
No parking All
Creek Road/Both From Old Willets Path
northeasterly to Croft Lane
(PNS) [Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Crestwood
Boulevard/Both
From Sunken Meadow Road
north to Hastings Road
(KPK) [Repealed 5-2-1991]
Crestwood
Drive/East
From Sunken Meadow Road
north to Hastings Drive
(KPK) [Added 5-2-1991]
No parking All
Crestwood
Drive/West
From Hastings Drive south
to Sunken Meadow Road
(KPK) [Added 5-2-1991]
No parking All
Crocus Lane/
Both
From Shirley Court South
east to terminus (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Croft Lane/Both From its terminus north for
50 feet (PNS/SMT)
No parking All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1167
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 300 feet north to 300
feet south of Creek Road
(PNS) [Repealed
5-16-2000]
From Old Willets Path south
to Creek Road (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m
Croft Lane/East From 300 feet south of
Creek Road to 525 feet north
of Creek Road (PNS) [Added
5-16-2000]
No parking All
From 325 feet south of Links
Road to Links Road (SMT)
[Added 5-24-2007]
No parking All
Croft Lane/West From 525 feet north of Creek
Road to 300 feet south of
Creek Road (PNS) [Added
5-16-2000]
No parking All
Crooked Hill
Road/East
From the Long Island
Expressway north service
road north for 652 feet
(COM) [Added 7-24-1987]
No parking All
From Commack Road (CR4)
south for 540 feet (COM)
[Added 8-25-1987]
No parking All
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Daisy Lane/Both From Walter Court south to
Shirley Court (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Dahlia Court/
Both
From Shirley Court South
west to terminus (COM)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Dana Lane/North From Morewood Drive west
for 50 feet (SMT) [Added
3-14-2000]
No
stopping
All
Dana Lane/South From 60 feet west of
Morewood Drive to
Morewood Drive (SMT)
[Added 3-14-2000]
No
stopping
All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1168
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Darling Avenue/
North
[Amended
6-5-1984;
7-10-1984;
repealed
12-4-1990]
Darling Avenue/
North
From 300 feet east of Maple
Avenue west to Maple
Avenue (SMT) [Added
10-4-1994]
No parking All
Darling Avenue/
South [Added
6-5-1984;
repealed
12-4-1990]
Davids Drive/
Both
From Adams Avenue west to
its terminus (HPG)
No parking All
Dehan Street/
North
From 115 feet east of Eden
Drive to 200 feet west of
Eden Drive (SMT) [Added
2-21-1989]
No parking All
Dillmont Drive/
North
From 490 feet west of Lonni
Lane west for 115 feet SMT
[Added 12-10-1996]
No parking All
From 200 feet east of Pine
Acre Drive to Pine Acre
Drive (SMT) [Added
1-24-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Dillmont Drive/
South
From 605 feet west of Lonni
Lane east for 75 feet (SMT)
[Added 12-10-1996]
No parking All
From Pine Acre Drive east
for 200 feet (SMT) [Added
1-24-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Don Way/South From the east side of Town
Line Road east for 240 feet
(COM)
No parking 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Dorian Lane/
Both
From Starlight Drive east to
Parkview Drive (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1169
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Dorset Way/Both From Starlight Drive South
westerly to Veterans
Memorial Highway (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Dundedin Street/
Both
From SR25A north to its
terminus (SMT)
No parking All
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Eagle Lane/Both From Falcon Drive south for
225 feet (HPG) [Repealed
8-25-1998]
Eagle Lane/
Southeast corner
at Falcon Drive
At emergency entrance of
Honey Hollow
condominiums (HPG)
[Added 2-23-1988]
No
stopping,
fire zone
All
East Hill Drive/
North
From 25 feet east to 25 feet
west of the property lines of
the East Hill Park (SMT)
[Repealed 10-6-1987]
East Hill Drive/
South
From 350 feet east of Penn
Drive east for 70 feet (STJ)
[Added 5-28-1991]
No parking All
East Northport
Road/North
[Added
1-26-1988;
amended
3-8-1988;
repealed
2-20-1996]
East Northport
Road/South
[Added
1-26-1988;
amended
3-8-1988;
repealed
2-20-1996]
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1170
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
East Northport
Road (Pulaski
Road,
CR11)/North
[Added
2-20-1996]
From 285 feet east of Cedar
Street to 145 feet west of
Cedar Street (KPK)
No stopping All
From Avenue K west to 110
feet west of Avenue B (KPK)
No parking All
East Northport
Road (Pulaski
Road,
CR11)/South
[Added
2-20-1996]
From 280 feet east of
Lincoln Avenue to 150 feet
east of Old Commack Road
(KPK)
No stopping All
Echo Lane/North From 525 feet west of First
Avenue west for 280 feet
(KPK) [Added 8-23-2005]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Echo Lane/South From 805 feet west of First
Avenue east for 60 feet
(KPK) [Added 8-23-2005]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Eckernkamp
Drive/Both
From Old Landers Court
east to Ingelore Court
(SMT)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Edgar Drive/
North
From Meadow Road to
Poplar Drive (SMT) [Added
2-24-2004]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Edgar Drive/
South
From Poplar Drive to
Meadow Road (SMT)
[Added 2-24-2004]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Edgewater
Avenue/North
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) south and west
for 300 feet (SMT)
No parking All
From 680 feet south and
west of Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) west to
Brooksite Drive (SMT)
[Repealed 9-2-1986]
Edgewater
Avenue/South
From Hawkins Avenue west
to Brooksite Drive (SMT)
[Repealed 9-2-1986]
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) south and west
to Hawkins Avenue (SMT)
No parking All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1171
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 133 feet west of
Mayflower Avenue west for
44 feet (SMT)
Reserved for
handicapped
All
Elder Drive/
North
From Cottonwood Drive to
Beechwood Lane (COM)
No parking All
Elder Drive/
South
From 120 feet west of
Beechwood Lane east for
120 feet (COM) [Added
12-13-2005]
No parking All
Elliott Place/
Both
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) north to
Prospect Street (SMT)
No parking All
Elm Avenue/East From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) south for 150
feet (SMT) [Added
6-3-1986; repealed
10-8-1991]
From a point 240 feet south
of Jericho Turnpike (SR25,
25A) south for 160 feet
(SMT) [Added 6-3-1986;
repealed 10-8-1991]
From 120 feet south of
Jericho Turnpike (SR25,
25A) to Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) (SMT) [Added
10-8-1991]
No stopping All
From 20 feet south of Ma
Bell Lane north for 130 feet
(SMT) [Added 10-8-1991]
No parking,
fire zone
All
From Willow Street south
for 75 feet (SMT) [Added
5-10-1988]
No standing All
Elm Avenue/
West
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) south to Ma
Bell Lane (SMT) [Amended
6-3-1986]
No standing All
From Ma Bell Lane south
for 350 feet (SMT) [Added
6-3-1986]
No parking,
fire zone
All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1172
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Enchanted
Forest Road/
North
From Gingerbread Road
(southern intersection) west
for 700 feet (KPK) [Added
3-28-2000]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Enchanted
Forest Road/
South
From 700 feet west of
Gingerbread Road (southern
intersection) east for 700
feet (KPK) [Added
3-28-2000]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Engineers Road/
Both
From Old Willets Path to
Plant Avenue (HPG)
No parking All
Ernest Court/
East
Form terminus north to Old
Northport Road (KPK)
[Added 8-10-1993]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
School Days
From 300 feet south of Old
Northport Road north for
300 feet (KPK) [Added
6-1-1993; repealed
8-10-1993]
Ernest Court/
West
From Old Northport Road
south through terminus
(KPK) [Added 8-10-1993]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p m.
School Days
From Old Northport Road
south for 300 feet (KPK)
[Added 6-1-1993;
repealed 8-10-1993]
Eustace Drive/
East
From 125 feet north of
Pittoni Drive north for 100
feet (COM)
No parking All
Eustace Drive/
West
From Pittoni Drive north for
225 feet (COM)
No parking All
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Fair Oaks Lane/
Both
From Churchill Lane north
to Timothy Court (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Fairview Avenue/
Both [Repealed
12-27-1984]
Fairview Avenue/
North/South
From Elliot Place east for
175 feet (SMT) [Added
12-27-1984]
2-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1173
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Fairview Avenue/
West/East
From Prospect Street south
for 340 feet (SMT) [Added
12-27-1984]
No parking All
Fairview Street/
Both
From Middle Country Road
(SR25) to Crystal Court
(SMT) [Added 12-5-2006]
No parking All
Falcon Drive/
South
From Eagle Lane west for
80 feet (HPG) [Repealed
8-25-1998]
Fern Drive/Both From Walter Court south to
Shirley Court (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Fifth Street/Both From Lake Avenue west for
100 feet (STJ) [Repealed
9-24-2002]
Fifth Street/
North
From Lake Avenue west for
40 feet (STJ) [Added
9-24-2002]
No stopping All
From Moriches Road west
for 120 feet (STJ) [Added
6-13-2006]
No parking All
Fifth Street/
South
[Repealed
10-17-2000]
Fifth Street/
South
From 70 feet west of Lake
Avenue east to Lake Avenue
(SJT) [Added 9-24-2002]
No parking All
Fifty Acre Road/
West
From Woodlawn Avenue To
Hofstra Drive (STJ) [Added
10-10-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m,
school days
Fifty Acre Road
South/Both
[Repealed
6-5-1990]
Fifty Acre Road
South/East
From Hofstra Drive to
Woodlawn Avenue (STJ)
[Added 10-10-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m,
school days
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1174
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Fifty Acre Road
South/East
[Added
6-5-1990;
repealed
9-8-1992]
Fifty Acre Road
South/West
[Added
6-5-1990;
repealed
9-8-1992]
Fiore Court/Both From Woodlawn Avenue to
terminus (STJ) [Added
8-17-2010]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m,
school days
First Avenue/
Both
From Pulaski - East
Northport Road (CR11)
south to the Long Island
Rail Road tracks (KPK)
No parking All
From Sixth Street north to
Fifth Street (STJ) [Added
10-9-1984; repealed
3-3-1992]
First Avenue/
East
From Railroad Avenue to
Second Street (STJ)
2-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Second Street south
for 200 feet (STJ)
No parking All
From Sixth Street north to
Fifth Street (STJ) [Added
3-3-1992; repealed
10-17-2000]
First Avenue/
West
From Railroad Avenue south
to 200 feet south of Second
Street (STJ) [Repealed
2-22-2018]
From Railroad Avenue south
to 50 feet south of Second
Street (STJ) [Added
2-22-2018]
No parking All
From 30 feet north of Sixth
Street south for 30 feet
(STJ) [Added 4-17-1995]
No stopping
here to
corner
All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1175
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Forest Road/
Both
From SR25A north to 170
feet (KPK)
No parking All
Fourth Street/
Both [Repealed
9-25-1990]
Fourth Street/
North
From 40 feet east of Lake
Avenue to Washington
Avenue (STJ) [Added
9-25-1990]
No parking All
Fourth Street/
South
From Washington Avenue to
First Avenue (STJ) [Added
9-25-1990; amended
7-27-2004]
No parking All
Fox Lane/Both From Mt. Pleasant Road to
Evergreen Avenue (SMT)
[Added 6-21-1984]
No stopping 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Franciscan Lane/
North
From 300 feet east of St.
Johnland Road west for 300
feet (SMT) [Added
3-26-2009]
No parking 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Franklin Drive/
Both
From Middle Country Road
(SR25) north for 100 feet
(SMT) [Added 5-5-1987]
No parking All
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Gaigal Court/
North
From 200 feet east of Gaigal
Drive to Gaigal Drive (NES)
[Added 8-28-1990;
repealed 9-21-1993]
Galahad Lane/
West
From Browns Road south
for 150 feet (NES)
No parking All
Gannet Drive/
North
From 75 feet east of
Pheasant Drive west to
Pheasant Drive (COM)
[Added 5-3-1994]
No parking All
From 140 feet west of
Peacock Lane west for 100
feet (COM) [Added
6-11-1996; 8-20-1996]
No parking All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1176
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Gannet Drive/
South
From New Highway east to
Peacock Lane (COM)
[Added 6-11-1996;
8-20-1996]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Gannet Drive/
West
From Pheasant Drive south
to New Highway (COM)
[Added 9-21- 1993]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Garvey Drive/
Both
From 200 feet north of
Sheila Drive north and east
to 300 feet west of Maureen
Drive (HPG)
No parking All
Garden Lane/
Both
From Starlight Drive east to
Parkview Drive (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Gardenia Drive/
Both
From Daisy Lane East
northeast to Laurel Lane
(PNS) [Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Gibbs Pond
Road/East
From Smithtown Bypass
(SR347) north for 170 feet
(SMT) [Added
12-23-1996]
No parking All
Gibbs Pond
Road/East
From 200 feet south of Lake
Avenue north for 200 feet
(NES) [Added 6-9-1998]
No parking All
From 265 feet north of
Nichols Road north for 565
feet [Added 1-22-2002]
No parking All
Gibbs Pond
Road/West
From Nichols Road north to
the north side of Gibbs Pond
Park (NES) [Repealed
4-9-1996]
From 720 feet north of
Nichols Road south to
Nichols Road (NES) [Added
3-26-1996]
No parking All
From 165 feet north of
Smithtown Bypass (SR347)
south to Smithtown Bypass
(SMT) [Added
12-23-1996]
No parking All
From Lake Avenue south for
200 feet (NES) [Added
6-9-1998]
No parking All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1177
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Gingerbread
Road/East
From Old Northport Road
north for 50 feet (KPK)
[Added 3-28-2000]
No stopping All
From 50 feet north of Old
Northport Road north to
Enchanted Forest Road
(northern intersection)
(KPK) [Added 3-28-2000]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Gingerbread
Road/West
From Enchanted Forest
Road (northern intersection)
south to 50 feet north of Old
Northport Road (KPK)
[Added 3-28-2000]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From 50 feet north of Old
Northport Road south for 50
feet (KPK) [Added
3-28-2000]
No stopping All
Glenridge Lane/
East
From terminus north for
135 feet (SMT) [Added
2-24-1998]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Glenridge Lane/
West
From 95 feet south of
Springbriar Lane south to
terminus (SMT) [Added
2-24-1998]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Glenview
Avenue/East
From Hastings Drive north
for 505 feet (KPK) [Added
5-2-1991]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Glenview
Avenue/West
From 500 feet north of
Hastings Drive south to
Hastings Drive (KPK)
[Added 5-2-1991]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From 150 feet south of
Crocus Lane south for 150
feet (KPK) [Added
7-17-2018]
No parking All
Glenwood Drive/
South
From Dewberry Place west
for 470 feet to the end of
the road (HPG) [Added
11-12-1985; repealed
4-5-1994]
From western terminus east
to Dewberry Place (HPG)
[Added 4-5-1994]
No stopping 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1178
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Gordon Gate/
Both [Added
8-11-2015]
From Cambon Avenue to
King Arthurs Court (COM)
No parking 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Grandview Lane/
Both
From Old Willets Path west
to Wyandanch Boulevard
(PNS) [Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Grassy Pond
Drive/Both
From Averly Place to
McArthur Lane (SMT)
[Added 9-26-1986]
No parking All
From Grandview Lane north
to terminus (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Grassy Pond
Drive South/Both
From Lone Oak Path south
to Veterans Memorial
Highway (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m to
6:00 a.m.
Greenfield Lane/
Both
From Hayrick Lane to
Wheatly Place (COM)
[Added 7-11-1989]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Grove Road/East
[Added
4-5-1988;
repealed
4-3-1990]
Grove Road/East From East Main Street
(SR25A) north for 150 feet
(KPK) [Added 4-3-1990]
No parking All
Grove Road/West
[Added
4-5-1988;
repealed
4-3-1990]
Grove Road/West From SR25A north from 290
feet north of East Main
Street (SR25A) to East Main
Street (SR25A) (KPK)
[Added 4-3-1990]
No parking All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1179
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Haig Place/East Frome Parkside Drive north
for 30 feet (KPK) [Added
12-3-1996]
No
stopping
All
Haig Place/West From Parkview Elementary
School north property line
north for 750 feet (KPK)
[Repealed 12-3-1996]
From 90 feet north of
Parkside Drive south for 120
feet (KPK) [Added
12-3-1996]
No
stopping
All
From Roundtree Drive north
to the Parkview Elementary
School property lines (KPK)
[Repealed 12-3-1996]
Half Hollow
Road/East
[Added
10-25-2012]
From 600 feet south of
Somers Lane north for 300
feet (COM)
No
standing
All
Half Hollow
Road/West
[Added
10-25-2012]
From Somers Lane south for
600 feet (COM)
No
standing
All
Hallock Avenue/
East
From 125 feet south of
Martha Lane north for 125
feet to Martha Lane (SMT)
[Added 11-28-2000]
No parking All
From 150 feet south of Terry
Road south for 175 feet
(SMT)
No parking All
Hallock Avenue/
West
From Terry Road south for
200 feet (SMT)
No parking All
Hanover Place/
East
From 30 feet south of
Waverly Avenue north to
Waverly Avenue (SMT)
[Added 11-12-1991]
No
stopping
here to
corner
All
Harbor Hill
Road/Both
From Moriches Road north
for 100 feet (STJ) [Added
4-3-1984]
No parking All
Harvest Lane/
East
From Split Rail Place to
Shaker Ridge Lane (COM)
[Added 5-23-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1180
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Harvest Lane/
North
From 40 feet east of Silo
Road west for 40 feet (COM)
[Added 4-7-2015]
No parking All
Hastings Drive/
North [Added
5-2-1991;
repealed
3-12-1996]
Hastings Drive/
North
From 460 feet east of
Concord Drive west to
Crestwood Drive (FTS)
[Added 3-12-1996]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Hastings Drive/
South
From 150 feet west of
Concord Drive southeaste for
150 feet (KPK) [Added
8-15-2002]
No parking All
From Crestwood Drive east
to Woodfield Avenue (KPK)
[Added 5-2-1991]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Hawkins Avenue/
Both
From Edgewater Avenue
south for 400 feet (SMT)
[Amended 8-14-1984]
No
stopping
All
Hawthorne
Drive/North
From Juniper Avenue east
for 150 feet (SMT)
No parking All
Hayrick Lane/
Both [Repealed
10-24-1995]
Hayrick Lane/
East
From Scholar Lane north for
70 feet (COM) [Added
4-28-1998]
No parking All
From Barley Place to Scholar
Lane (COM) [Added
10-24-1995; amended
5-11-2004]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Hayrick Lane/
West
From 120 feet north of
Scholar Lane south for 120
feet (COM) [Added
4-28-1998]
No parking All
From Scholar Lane to Barley
Place (COM) [Added
10-24-1995; amended
3-5-1996; 5-11-2004]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1181
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Hazel Drive/Both From Lone Oak Path south to
Holly Drive (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Henry Street/
Both
From Main Street (SR25A)
north for 25 feet (KPK)
No
standing
All
From 25 feet north of Main
Street (SR25A) north to Park
Avenue (KPK)
2-hour
park- ing
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Henry Street/
East
From 150 feet south of
Veterans Lane to 170 feet
south of Veterans Lane (KPK)
[Added 12-1-1987]
No parking All
Hidden Ponds
Circle/Both
From SR347 to Hidden
Ponds Circle (SMT) [Added
8-26-1992]
No parking All
Highview Court/
Both
From Soundview Drive west
for 125 feet (FTS) [Added
8-23-1988; amended
9-6-1988]
No parking All
Highway Place/
Both
From NY 25 to gate at
terminus (NES) [Added
10-26-1999]
No
standing
8:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Hilden Street/
South [Added
2-28-2013]
From 540 feet east of Kohr
Road east for 75 feet (KPK)
No parking All
Hill Lane/East From Ridge Road to Lindron
Avenue (SMT) [Added
8-15-2002]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Hill Lane/West From Lindron Avenue to
Ridge Road (SMT) [Added
8-15-2002]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Hillcrest Drive/
Both [Added
8-12-1986;
repealed
2-23-1993]
Hillcrest Drive/
East [Added
3-3-1987;
repealed
2-23-1993]
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1182
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Hillcrest Drive/
East
From 545 feet south of
Middle Country Road north
for 400 feet (NES) [Added
2-23-1993; amended
8-24-1993]
No Parking All
From 60 feet south of Middle
Country Road north to
Middle Country Road (NES)
[Added 2-23-1993]
No
stopping
All
Hillcrest Drive/
West [Added
9-20-2012]
From Hillcrest Drive West
north for 170 feet (NES)
[Repealed 8-8-2017]
From Middle Country Road
south for 60 feet (NES)
[Added 2-23-1993;
repealed 8-8-2017]
No
stopping
All
From Middle Country Road
to Hillcrest Drive west (SMT)
[Added 8-8-2017]
No parking All
From 225 feet south of
Middle Country Road south
for 150 feet (NES) [Added
2-23-1993; repealed
9-20-2012]
Hillcrest Drive/
West [Added
3-3-1987;
repealed
2-23-1993]
Hillcrest Drive
West/North
[Added
9-20-2012]
From Hillcrest Drive, west
for 150 feet (NES)
No parking All
Hillcrest Drive
West/South
From 75 feet west of
Hillcrest Drive to Hillcrest
Drive (SMT) [Added
9-26-2006]
No parking All
Hillside Avenue/
Both
From SR25 (Middle Country
Road) north for 50 feet (STJ)
[Added 6-5-1990]
No
stopping
All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1183
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Hillside Avenue/
East
From 115 feet south of
Woodlawn Avenue north for
115 feet (STJ) [Added
12-16-1998]
No
stopping
All
Hillside Avenue/
West
From Woodlawn Avenue
south for 50 feet (STJ)
[Added 12-16-1998]
No
stopping
All
Hills Park Lane/
Both
From Old Willets Path West
north to Woodland Lane
(PNS) [Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Hilltop Drive/
North
From Mayline Court west for
275 feet (SMT) [Added
7-7-1988]
No parking All
Hobson Avenue/
Both
From SR25 north for 150
feet (STJ) [Added
11-26-1985]
No parking All
Hoffman Drive/
East
From 50 feet south of
Pulaski Road north to
Pulaski Road (KPK) [Added
6-11-1991]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Hoffman Drive/
West
From Pulaski Road south for
50 feet (KPK) [Added
6-11-1991]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Holly Drive/Both From 50 feet east of Hazel
Drive east to Legion Drive
(SMT) [Repealed 8-8-2000]
From Grassy Pond Drive
South west to White Oak
Drive (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Holly Drive/
North
From Legion Drive to 50 feet
east of Hazel Drive (SMT)
[Added 8-8-2000]
No parking All
Holly Drive/
South
From 50 feet east of Hazel
Drive east to Ledgewood
Drive (SMT) [Added
8-8-2000]
No parking All
Hyacinth Lane/
Both
From Verbena Drive south to
Walter Court (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1184
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Indian Head
Road
(CR14)/Both
From Cowie Road North to
Cowie Road South (COM)
No parking All
Indian Head
Road
(CR14)/East
At the far side driveway of
Friendly's (COM) [Added
11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
From Main Street (SR25A)
south for 175 feet to the
Long Island Railroad tracks
(KPK)
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
From the Long Island Rail
Road tracks south to Stattel
Drive (KPK) [Repealed
6-8-2004]
From 150 feet north of Park
Drive to L.I.R.R. right-ofway
(KPK) [Added
6-8-2004]
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Stattel Drive to 150
feet north of Park Drive
(KPK) [Added 6-8-2004]
2-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Stattel Drive south to
Shay Drive (KPK)
No parking All
In front of Catholic
Charities (KPK) [Added
5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
In front of Smithtown
Library Branch (KPK)
[Added 5-26-1987;
repealed 11-24-1987]
North of Ellen Place (KPK)
[Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
North of Meadow Road
(KPK) [Added 11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
North of Somers Lane
(COM) [Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
North of Stattle Drive (KPK)
[Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1185
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Opposite Byron Road (COM)
[Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Opposite ice skating rink
(KPK) [Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of Kings Park Road
(KPK) [Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of SR25A (KPK)
[Added 5-26-1987;
repealed 11-24-1987]
Indian Head
Road
(CR14)/West
From Main Street (SR25A)
south for 175 feet to the
Long Island Rail Road
tracks (KPK)
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
From Meadow Road West
south for 340 feet (KPK)
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Stattel Drive south for
200 feet (KPK)
No parking All
From the Long Island Rail
Road tracks to Meadow
Road West (KPK)
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6.00 p. m.
In front of ice skating rink
(KPK) [Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
North of Stattle Drive (KPK)
[Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Opposite Catholic Charities
(KPK) [Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Opposite library (KPK)
[Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of Byron Road (COM)
[Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of Ellen Place (KPK)
[Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1186
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
South of Reydon Way (KPK)
[Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of Somers Lane
(COM) [Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of SR25A (KPK)
[Added 5-26-87]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Indian Head
Road/Harned
Road
(CR14)/Both
From 500 feet south of
Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to
Bruce Lane (COM) [Added
8-12-1986]
No stopping All
Jackon Avenue/
Both [Repealed
9-8-1992]
Jackon Avenue/
East [Added
8-28-1990;
repealed
9-8-1992]
Jackon Avenue/
West [Added
8-28-1990;
repealed
9-8-1992]
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Jackson Avenue/
North/East
From 535 feet south of
Woodlawn Avenue to
Woodlawn Avenue (STJ)
[Added 3-29-2007]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Jackson Avenue/
North/East
From Woodlawn Avenue to
Railroad Avenue (STJ)
[Added 6-10-2008]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Jackson Avenue/
North/West
From Railroad Avenue to
Woodlawn Avenue (STJ)
[Added 6-10-2008]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Jackson Avenue/
North/West
From Woodlawn Avenue
south for 535 feet (STJ)
[Added 1-27-1998;
amended 6-30-1998]
No parking All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1187
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Jackson Avenue
South/East
From 700 feet north of
Rutherford Street north for
175 feet (STJ) [Added
5-3-2016]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Jackson Ave
South/Both
From Rutherford Street
north to terminus (STJ)
[Added 7-16-2019]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Jasmine Lane/
Both
From Columbia Lane to
Sagebrush Lane (KPK)
[Added 3-24-1987]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Jefferson
Avenue/Both
From Middle Country Road
(SR25) to Ketcham Avenue
(STJ)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday
Jefferson
Avenue/East
From 400 feet south of
Woodlawn Avenue to
Woodlawn Avenue (STJ)
[Added 1-22-2009]
No parking All
Jefferson
Avenue/West
From 20 feet south of
Sherwood Drive south for
80 feet (STJ) [Added
12-10-1991]
No parking All
Jefferson Street/
East
From 60 feet south of
Smithtown Boulevard north
to Smithtown Boulevard
(NES) [Added
11-24-1998]
No parking All
Jefferson Street/
West
From Smithtown Boulevard
south for 110 feet (NES)
[Added 11-24-1998]
No parking All
Jericho Turnpike Stearns Shopping Center
(COM) [Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All excluding
buses
John Jones Lane/
East
From Middle Country Road
south for 65 feet (SMT)
[Added 2-7-1989]
No parking All
John Jones Lane/
West
From Middle Country Road
(SR25) south for 200 feet
(SMT) [Added 2-7-1989]
No parking All
Julie Street/Both Town Line Road north to
Thomas Drive (HPG)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1188
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Juniper Avenue/
Both [Repealed
9-2-1986]
Juniper Avenue/
East
From Edgewater Avenue
south for 400 feet (SMT)
No parking 8:00 a.m, to
1:00 p.m.,
Sundays
From Hawthorne Drive
north for 390 feet (SMT)
[Repealed 11-23-1993]
From Hawthorne Drive
north for 75 feet (SMT)
[Added 11-23-1993]
No parking All
Juniper Avenue/
West
From 500 feet north of
Hawthorne Drive south for
225 feet (SMT) [Added
6-23-1998; amended
9-3-2019]
No parking All
From Hawthorne Drive
south for 160 feet (SMT)
No parking All
Juniper Road/
East
From 260 feet north of
SR25A north for 100 feet
(KPK)
No parking All
From Woodland Drive north
for 100 feet (KPK) [Added
8-27-1991]
No parking All
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Karl Avenue/East From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) north to
Redwood Lane (SMT)
2-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Karl Avenue/
West
From 100 feet north of
Jericho Turnpike (SR25)
north to Manor Road (SMT)
2-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25) north for 100 feet
(SMT)
15-minute
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Redwood Lane south
for 100 feet (SMT)
No parking All
Kennedy Drive/
Both
From 200 feet north of
Vanderbilt Motor Parkway
(CR67) to Marcus Boulevard
(HPG)
No parking All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1189
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Vanderbilt Motor
Parkway (CR67) north for
200 feet (HPG) [Added
9-6-1983]
No stopping All
Kind Road/East
(KPK)
[Repealed
5-10-2005]
King Road/East From SR25A north for 260
feet (KPK) [Added
5-10-2005]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
King Road/West From 250 feet north of
SR25A south to SR25A
(KPK) [Amended
4-12-2005]
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Kings Highway/
North
Across from Power Drive
(HPG) [Added
11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Kings Park
Railroad Station/
East
Town parking area not
included in MTA agreement
[Added 3-20-2014]
No parking 4:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m.
Knoll Lane/North From Plymouth Boulevard
to Abbot Road (SMT)
[Added 1-22-2002]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From Plymouth Boulevard
west for 500 feet (SMT)
[Added 6-1-1993;
repealed 1-22-2002]
Knoll Lane/South From Abbot Road east to
Plymouth Boulevard (SMT)
[Added 1-22-2002]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From 500 feet west of
Plymouth Boulevard east for
500 feet (SMT) [Added
6-1-1993; repealed
1-22-2002]
Knollwood Lane/
Both
From Ledgewood Drive
northeast to Grassy Pond
Drive (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m to
6:00 a.m.
Kohr Road/Both From Old Dock Road north
for 25 feet (KPK) [Repealed
10-3-1989]
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1190
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Sunken Meadow Road
south to 290 feet south of
Broadview Avenue (KPK)
No parking All
Kohr Road/East
[Repealed
4-12-1988]
Kohr Road/West
[Repealed
10-3-1989]
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Lafayette
Avenue/West
From a point 113 feet south
of Washington Boulevard
south for 75 feet (COM)
No parking All
Lake Avenue/
East
From Moriches Road south
to Third Street (STJ)
[Amended 6-21-1984;
2-14-1985; repealed
1-21-1986]
From SR25A south to 200
feet south of Moriches Road
(STJ) [Added 1-21-1986;
repealed 2-4-1992]
From 20 feet south of
Second Street to 25 feet
north of Second Street (STJ)
[Added 2-6-1990]
No standing
here to
corner
All
From 200 feet south of
Moriches Road south to
Seventh Street (STJ)
[Added 1-21-1986;
repealed 2-4-1992]
From 110 feet south of
Third Street south to
Seventh Street (STJ)
[Added 2-14-1985;
repealed 11-12-1991;
11-19-1991]
From Sixth Street north for
295 feet (STJ) [Added
11-12-1991; amended
11-19-1991; repealed
2-4-1992]
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1191
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Seventh Street to
Sixth Street (STJ) [Added
11-19-1991; repealed
2-4-1992]
From Seventh Street to 295
feet north of Sixth Street
(STJ) [Repealed 2-4-1992]
From 295 feet north of Sixth
Street to 110 feet south of
Third Street (STJ) [Added
11-12-1991; amended
11-19-1991; repealed
10-1-1996]
From Seventh Street south
to Woodlawn Avenue (STJ)
[Added 6-21-1984]
No stopping All
From Third Street south for
110 feet (STJ) [Added
2-14-1985; repealed
1-21-1986]
North of Oak Street (STJ)
[Added 5-26-1987;
repealed 2-4-1992]
North of Woodlawn Avenue
(STJ) [Added 5-26-1987;
repealed 2-4-1992]
South of Third Street (STJ)
[Added 5-26-1987;
repealed 2-4-1992]
From Seventh Street to 55
feet north of Fifth Street
(STJ) [Added 2-4-1992]
No parking All
From 55 feet north of Fifth
Street [Added 2-4-1992;
repealed 11-4-2003]
Lake Avenue/
East
From 55 feet north of Fifth
Street to 180 feet north of
Fourth Street (STJ) [Added
11-4-2003]
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 180 feet north of
Fourth Street north for 100
feet (STJ) [Added
11-4-2003]
30-minute
parking
12:00 noon
to 9:00 p.m.
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1192
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 280 feet north of
Fourth Street to 110 feet
south for Third Street (STJ)
[Added 11-4-2003]
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 110 feet south of
Third Street to Third Street
(STJ) [Added 2-4-1992]
No stopping All
From Third Street to 20 feet
south of Second Street (STJ)
[Added 2-4-1992]
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 25 feet north of
Second Street to 200 feet
south of Moriches Road
(STJ) [Added 2-4-1992]
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 200 feet south of
Moriches Road to North
Country Road (SR 25A)
(STJ) [Added 2-4-1992]
No stopping All
Lake Avenue/
West
From 110 feet north of
Middle Country Road
(SR25) to Middle Country
Road (STJ) [Added
9-18-1990]
No parking All
From 200 feet south of
Moriches Road south for
240 feet (STJ) [Added
2-7-2007]
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 440 feet south of
Moriches Road south for
175 feet (STJ) [Added
2-7-2007]
No stopping All
From 655 feet south of
Moriches Road south for
175 feet (STJ) [Added
2-7-2007]
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 830 feet south of
Moriches Road south for
250 feet (STJ) [Added
2-7-2007]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1193
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Moriches Road south
to 30 feet north of the north
driveway of the St. James
Elementary School (STJ)
[Repealed 1-21-1986]
From State Route 25A south
to 200 feet south of
Moriches Road (STJ)
[Added 1-21-1986;
repealed 2-4-1992]
From 200 feet south of
Moriches Road south to 30
feet north of the north
driveway of the St. James
Elementary School (STJ)
[Added 1-21-1986;
repealed 2-7-2007]
From 30 feet north of the
north driveway of the St.
James Elementary School to
30 feet south of the south
driveway (STJ) [Repealed
2-7-2007]
From 30 feet south of the
south driveway of the St.
James Elementary School
south to Railroad Avenue
(STJ) [Repealed 2-7-2007]
From Railroad Avenue south
for 450 feet [Added
7-28-1987; repealed
11-24-1987]
From Railroad Avenue south
to Seventh Street (STJ)
[Amended 6-21-1984;
repealed 11-24-1987]
From 500 feet south of
Railroad Avenue to Seventh
Street (STJ) [Added
11-24-1987; amended
2-9-1988]
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1194
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Railroad Avenue south
for 500 feet (STJ) [Added
11-24-1987; amended
2-9-1988]
No parking All
North of Roseville Avenue
(STJ) [Added 5-26-1987;
repealed 2-4-1992]
From Seventh Street south
to Woodlawn Avenue (STJ)
[Added 6-21-1984;
repealed 2-4-1992]
South of Third Street (STJ)
[Added 5-26-1987;
repealed 2-4-1992]
South of Woodlawn Avenue
(STJ) [Added 5-26-1987;
repealed 2-4-1992]
From North Country Road
(SR 25A) to 200 feet south
of Moriches Road (STJ)
[Added 2-4-1992]
No stopping All
From Seventh Street to
Woodlawn Avenue (STJ)
[Added 2-4-1992]
No parking All
Lake Avenue
South/Both
From Browns Road south to
300 feet south of Gibbs
Pond Road (NES)
No parking All
Lake Avenue
South/West
From Leyden Street South
for 90 feet (NES)
No parking All
Lake Shore
Road/North
East of School House Road
(NES) [Added
11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Lake Shore
Road/South
Last of School House Road
(NES) [Added
11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Landing Avenue/
East
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) north to the
Long Island Rail Road
tracks (SMT) [Repealed
11-7-1995]
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1195
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From East Main Street to
(SR25, SR25A) north for 90
feet (SMT) [Added
11-7-1995]
No standing All
From 300 feet south of
Blydenburgh Avenue to the
Long Island Railroad tracks
(SMT) [Added 11-7-1995]
No parking All
Landing Avenue/
West
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) north to 200
feet south of Manor Road
(SMT) [Repealed
11-7-1995]
From 200 feet south of
Manor Road north to the
Long Island Rail Road
tracks (SMT) [Repealed
11-7-1995]
From Redwood Lane to 275
feet south of Manor Road
(SMT) [Added 11-7-1995]
2-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 275 feet south of
Manor Road to East Main
Street (SR25/25A) [Added
11-7-1995]
No parking All
Landview Drive/
North [Added
8-11-2015]
From 150 feet east of
Gristmill Drive west for 150
feet (KPK)
No parking 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Larsen Avenue/
North
From Terry Road west for
110 feet (SMT) [Added
4-26-1988]
No stopping All
From 110 feet west of Terry
Road west to Hallock
Avenue (SMT) [Added
7-14-1998; amended
1-23-2001]
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Larsen Avenue/
South
From Hallock Avenue east
to 65 feet west of Terry
Road (SMT) [Added
1-23-2001; amended
12-11-2001]
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1196
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 65 feet west of Terry
Road to Terry Road (SMT)
[Added 4-26-1988]
No stopping All
Laurel Drive/
Both
From Wyandanch Boulevard
south to Bayberry Lane
(SMT) [Added 5-2-2000]
No stopping All
From Wyandanch Boulevard
south to Old Hauppauge
Road (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Laurel Lane/
Both
From Walter Court south to
Shirley Court (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Lawrence
Avenue/Both
[Repealed
4-9-1985]
Lawrence
Avenue/East
From 100 feet south of
Birch Brook Drive to 75 feet
north of Birch Brook Drive
(northern intersection)
(SMT) [Amended
8-23-2005]
No parking All
From Main Street (SR25,
25A) south for 275 feet
(SMT) [Added 4-9-1985]
No stopping All
From 25 feet north of the
north driveway to 25 feet
south of the south driveway
of the Smithtown
Elementary School (SMT)
[Repealed 8-11-2009]
From 275 feet south of Main
Street (SR25, 25A) south for
130 feet (SMT) [Added
4-9-1985]
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Lawrence
Avenue/West
From Cedar Street north for
90 feet (SMT) [Added
4-9-1985]
No standing All
From Main Street (SR25,
25A) south for 160 feet
(SMT) [Added 4-9-1985]
No stopping All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1197
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 160 feet south of Main
Street (SR25, 25A) south to
190 feet south of Percy
Street (SMT) [Amended
4-9-1985]
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 30 feet north of Percy
Street to Percy Street (SMT)
[Added 8-28-1990]
No stopping All
From 350 feet south of
Willow Street south for 240
feet (SMT) [Added
4-9-1985]
No parking All
From Willow Street north
for 100 feet (SMT)
No parking All
From Willow Street south
for 50 feet (SMT) [Added
5-10-1988]
No standing All
Lawrence Road/
East
From 700 feet north of
Boxwood Drive north for
300 feet [Added
11-14-2000]
No stopping All
From Rumford Road south
to Primrose Lane (KPK)
[Repealed 12-5-2000]
From Primrose Lane to East
Main Street (SR25A) (KPK)
No stopping All
From 375 feet north of
SR25A to 90 feet north of
Sesame Street (KPK)
[Added 4-26-1999;
repealed 8-31-1999]
From SR25A to 90 feet
north of Sesame Street
(KPK) [Added 8-31-1999]
No parking All
From 90 feet north of
Sesame Street north for 225
feet (KPK) [Added
2-4-2003]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From SR25A south to
Rumford Road (KPK)
[Repealed 12-5-2000]
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1198
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Yale Lane north
through north terminus
(KPK) [Added 6-28-1988]
No parking All
Lawrence Road/
West [Repealed
6-24-1986]
Lawrence Road/
West
From north terminus to 400
feet south of Yale Lane
(KPK) [Added 6-28-1988]
No parking All
From 50 feet north of
Boxwood Drive to SR25A
(KPK) [Added 2-22-2005]
No parking All
From State Route 25A south
to 210 feet north of Lordly
Court (KPK) [Added
4-7-1992]
No parking All
From 210 feet north of
Lordly Court to 118 feet
north of Lordly Court (KPK)
[Added 11-9-1989]
No parking 8:30 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From 118 feet north of
Lordly Court south to
Primrose Lane (KPK)
[Added 11-9-1989]
No parking All
From Primrose Lane south
for 200 feet (KPK) [Added
11-9-1999]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From Kim Place south to its
terminus (KPK) [Added
9-26-1986]
No parking All
From 210 feet north of
Lordly Court to 210 feet
south of Lordly Court (KPK)
[Added 8-23- 1988;
repealed 11-9-1989]
From State Route 25A to 60
feet south of Rumford Road
(KPK) [Added 11-9-1989;
repealed 4-7-1992]
From 200 feet north of
SR25A south to SR25A
(KPK) [Added 8-31-1999;
repealed 2-22-2005]
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1199
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Ledgewood
Drive/Both
From Jericho Turnpike
south to Veterans Memorial
Highway (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Ledgewood
Drive/East
From 85 feet south of
(SR25) Jericho Turnpike
north for 85 feet (SMT)
[Added 4-23-1996]
No stopping All
Ledgewood
Drive/West
From (SR25) Jericho
Turnpike south for 325 feet
(SMT) [Added 4-23-1996]
No stopping All
Legion Drive/
Both
From Lone Oak Path south
to Holly Drive (PNS)
[Added 4-24- 1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Leonard Street/
North
From terminus west for 25
feet (NES) [Added
12-9-2003]
No stopping All
Leonard Street/
South
From 25 feet west of
terminus to terminus (NES)
[Added 12-9-2003]
No stopping All
Leydon Street/
North
From 50 feet east of Lake
Avenue South to Lake
Avenue South (NES)
[Added 9-18-1990]
No parking All
Leydon Street/
South
From Lake Avenue South to
Lancaster Avenue (NES)
[Added 9-18-1990]
No parking All
Lilac Lane/Both
[Repealed
8-27-1991]
Lincoln Avenue/
East
From Cedar Street North
for 150 feet (COM) [Added
11-19-1991]
No stopping All
From 75 feet south of State
Road 454 Veterans
Memorial Highway to State
Road 454 (COM) [Added
11-19-1991]
No stopping All
Lincoln Avenue/
West
From 155 feet south of
State Road 454 Veterans
Memorial High- way south
for 235 feet (COM) [Added
11-19-1991]
No parking All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1200
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Lincoln Drive/
South
From Narcissus Road east
to Maple Drive (KPK)
[Added 6-28-1994]
No parking All
Lincoln Street/
Both
From Lindron Avenue north
[Added 9-10-1985;
repealed 9-10-1993]
Lincoln Street/
East
From Lindron Avenue north
to Accompsett Elementary
School property line (SMT)
[Added 8-10-1993]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Lincoln Street/
West
From Accompsett
Elementary School property
line south to Lindron
Avenue (SMT) [Added 8-
10-1993]
No parking All
Linden Avenue/
Both
From its terminus south for
100 feet (KPK)
No parking All
Lindner Place/
East
From SR25 north for 50 feet
(SMT) [Added 4-12-2005]
No parking All
Lindner Place/
West
From 300 feet north of
SR25 south for 300 feet
(SMT) [Added 4-12-2005]
No parking All
Lindron Avenue/
North
From 350 feet east of
Plymouth Boulevard to
Plymouth Boulevard (SMT)
[Added 9-30-1992]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From 185 feet east of
Lincoln Street west for 400
feet (SMT) [Added
1-11-1994; repealed
6-7-1994]
From 300 feet east of
Lorraine Court to 100 feet
west of Hill Lane (SMT)
[Added 6-7-1994;
amended 4-14-1998]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Lindron Avenue/
South
From 100 feet west of Hill
Lane to 300 feet east of
Lorraine Court (SMT)
[Added 6-7-1994;
amended 4-14-1998]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1201
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Plymouth Boulevard
east for 350 feet (SMT)
[Added 9-30-1992]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From 80 feet west of
Lincoln Street for 410 feet
(SMT) [Added 1-11-1994;
repealed 6-7-1994]
Lisa Court/North From South Hillside Avenue
east for 135 feet (NES)
No parking All
Lone Oak Path/
Both [Added
4-24-1990]
From Ledgewood Drive east
to terminus (PNS)
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Wyandanch Boulevard
east to Ledgewood Drive
(PNS)
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Lone Oak Path/
South
From Wyandanch Boulevard
east for 100 feet (PNS)
[Added 4-26-1988]
No parking All
Long Bow Lane/
North
From Long Bow Court to
200 feet east of Town Line
Road (COM) [Added
11-18-2003]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From 200 feet east of Town
Line Road to Town Line
Road (COM) [Added
11-18-2003]
No parking All
Long Bow Lane/
South
From Town Line Road east
for 250 feet (COM) [Added
11-18-2003]
No parking All
From 250 feet east of Town
Line Road to Long Bow
Court (COM) [Added
11-18-2003]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Longfellow
Drive/East
From Riviera south for 700
feet (KPK) [Added
8-23-1988]
No parking All
Longfellow
Drive/West
From Riviera south for 210
feet (KPK) [Added
8-23-1988; amended
11-23-1999]
No parking All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1202
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Long Hill Road/
North
From 55 feet east of River
Road to River Road (SMT)
[Added 2-26-2002]
No standing All
Long Hill Road/
South
From River Road east for 55
feet (SMT) [Added
2-26-2002]
No standing All
Long Island
Expressway's
south service
road/Both
From Commack Road (CR4)
east for 450 feet (COM)
No stopping All
Looking Glass
Court/North
From terminus west to
Whispering Woods Drive
(SMT) [Added 8-12-1997]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Looking Glass
Court/South
From Whispering Woods
Drive east to terminus
(SMT) [Added 8-12-1997]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Lordly Court/
North
From Lawrence Road west
to terminus (KPK) [Added
11-10-1987]
No parking 8:30 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Lordly Court/
South
From Lawrence Road west
for 110 feet (KPK) [Added
11-10-1987; repealed
4-26-1999]
From 275 feet west of
Lawrence Road west to
terminus (KPK) [Added
11-10-1987; repealed
4-26-1999]
From terminus east to
Lawrence Road (KPK)
[Added 4-26-1999;
amended 10-12-1999]
No parking 8:30 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Lorraine Court/
East
From Lindron Avenue north
to terminus (SMT) [Added
4-14-1998]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Lorraine Court/
West
From terminus south to
Lindron Avenue (SMT)
[Added 4-14-1998]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Lynch Lane/
North
From 300 feet east of Edgar
Drive to Edgar Drive (SMT)
[Added 5-11-2004]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1203
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Magnolia Drive/
Both
From Verbena Drive south
to Walter Court (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Mallard Lane/
East [Added
4-9-2002]
From terminus north for
130 feet (SMT)
No parking All
From 130 feet north of
terminus north for 340 feet
(SMT)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00
a.m./Sunday
Mallard Lane/
South [Added
4-9-2002]
Along terminus (SMT) No parking All
Mall Drive/Both From its northern terminus
to its southern terminus
(COM)
No parking All
Manor Road/
Both [Repealed
8-28-1990]
Manor Road/
North
From Landing Avenue west
for 30 feet (SMT) [Added
3-21-1991]
No stopping
here to
corner
All
From 30 feet west of
Landing Avenue west to
Bank Street (SMT) [Added
2-23-1993; repealed
2-22-1994]
From 30 feet west of
Landing Avenue west to
Karl Avenue (SMT) [Added
2- 22-1994]
2-hour
parking
9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Manor Road/
South
From Bank Avenue east to
40 feet west of Landing
Avenue (SMT) [Added
2-22-1994]
2-hour
parking
9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From Karl Avenue east to
Bank Avenue (SMT) [Added
2-22-1994]
No parking All
From 40 feet west of
Landing Avenue to Landing
Avenue (SMT) [Added
3-21-1991]
No stopping
here to
corner
All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1204
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Bank Avenue east to
Landing Avenue (SMT)
[Added 8-11-1992;
repealed 2-22-1994]
Map Lane/Both From Apple Lane east to
terminus [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Maple Avenue/
Both
From Hauppauge Road
(SR111) north to Briaroot
Drive (SMT)
No parking All
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) south to
Bowers Lane (SMT)
No parking All
Maple Avenue/
East
From 140 feet north of
Brook Lane south for 80
feet (SMT) [Added
6-20-1989]
No parking
except
public
service
vehicles
All
From 123 feet north of
Briaroot Drive south for 23
feet (SMT) [Added
6-20-1989]
No parking
except
public
service
vehicles
All
From Darling Avenue south
for 100 feet (SMT) [Added
6-5-1984]
No parking All
Maple Avenue/
West
From 80 feet north of
Fourth Avenue south for 24
feet (SMT) [Added
6-20-1989]
No parking
except
public
service
vehicles
All
From Wildwood Lane south
to the bridge over the
stream exiting Miller's Pond
(SMT)
No parking All
Maple Drive/
South
From Moriches Road west
for 95 feet (STJ) [Added
1-23-1990]
No stopping All
Maple Lawn
Drive/Both
From Valley Wood Road
south to Veterans Memorial
Highway (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1205
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Marcella Court/
Both
From Winston Drive west to
terminus (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Marcus
Boulevard/Both
From Vanderbilt Motor
Parkway (CR67) to New
Highway (HPG)
No parking All
Marcus
Boulevard/East
Approximately 100 feet
north of Motor Parkway
(HPG) [Added
11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Across from Arkay Drive
(HPG) [Added
11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of Oser Avenue (HPG)
[Added 11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Marcus
Boulevard/West
North of Arkay Drive (HPG)
[Added 11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Approximately 100 feet
north of Motor Parkway
(HPG) [Added
11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stops
All,
excluding
buses
South of Oser Avenue (HPG)
[Added 11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Margaret
Avenue/North
From Nichols Road west for
95 feet (NES)
No parking All
Margaret Drive/
Both
From Gibbs Pond Road east
to Spruce Drive (NES)
[Repealed 7-26-1994]
Margaret Drive/
North
From 75 feet east of Gibbs
Pond Road west for 75 feet
(NES) [Added 7-26-1994]
No parking All
From Spruce Drive west for
500 feet (NES) [Added
7-26-1994]
No parking All
Margaret Drive/
South
From Gibbs Pond Road east
for 400 feet (NES) [Added
7-26-1994]
No parking All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1206
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Marquette Drive/
Both [Repealed
9-8-1992]
Marquette Drive/
North
From Fifty Acre Road south
to Colgate Drive (SMT)
[Added 8-22-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Marquette Drive/
South
From Colgate Drive to Fifty
Acre Road (SMT) [Added
8-22-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Mayfair Terrace/
Both
From Jericho Turnpike
south to Astor Court (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Mayflower
Avenue/Both
[Repealed
9-2-1986]
Mayflower
Avenue/East
From 330 feet south of
Edgewater Avenue north for
200 feet (SMT) [Added
4-12-2005]
No parking All
Mayflower
Avenue/West
From Edgewater Avenue
south for 540 feet (SMT)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.,
Sundays
McArthur Lane/
Both
From Laurel Drive east to
Grassy Pond Drive (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
McKinley Street/
South
From St. James Avenue east
to Tredwell Avenue (STJ)
No parking All
Meadow Road/
North
From Indian Head Road
(CR14) east for 120 feet
(KPK)
No parking All
From 120 feet east of Indian
Head Road (CR14) west to
West Drive (KPK)
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Ridge Road east for
400 feet (SMT)
No standing All
From Ridge Road west for
200 feet (SMT)
No standing All
Meadow Road/
South
From Indian Head Road
(CR14) east for 75 feet
(KPK) [Added 11-10-1987;
amended 9-24-2002]
No stopping All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1207
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 75 feet east of Indian
Head Road (CR14) east to
West Drive (KPK)
[Amended 9-24-2002]
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Ridge Road east for
400 feet (SMT)
No standing All
From Ridge Road west for
200 feet (SMT)
No standing All
Meadow Road
West/North
From 235 feet west of
(CR14) west for 100 feet
(KPK) [Added 4-27-2017]
1 hour
parking
All
From Indian Head Road
(CR14) west for 235 feet
(KPK) [Amended 2-
19-1987; 2-25-1992]
No parking All
From 387 feet west of
Indian Head Road (CR14)
west for 258 feet (KPK)
[Added 2-25-1992]
No parking All
Meadow Road
West/South
From Indian Head Road
(CR14) west for 740 feet
(KPK) [Amended
2-25-1992]
No parking All
Melody Lane/
North
From Alfred Lane to
Gingerbread Road (KPK)
[Added 5-30-2000]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Melody Lane/
South
From 350 feet east of Alfred
Lane to Gingerbread Road
(KPK) [Added 5-30-2000]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Midwood
Avenue/East
From 60 feet south of
Tackan Elementary School
driveway north for 125 feet
(NES) [Added 3-11-1997]
No stopping All
Midwood
Avenue/West
From 125 feet north of
Crusader Lane south for
125 feet (NES) [Added
3-11-1997]
No stopping All
Mills Path/Both From the Smithtown Town
Line to terminus (NES)
[Added 1-27-2004]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m.,
Monday
through
Friday
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1208
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Mobrey Lane/
Both
From Old Willets Path west
to Laurel Drive (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Modular Avenue/
Both
From Moreland Road to
Mall Drive (COM)
No parking All
Mohawk Lane/
West
From Seneca Drive north
for 100 fee (COM) [Added
3-17-2016]
No parking All
Mon Repos
Lane/Both
From Smithtown Boulevard
to Park Circle (NES)
[Added 6-2-1992;
repealed 12-14-1999]
Mon Repos
Lane/East
From Smithtown Boulevard
to Park Circle (NES)
[Added 12-14-1999]
No stopping All
Mon Repos
Lane/West
From Smithtown Boulevard
to Park Circle (NES)
[Added 12-14-1999]
No stopping All
Montclair
Avenue/Both
From SR25 north for 1,100
feet (STJ) [Added
11-19-2015]
No stopping All
Moreland Road/
Both
From 450 feet north of
Vanderbilt Motor Parkway
north to Parkway Drive
South (HPG) [Added
3-27-1984]
No parking All
From Vanderbilt Motor
Parkway (CR67) north for
450 feet (HPG)
No parking All
Moreland Road/
East
Opposite Austin Boulevard
(HPG) [Added 5-26-1987;
repealed 11-24-1987]
Opposite Howard Johnson
Restaurant (HPG) [Added
5-26-1987; repealed
11-24-1987]
Moreland Road/
West
In front of Howard Johnson
Restaurant (HPG) [Added
5-26-1987; repealed
11-24-1987]
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1209
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
South of Austin Boulevard
[Added 5-26-1987;
repealed 11-24-1987]
Morewood Drive/
East
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25) to 300 feet north to
Woodrow Lane (SMT)
No stopping All
Morewood Drive/
West
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25) north for 250 feet
(SMT)
No stopping All
From Norwalk Lane south
for 100 feet (COM) [Added
11-7-2017]
No standing
here to
corner
Morgan Court/
Both
From Brooksite Drive east
to its terminus [Added
11-4-2003]
No parking 12:00
midnight to
8:00 a.m.
Moriches Road/
Both
From North Country Road
(SR25A) south to Lake
Avenue (STJ)
No parking All
Moriches Road/
Northeast
From Lake Avenue to Maple
Drive (STJ)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From 90 feet west of Harbor
Hill Road west for 140 feet
(STJ)
No parking All
From Woodlawn Avenue
north to Fifth Street (STJ)
No parking All
Motor Parkway/
North
In front of Sheraton Motel
(HPG) [Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
West of Adams Avenue
(HPG) [Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Mt. Pleasant/
Both
From SR347 north for 200
feet (SMT) [Repealed
2-26-1991]
From SR347 south for 200
feet (SMT) [Repealed
2-26-1991]
Mount Pleasant
Road/East
From Townline Road north
to 100 feet north of
Angelica Court (HPG)
[Added 9-25-2001]
No parking All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1210
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Mount Pleasant
Road/West
From Sherry Lane to
Townline Road (HPG)
[Added 9-25-2001]
No parking All
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Narcissus Road/
West
From 130 feet north of
Lincoln Drive south for 130
feet (KPK) [Added
6-28-1994]
No parking All
Navy Drive/Both
[Repealed
9-8-1992]
Navy Drive/East From Marquette Drive to
Carnegie Drive (SMT)
[Added 9-12-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
New Dairy Lane/
North
From 325 feet west of Park
Avenue to Cedar Street
(KPK) [Added 10-12-2004;
amended 3-8-2005]
No parking All
New Highway/
Both
From Wicks Path west to
Valmont Lane (HPG)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From Old Willets Path south
to Veterans Memorial
Highway (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
New Highway/
East and South
From Veterans Memorial
Highway (SR454) south to
Holiday Park Drive (HPG)
No parking All
New Highway/
North
From Commack Road east
for 220 feet (COM) [Added
5-23-1989]
No parking All
From 800 feet east of
Harned Road west for 800
feet (COM) [Added
1-27-2004]
No parking All
From 300 feet east of
Mohegan Lane west for 100
feet (COM) [Added
12-5-2006]
No parking All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1211
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Parkway Drive
northwest for 165 feet
(COM) [Added 8-22-1989]
No stopping All
From 165 feet west of
Parkway Drive North to 350
feet west of Gannet Drive
(COM) [Added 7-11-1995]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 145 feet west of Wicks
Path west for 145 feet
(COM) [Added 12-5-2006]
No parking All
New Highway/
South
From Commack Road east
for 320 feet (COM) [Added
5-23-1989]
No parking All
From Marie Crescent to
Valmont Drive (COM)
[Added 3-6-2012]
No parking
From Wicks Road to
Parkway Drive North (COM)
[Added 7-11-1995;
amended 5-16-2000;
5-10-2005]
No parking All
From 665 feet east of Hoyt
Farm Park entrance east for
175 feet (COM) [Added
7-11-1995; repealed
5-16-2000]
New Highway/
West
From 100 feet north of
Robin Drive north for 130
feet [Added 6-23-1987]
No parking 12:00
midnight to
6:00 a.m.
From 100 feet north of
Robin Drive south to Oriole
Street (HPG) [Amended
6-23-1987]
No parking All
From Veterans Memorial
Highway (SR454) south for
50 feet (HPG)
No parking All
New York
Avenue/East
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25) south for 40 feet
(SMT)
No stopping All
From 655 feet south of Main
Street (SR25) north for 20
feet (SMT)
No parking All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1212
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
New York
Avenue/East
[Added
2-14-1985;
repealed
2-3-1987]
New York
Avenue/West
From 125 feet south of
Colonial Road to 190 feet
south of Colonial Road
(SMT) [Added 7-7-1988;
repealed 10-24-1995]
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25) south to the
northern driveway of New
York Avenue Junior High
School (STM) [Repealed
10-10-1995]
From 210 feet south of
SR25 to 304 feet south of
SR25 [Added 7-8-1986;
repealed 10-10-1995]
From West Main Street
(SR25) south for 100 feet
(SMT) [Added
10-10-1995; amended
3-12-1996]
No stopping All
From 388 feet south of
SR25 to 745 feet south of
SR25 [Added 7-8-1986;
amended 8-20-1996]
No parking All
From 601 feet south of
SR25 to 745 feet south of
SR25 [Added 7-8-1986;
repealed 8-20-1996]
Nichols Road/
Both
From 250 feet south of
Smithtown Boulevard
(CR16) to 250 feet north of
Smithtown Boulevard
(CR16) (NES) [Added
10-3-1989]
No stopping All
Nichols Road/
North
From Gibbs Pond Road west
to 100 feet west of
Salvatore Court (NES)
[Added 3-26-1996]
No parking All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1213
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Nichols Road/
South
From the entrance to the
Parish of the Holy Cross
east to the exit (NES)
[Added 11-28-2000]
No parking All
Nichols Road/
West
From Margaret Avenue
north for 95 feet (NES)
No parking All
North Avenue/
North
From Terry Road west for
105 feet (SMT) [Added
8-13-1991]
No parking All
Northern
Boulevard/Both
[Repealed
9-8-1992]
Northern
Boulevard/East
From 330 feet south of
North Country Road
(SR25A) to North Country
Road (STJ) [Added 5-23-
1989]
No parking All
From 175 feet south of
Ranson Street to Ranson
Street (STJ) [Added
7-7-1988; repealed
9-8-1992]
From Roseville Avenue to
125 feet south of Wexford
Court (STJ) [Added
11-21-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From 125 feet south of
Wexford Court to 100 feet
north of Wexford Court
(STJ) [Added 9-12-2006]
No parking All
From 100 feet north of
Wexford Court to Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ) [Added
11-21-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Northern
Boulevard/West
From 85 feet north of
Clinton Avenue to Clinton
Avenue (STJ) [Added
5-23-1989; repealed
9-27-1994]
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1214
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 200 feet north of
Clinton Avenue to Clinton
Avenue (STJ) [Added
9-27-1994]
No parking All
From Ranson Street south
for 375 feet (STJ) [Added
7-7-1988; repealed
9-8-1992]
From Woodlawn Avenue
south for 115 feet (STJ)
[Added 11-9-1999]
No parking All
From 115 feet south of
Woodlawn Avenue to
Roseville Avenue (STJ)
[Added 11-21-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
North Lane/Both From Hidden Ponds Circle
to its terminus (SMT)
[Added 8-26-1992]
No parking All
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Okst Street/Both From Main Street (SR25A)
south to its terminus (KPK)
No parking All
Old Dock Road/
Both [Amended
10-3-1989;
repealed
1-12-1993]
Old Dock Road/
East [Added
10-3-1989;
repealed
1-12-1993]
Old Dock Road/
East
From Main Street (SR25A)
north for 285 feet (KPK)
[Added 1-12-1993]
No parking All
Old Dock Road/
North
From 50 feet east of Church
Street west to 50 feet west
of Church Street (KPK)
[Added 1-12-1993]
No
standing
All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1215
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 600 feet east of
Church Street west for 340
feet (KPK) [Added
1-24-1995]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Old Dock Road/
Northwest
From the Bluff Parking Area
southwest to Upper Dock
Road (southern intersection)
(KPK)
No
stopping
9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Old Dock Road/
South
From 50 feet west of Church
Street east to 50 feet east of
Church Street (KPK) [Added
1-12- 1993]
No
standing
All
From 50 feet east of Church
Street east for 300 feet
(KPK) [Added 6-27-2000]
No parking All
From 350 feet east of
Church Street east for 315
feet (KPK) [Added
10-5-1993; amended
6-27-2000]
No
stopping
All
Old Dock Road/
Southeast
From Upper Dock Road
North south for 165 feet
(KPK) [Amended
8-12-1986]
No parking All
From Upper Dock Road
South north for 175 feet
(KPK) [Added 8-12-1986]
No parking All
Old Dock Road/
West
From Main Street (SR25A)
north for 375 feet (KPK)
[Added 10-3-1989;
amended 4-9-2019]
No parking All
From 425 feet north of
Upper Old Dock Road (south
intersection) south for 210
feet (KPK) [Added
7-11-1995]
No parking
of canoe
livery
vehicles
All
Old Hauppauge
Road/Both
From eastern Veterans
Memorial Highway to
western Veterans Memorial
Highway (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1216
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Old Indian Head
Road/East
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25) north for 530 feet
(COM) [Added 11-20-1984]
No parking All
Old Indian Head
Road/West
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25) north for 260 feet
(COM) [Added 11-20-1984]
No parking All
Old Landers
Court/Both
From Eckernkamp Drive
north to its terminus (SMT)
No parking 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Old Nichols
Road/East
North of Browns Road (NES)
[Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
North of Elliot Drive (NES)
[Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
North of Town Line Road
(NES) [Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of Gibbs Pond Road
(NES) [Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of Smithtown
Boulevard (NES) [Added
5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Old Nichols
Road/West
North of Gibbs Pond Road
(NES) [Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
North of Shenandoah
Boulevard (NES) [Added
5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
North of Smithtown
Boulevard (NES) [Added
5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
North of Town Line Road
(NES) [Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of Browns Road (NES)
[Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of Moriches Road
(NES) [Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1217
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Old Northport
Road/North
[Added
3-2-1993;
repealed
3-31-1993]
Old Northport
Road/North
From 400 feet east of Alfred
Lane west to east side of
Lawrence Road extension
(SMT) [Added 3-31-1993]
No parking All
Old Northport
Road/South
[Added
3-2-1993;
repealed
3-31-1993]
Old Northport
Road/South
From east side of Lawrence
Road extension east to 100
feet east of Ernest Court
(SMT) [Added 3-31-1993]
No parking All
Old Road/Both
[Added
10-9-2018]
From Old Northport Road to
Linden Avenue (KPK)
No parking All
Old Willets Path/
Both
From Eagle Lane south to
the slip line (HPG)
No parking All
From Jericho Turnpike south
to Veterans Memorial
Highway (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Old Willets Path/
East
In front of Ivanhoe
Restaurant (HPG) [Added
5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
North of Oser Avenue (HPG)
[Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
North of Veterans Memorial
Hospital (HPG) [Added
11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of Kings Highway
(HPG) [Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1218
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
South of Veterans Memorial
Highway (HPG) [Added
5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Old Willets Path/
West
In front of Sears (HPG)
[Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of Engineers Road
(HPG) [Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of Oser Avenue (HPG)
[Added 5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
South of Veterans Memorial
Highway (HPG) [Added
5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Orchard Avenue/
East
From Rutherford Street to
Roseville Avenue (STJ)
[Added 1-9-2007]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Orchard Avenue/
West
From Roseville Avenue south
for 125 feet (STJ) [Added
9-29-1998]
No parking All
From 125 feet south of
Roseville Avenue to
Rutherford Street (STJ)
[Added 1-9-2007]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Oreste Street/
East
From terminus north to
Lindron Avenue (SMT)
[Added 6-9-1998]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Oreste Street/
West
From Lindron Avenue south
to terminus (SMT) [Added
6-9-1998]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Oriole Street/
East
From 100 feet south of New
Highway to New Highway
(HPG) [Added 1-21-1991]
No
standing
here to
corner
All
Oriole Street/
West
From New Highway south
for 50 feet (HPG) [Added
1-2-1991]
No
standing
here to
corner
All
Oser Avenue/
Both
From Old Willets Path to
Parkway Drive South (HPG)
No parking All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1219
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Oser Avenue/
North
Across from Plant Avenue
(HPG) [Added 11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
In front of Gap Instrument
sign (HPG) [Added
11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
West of Old Willets Path
(HPG) [Added 11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Oser Avenue/
South
East of Eaton Corporation
entrance (HPG) [Added
11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
West of Old Willets Park
(HPG) [Added 11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
East of Plant Avenue (HPG)
[Added 11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
O'Shea Lane/
Both
From Roseville Avenue to
David Lane (STJ) [Added
10-18-2010]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Palmer Lane/
Both
From Crocus Lane west to
Pickwick Drive (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Park Avenue/
East
From SR25A north for 140
feet (KPK) [Added
10-28-1997]
No parking All
Park Avenue/
North
From Fort Salonga Road
(SR25A) west for 125 feet
(KPK)
No parking All
Park Avenue/
West
From SR25A north for 140
feet (KPK) [Added
11-26-1985]
No parking All
Park Drive/Both From Indian Head Road
(CR14) east for 300 feet
(KPK)
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1220
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Parkview Drive/
Both
From its northern
intersection with Pickwick
Court southeast to southern
intersection of Pickwick
Drive (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Park Woods
Lane/East
From Eugene Drive north
for 500 feet (KPK) [Added
10-9-2001]
No parking All
Park Woods
Lane/West
From 500 feet north of
Eugene Drive south for 500
feet (KPK) [Added
10-9-2001]
No parking All
Paul Lane/Both From Stanwich Road north
to Morewood Park (COM)
No standing All
Peony Lane/Both From Astor Court south to
Walter Court (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Persimmon
Court/Both
From Lillian Road north for
140 feet (NES)
No parking All
Pheasant Drive/
North [Added
5-3-1994;
repealed
7-11-1995]
Pheasant Drive/
North
From Gannet Drive west for
285 feet (COM) [Added
7-11-1995]
No parking All
Pheasant Drive/
South
From 295 feet west of
Gannet Drive east to Gannet
Drive (COM) [Added
7-11-1995]
No parking All
Pickwick Court/
Both
From Pickwick Drive
southeast to terminus (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Pickwick Drive/
Both
From Smiths Lane East
south to Pickwick Court
(PNS) [Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Pierrepont
Street/East
From Clinton Avenue south
to Tillotson Avenue (STJ)
No parking,
fire zone
All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1221
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Pierson Street/
North
From 75 feet east of Lake
Avenue South [Added
5-28-1991]
No stopping
here to
corner
All
Pierson Street/
South
From Lake Avenue South
east for 75 feet [Added
5-28-1991]
No stopping
here to
corner
All
Pine Acre Drive/
East [Added
3-31-1993;
repealed
1-24-2006]
Pine Acre Drive/
West [Added
3-31-1993;
repealed
1-24-2006]
Pine Acre Drive/
East
From Meadow Road to
Hilltop Drive (SMT) [Added
1-24-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Pine Acre Drive/
West
From Hilltop Drive to
Meadow Road (SMT)
[Added 1-24-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Pine Ridge
Drive/Both
From McArthur Lane south
to Lone Oak Path (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Pines/All
Highways/Both
[Amended
2-20-1990;
repealed
4-24-1990]
Pinewood Drive In front of house, 22
Pinewood Drive (COM)
[Added 3-19-2020]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Plant Avenue/
Both
From Oser Avenue to
Kennedy Drive (HPG)
No parking All
Plant Avenue/
East
From Kennedy Drive north
for 400 feet (HPG) [Added
5-11-1999]
No stopping All
Plymouth
Boulevard/Both
From Asbury Drive south to
the Smithtown Fire
Department southern
property line (COM)
No parking,
fire zone
All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1222
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Plymouth
Boulevard/East
From Knoll Lane north to
400 feet north of Wichard
Boulevard (SMT) [Added
9-30-1992; amended
4-9-1996]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Plymouth
Boulevard/West
From Cindy Street north for
125 feet (SMT)
No parking All
From 400 feet north of
Wichard Boulevard south to
Knoll Lane (SMT) [Added
9-30-1992; amended
4-9-1996]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Pond Path/East From Thatch Pond Road
north for 340 feet (SMT)
[Added 12-6-1988]
No parking All
Pond View Lane/
Both
From Hidden Ponds Circle
to Hidden Ponds Circle
(SMT) [Added 8-26-1992]
No parking All
Poppy Lane/Both From Walter Court south for
Shirley Court (COM)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Primrose Lane/
North [Added
4-21-1997;
repealed
1-23-2020]
Primrose Lane/
North
From 275 feet west of
Cactus Lane west for 400
feet (KPK) [Added
6-9-1998]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From Lawrence Road east
for 270 feet (KPK) [Added
1-23-2020]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Primrose Lane/
South
From Lawrence Road east
for 500 feet (KPK) [Added
3-10-1998]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Prospect
Avenue/East
Middle Country Road
(SR25) south for 500 feet
(SMT) [Added 3-24-2011;
amended 1-19-2017]
No parking All
Prospect
Avenue/West
From Middle Country Road
(SR25) south for 50 feet
(SMT) [Added 3-24-2011]
No parking All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1223
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Prospect Street/
Both [Repealed
2-27-1990]
Prospect Street/
North
From Atterbury Drive to 100
feet east of Elliott Place
(SMT) [Added 2-27-1990]
No parking All
Prospect Street/
South
From Elliott Place to
Atterbury Drive (SMT)
[Added 2-27-1990]
No parking All
Pulaski - East
Northport Road
(CR11)/North
From Main Street (SR25A)
west for 45 feet (KPK)
[Added 10-11-1994]
No stopping All
From Main Street (SR25A)
west to First Avenue (KPK)
[Repealed 10-11-1994]
From 45 feet west of Main
Street (SR25A) west to First
Avenue (KPK) [Added
10-11-1994]
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Pulaski - East
Northport Road
(CR11)/South
From First Avenue west of
Hoffman Lane (KPK)
No parking All
From Main Street (SR25A)
west for 250 feet (KPK)
No standing All
From 250 feet west of Main
Street (SR25A) west to First
Avenue (KPK)
1-hour
parking
8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Rabro Drive
(CR6)/Both
From Old Willets Path east
to the town line (HPG)
No parking All
Railroad Avenue/
South
From First Avenue east 125
feet to First Street (STJ)
No parking All
From Lake Avenue east for
75 feet (STJ) [Added
8-26-1992]
No parking All
From 70 feet west of Lake
Avenue to Lake Avenue
(STJ) [Added 3-8-1988;
amended 8-23-1988]
No standing All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1224
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 234 feet west of Lake
Avenue to 156 feet west of
Lake Avenue (STJ) [Added
2-25-1992]
No parking All
Ranson Street/
Both [Repealed
9-8-1992]
Ranson Street/
North
From Northern Boulevard to
Tredwell Avenue (STJ)
[Added 4-4-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Ranson Street/
South
From Tredwell Avenue to
Northern Boulevard (STJ)
[Added 4-4-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Redleaf Lane/
North
From 200 feet east of
Vanderbilt Motor Parkway
west for 200 feet [Added
10-12-1999]
No parking All
Redwood Lane/
Both
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25, 25A) north and east
to Landing Avenue (SMT)
No parking All
Redwood Lane/
North
In front of Town Building
Department (SMT) [Added
5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Redwood Lane/
South
In front of Town Building
Department (SMT) [Added
5-26-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Renlet Lane/
Both
From Brilner Drive south to
its terminus (SMT)
No parking All
Renwick Avenue/
East [Amended
6-11-1985;
repealed
3-5-1996]
Renwick Avenue/
East
From 225 feet south of Main
Street north for 75 feet
(KPK) [Added 3-5-1996]
No parking All
From 80 feet south of Main
Street north for 80 feet
(KPK) [Added 3-5-1996]
No stopping All
Renwick Avenue/
West
From Main Street south for
20 feet (KPK) [Added
3-5-1996]
No stopping All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1225
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 110 feet south of Main
Street south for 115 feet
(KPK) [Added 3-5-1996]
No parking All
Renwick Avenue/
West [Repealed
3-5-1996]
Renwick Lane/
East
From 300 feet south of SR
25A south for 300 feet
(KPK) [Added 3-7-2017]
No parking 6:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.,
weekdays
Ricefield Lane/
Both
From Davids Drive to
Parkway Drive South (HPG)
No parking All
Ridge Road/
North
From Hill Lane to Plymouth
Boulevard (SMT) [Added
7-27-2004]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Ridge Road/
South
From Meadow Road west
for 200 feet (SMT)
No standing All
From Plymouth Boulevard
to Hill Lane (SMT) [Added
7-27-2004]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
River Road/Both From State Route 25A north
to Blydenburgh Avenue
(SMT) [Added 8-11-87]
No parking All
Riviera Drive/
North
From 400 feet east of
Highland Drive west for 250
feet (KPK) [Added
2-24-1998]
No parking All
Riviera Drive/
South
From 100 feet east of
Beaver Drive east to
Cypress Drive (KPK)
[Added 6-13-2006]
No parking All
Robin Drive/Both From New Highway west
for 350 feet (HPG)
No parking All
Rolling Hills
Drive/East
From 100 feet south of
Nichols Road to Nichols
Road (NES) [Added
1-27-1998]
No parking All
Rolling Hills
Drive/West
From Nichols Road south
for 100 feet (NES) [Added
1-27-1998]
No parking All
Romeo Drive/
Both
From Central Road east to
terminus (SMT) [Added
5-12-1992]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4 00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1226
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Ron Court/Both From Penguin Lane east for
140 feet (COM)
No parking All
Rose Court/Both From Peony Lane east to
Laurel Drive (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Rose Lane/Both From 1600 feet west of
Brooksite Drive west to
terminus (SMT) [Added
11-1-2016]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4 00 p.m.,
school days
Rose Street/Both From St. Johnland Road
(SR25A) east to St. Nicholas
Avenue (KPK)
No parking All
Rosevale Avenue
(CR93)/East
From Mon Repos Lane
south for 75 feet (NES)
[Added 6-2-1992;
repealed 12-14-1999]
From Mon Repos Lane
south for 100 feet (NES)
[Added 12-14-1999]
No parking All
From Smithtown Boulevard
(CR16) to Mon Repos Lane
(NES) [Added
11-24-1998]
No stopping All
Roseville
Avenue/Both
[Added
4-9-1985;
repealed
9-25-2008]
Roseville
Avenue/North
From Northern Boulevard to
Tredwell Avenue (STJ)
[Added 9-25-2008]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From Tredwell Avenue west
for 150 feet (STJ) [Added
9-25-2008]
No stopping 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Roseville
Avenue/South
From 110 feet west of
Orchard Avenue to Orchard
Avenue (STJ) [Added
9-25-2008]
No parking All
From Orchard Avenue to
O'Shea Lane (STJ) [Added
8-17-2010]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1227
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Roundtree Drive/
Both
From Haig Place west to its
terminus (KPK)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Roy Drive/Both From Nichols Road north
for 85 feet (NES)
No parking All
Rumford Road/
Both [Added
3-24-1987;
repealed
12-5-2000]
Rumford Road/
North
From Clover Lane West for
815 feet (KPK) [Added
12-5-2000]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From 160 feet east of
Columbine Lane to
Lawrence Road (KPK)
[Added 12-5-2000]
No stopping 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Rumford Road/
South
From Lawrence Road to 150
feet east of Columbine Lane
(KPK) [Added 12-5-2000]
No stopping 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From 150 feet east of
Columbine Lane to Clover
Lane (KPK) [Added
12-5-2000]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Ruth Boulevard/
East
From SR25 to Johnson
Street (COM) [Added
9-24-2002]
No stopping All
Ruth Boulevard/
West
From Johnson Street to
SR25 (COM) [Added
9-24-2002]
No stopping All
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Saber Drive/East From terminus northwest to
Saber Drive (KPK) [Added
11-24-1998]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Saber Drive/
West
From Sesame Street
southeast to terminus (KPK)
[Added 11-24-1998]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Sagebrush Lane/
North
From Clover Lane west to
Jasmine Lane (KPK) [Added
4-9-1996; amended
4-23-1996]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1228
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Sagebrush Lane/
South
From Jasmine Lane east for
300 feet (KPK) [Added
4-9-1996; amended
4-23-1996]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
St. James
Avenue/Both
[Repealed
9-8-1992]
St. James
Avenue/East
[Repealed
12-13-2005]
St. James Avenue
North/East
From 270 feet south of
Cleveland Street north for
120 feet (STJ) [Added
5-28-1996]
No parking All
From 150 feet south of
Tredwell Avenue to
Woodlawn Avenue (STJ)
[Added 12-13-2005]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From Woodlawn Avenue
north to McKinley Street
(STJ) [Added 12-13-2005]
No parking All
St. James Avenue
North/West
[Added
12-13-2005;
repealed
6-9-2020]
St. James Avenue
North/West
From 400 feet south of
McKinley Street south for
195 feet (STJ) [Added
6-9-2020]
No parking All
From Woodlawn Avenue to
Smithtown High School
East, north entrance (STJ)
[Added 12-13-2005]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
St. James
Avenue/West
[Added
11-23-1993;
repealed
12-13-2005]
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1229
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
St. James
Avenue/West
From 595 feet south of
McKinley Street south to
Woodlawn Avenue (STJ)
[Added 5-1-2012]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From Woodlawn Avenue
north for 125 feet (STJ)
[Added 4-5-2011]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.
St. James Avenue
South/Both
[Added
9-24-2015;
repealed
9-6-2016]
St. James Avenue
South/Both
From Rutherford Street
north to terminus (STJ)
[Added 9-6-2016]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
St. Johnland
Road/South
From Locust Drive to
Hemlock Drive (KPK)
[Added 11-25-1997]
No stopping All
St. Nicholas
Avenue/West
From Franklin Street south
for 125 feet (SMT) [Added
10-10-2006]
No parking All
Sally's Path/
North
From 625 feet west of
Meadow Glen Road south
for 250 feet around
terminus (KPK) [Added
3-10-1992]
No parking All
Saxon Court/
Both
From its terminus west for
50 feet (PNS)
No parking All
From Croft Lane east to its
terminus (SMT) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Scholar Lane/
Both [Repealed
6-4-1996]
Scholar Lane/
North
From 200 feet west of
Hayrick Lane (east
intersection) to 260 feet
east of Hayrick Lane (east
intersection) (COM) [Added
5-8-1990; repealed
3-12-2002]
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1230
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Silo Road to 130 feet
west of Hayrick Lane (west
intersection) (COM) [Added
3-12-2002; repealed
7-15-2014]
From 130 feet west of
Hayrick Lane (west
intersection) to Town Line
Road (COM) [Added
3-12-2002]
No stopping All
From 100 feet east of Town
Line Road west to Town
Line Road (COM) [Added
6-4-1996; repealed
3-12-2002]
From Coconut Drive (west
intersection) to Town Line
Road (COM)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Scholar Lane/
South
From 200 feet west of
Hayrick Lane (east
intersection) to 150 feet
east of Hayrick Lane (east
intersection) (COM) [Added
5-8-1990]
No parking All
From Town Line Road east
to Silo Road (COM) [Added
6-4-1996]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From Silo Road east for 150
feet (COM) [Added
6-4-1996]
No stopping All
From 150 feet east of Silo
Road east for 675 feet
(COM) [Added 9-14-1999]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
School Street/
Both
From Northern Boulevard
west to the Smithtown High
School East (STJ)
No parking All
Schubert Drive/
Both
From Grassy Pond Drive
South west to Ledgewood
Drive (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Scott Lane/Both From Redwood Lane to
Smithtown Railroad Station
Parking Field (SMT)
No parking All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1231
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Second Avenue/
Both
From Woodlawn Avenue
north to Seventh Street
(STJ) [Added 12-1-1987]
No parking All
Second Avenue/
East [Repealed
12-1-1987]
Second Street/
Both [Repealed
12-23-1986]
Second Street/
Both
From Lake Avenue east for
50 feet (STJ) [Added
12-11-1990; repealed
9-17-1991]
Second Street/
North
From Lake Avenue east for
40 feet (STJ) [Added
2-6-1990]
No standing
here to
corner
All
Second Street/
South
From Lake Avenue east for
30 feet (STJ) [Added
2-6-1990]
No standing
here to
corner
All
Seneca Drive/
North
From Mohawk Lane west
for 130 feet (COM) [Added
3-17-2016]
No parking All
Sesame Street/
Both
East of Lawrence Road to
the turnaround area (KPK)
[Added 1-12-1988]
No parking 7:30 a.m. to
2:30 p.m.,
school days
Sesame Street/
Cul-de-sac
East of Lawrence Road
(turnaround area) [Added
1-12-1988]
No stopping All
Seventh Avenue/
East
From 40 feet south of Old
Commack Road to Old
Commack Road (KPK)
[Added 3-29-2007]
No parking All
Seventh Avenue/
West
From Old Commack Road
south for 50 feet (KPK)
[Added 3-29-2007]
No parking All
Seventh Street/
North
From Lake Avenue west for
125 feet (STJ) [Added
2-20-1990]
No parking All
Seventh Street/
South
From Lake Avenue west for
200 feet (STJ)
No parking All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1232
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Second Avenue east to
Third Avenue (STJ)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m,
Sundays
Sheppard Lane/
East
From 75 feet south of
Smithtown Boulevard to
Smithtown Boulevard (NES)
[Added 5-27-2003]
No parking All
Sheppard Lane/
West
From Smithtown Boulevard
south for 75 feet (NES)
[Added 5-27-2003]
No parking All
Shirley Court/
Both
From Walter Court
southeast to Bayberry Lane
(PNS) [Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Silo Road/Both From Scholar Lane to
Harvest Lane (COM)
[Added 8-22-1989]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Siracusa
Boulevard/East
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25) north for 325 feet
(SMT) [Added 4-29-1997]
No parking All
Siracusa
Boulevard/West
From 300 feet north of
Jericho Turnpike (SR25)
south for 300 feet (SMT)
[Added 5-25-1999]
No parking All
Sixth Street/Both From Lake Avenue west for
100 feet (STJ)
No parking All
Smiths Lane/
Both
From north terminus to
south terminus [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Smith Street/
West
From Nichols Road south
for 100 feet (NES) [Added
1-24-1995]
No stopping
here to
corner
All
Smithtown
Boulevard (CR
16)/Both
From Annetta Avenue south
and east to Rosevale Avenue
(CR93) (SMT) [Added
6-20-1989]
No stopping All
Smithtown
Boulevard/Both
[Added
6-25-85;
repealed
6-20-1989]
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1233
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Smithtown
Boulevard
(CR16)/Both
[Added
11-12-1985;
repealed
6-20-1989]
Smithtown
Boulevard/East
[Repealed
8-12-1986]
Smithtown
Boulevard/North
East of Gibbs Ponds Road
(NES) [Added
11-24-1987]
No
stopping/
bus stop
All,
excluding
buses
Smithtown
Boulevard/South
[Repealed
6-25-1985]
Smithtown
Boulevard
(CR-16)/West
[Repealed
8-12-1986]
Smithtown
Landing Country
Club Road/Both
Through traffic circle at
terminus (SMT) [Added
5-10-1988]
No parking All
Somers Lane/
Both
From Indian Head Road
(CR14) west to Ramsey
Road (COM)
No stopping All
Soundview
Drive/Both
From Beach Hill Drive south
for 185 feet (KPK)
[Repealed 8-23-1988]
From Highview Court to
Beach Hill Drive (FTS)
[Added 8-23-1988;
amended 9-6-1988]
No parking All
Soundview
Drive/West
From 535 feet north of
Beverly Court south for 335
feet (KPK) [Added
10-28-1997]
No stopping All
Southern
Boulevard/Both
From Smithtown Boulevard
(CR16) south for 100 feet
(NES) [Added 9-25-1984]
No stopping All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1234
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
South Pond
Lane/Both
From West Pond Court to
Hidden Ponds Circle (SMT)
[Added 8-26-1992]
No parking All
Spectacle Lake
Drive/Both
From Smithtown Boulevard
north for 800 feet (NES)
[Added 9-8-2009]
No parking May 15 to
September
15
Standish Place/
North
From 450 feet west of
Summit Drive west to
terminus (NES) [Added
7-9-1991]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Standish Place/
South
From terminus of Standish
Place east for 115 feet
(NES) [Added 7-9-1991]
No parking 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Stanley Place/
South
From 350 feet east of Shelia
Drive east for 30 feet (SMT)
[Added 8-9-2016]
No parking All
Stanwich Road/
North
From 140 feet east of Villa
Lane west for 60 feet (SMT)
[Added 7-28-1998]
No parking All
Stanwich Road/
South
From Villa Lane east for 140
feet (SMT) [Added
7-28-1998]
No parking All
Starlight Drive/
Both
From Pickwick Drive
southeast to Pickwick Court
(PNS) [Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Suffolk Court/
Both
From Adams Avenue east to
its terminus [Added
5-22-1984]
No parking All
Summit Drive
North/West
From Smithtown Boulevard
north for 200 feet (NES)
No parking All
Summit Drive
South/West
From Smithtown Boulevard
south for 165 feet (NES)
No parking All
Sunken Meadow
Road/Both
From 450 feet west of
Truxton Lane east to
Woodvale Avenue (KPK)
[Amended 9-3-1991]
No parking All
Sunny Road/East From SR25 (Middle Country
Road) north for 250 feet
(STJ) [Added 10-6-1987;
amended 2-7-2017]
No stopping All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1235
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Sunny Road/
West
From SR25 (Middle Country
Road) north for 100 feet
(STJ) [Added 10-6-1987]
No stopping All
From 100 feet north of
SR25 (Middle Country
Road) to 250 feet north of
SR25 (Middle Country
Road) (STJ) [Added
10-6-1987]
No standing All
Sunset Lane/
Both
From Brooksite Drive west
for 350 feet (SMT)
No parking All
Susan Court/
Both
From Shirley Court south to
terminus (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Sycamore Lane/
Both
From Indian Head Road
east for 75 feet (COM)
[Added 4-21-1987]
No stopping All
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Taffy Court/East From Old Commack Road
north for 75 feet (KPK)
[Added 3-13-2001]
No stopping All
Taffy Court/West From 75 feet north of Old
Commack Road south for 75
feet (KPK) [Added
3-13-2001]
No stopping All
Tanglewood
Drive/Both
From Hauppauge Road
(SR111) east for 100 feet
(SMT)
No parking All
Teapot Lane/
Both
From Landing Avenue north
and east for 200 feet (SMT)
No parking All
Terrill Lane/
South
From the easterly terminus
west for 75 feet (KPK)
[Amended 5-24-1988]
No parking All
Terry Road
(CR16)/Both
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25) south to Annetta
Avenue (SMT) [Added
11-12-1985]
No stopping All
Terry Road
(CR16)/East
From Smithtown Boulevard
to Gilbert Avenue (SMT)
No parking All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1236
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Townline Road north
for 280 feet (HPG) [Added
9-25-2001]
No parking All
Terry Road
(CR16)/West
[Repealed
11-12-1985]
From 280 feet north of
Townline Road to Townline
Road (HPG) [Added
9-25-2001]
No parking All
Thatch Pond
Road/Both
From Pond Path west to its
terminus (SMT) [Amended
8-12-1986]
No stopping All
Third Avenue/
West
From Woodlawn Avenue
north to Seventh Street
(STJ)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.,
Sundays
Third Street/
North
From 105 feet west of Lake
Avenue west for 110 feet
(STJ) [Added 10-25-2007]
No parking All
Thompson
Street/Both
From Main Street north for
275 feet (KPK) [Added
5-7-1985]
No parking 5:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.,
Monday
through
Friday
Three Sisters
Road/East
From 75 feet south of
Overton Pass north for 75
feet (STJ) [Added
6-8-1993]
No stopping
here to
corner
All
Tide Mill Road/
East
From terminus north for
425 feet (SMT) [Added
1-27-1998]
No parking All
Tide Mill Road/
West
From 250 feet south of
Nissequogue River Road
south to terminus (SMT)
[Added 1-27-1998]
No parking All
Tillotson Avenue/
North
From Pierrepont Street
west for 200 feet (STJ)
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.,
Sundays
Tillotson Avenue/
South
From 125 feet west of
Remsen Street east to
Remsen Street (STJ)
[Added 5-24-2007]
No parking All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1237
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Timber Croft
Way/Both
From Old Willets Path west
to Wild Run (SMT) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Timothy Court/
Both
From Ledgewood Drive
west to terminus (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Timothy Court/
North
From 115 feet west of
Greenfield Lane to
Greenfield Lane (COM)
[Added 2-11-1992]
No parking 9:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Timothy Court/
South
From Greenfield Lane east
for 115 feet (COM) [Added
2-11-1992]
No parking 9:00 am. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Town Line Road/
East
From Burr Road north and
south for 200 feet (COM)
[Repealed 4-23-1991]
From 150 feet south of
Havemeyer Lane to 515 feet
north of Havemeyer Lane
(COM) [Added 4-23-1991]
No parking All
From 450 feet south of Long
Bow Lane north for 450 feet
(COM) [Added 3-29-2007]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From 300 feet south of
Marshmallow Drive to 175
feet north of Marshmallow
Drive (COM) [Added
3-8-2005]
No parking All
From 215 feet north of Old
Northport Road north for
140 feet (KPK) [Added
8-14-1990]
No parking All
From Scholar Lane north
for 200 feet (COM) [Added
6-5-1990; repealed
4-23-1991]
From 450 feet north of
Scholar Lane north for 250
feet (COM) [Added
6-5-1990; repealed
4-23-1991]
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1238
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From 100 feet south of
Scholar Lane to 700 feet
north of Scholar Lane
(COM) [Added 4-23-1991]
No parking All
Town Line Road/
North
From Hauppauge Road
(SR111) east to Park Avenue
(HPG) [Repealed
8-22-2000]
From Mount Pleasant Road
to North Hoffman Lane
[Repealed 8-22-2000]
From Nichols Road to Jamor
Court (NES) [Added
8-22-2000]
No parking All
From Sunhill Road to Terry
Road (NES) [Added
8-22-2000]
No parking All
From Terry Road to
Hauppauge Road (SR111)
(HPG) [Added 8-22-2000]
No parking All
Tredwell
Avenue/Both
[Repealed
9-8-1992]
Tredwell
Avenue/East
[Repealed
9-8-1992]
Tredwell
Avenue/East
From Roseville Avenue to
Woodlawn Avenue (STJ)
[Added 3-21-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
From Woodlawn Avenue
north to McKinley Street
(STJ) [Added 2-22-2018]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Tredwell
Avenue/West
From Ranson Street
[Repealed 9-8-1992]
From Woodlawn Avenue
north to McKinley Street
(STJ)
No parking All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1239
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Woodlawn Avenue to
100 feet north of School
Street (STJ) [Added
3-21-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.
school days
From 100 feet north of
School Street to School
Street (STJ) [Added
3-21-2006]
No stopping All
From School Street to
Roseville Avenue (STJ)
[Added 3-21-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
Tulip Lane/Both From Astor Court north to
terminus (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Twilight Lane/
Both
From Brooksite Drive west
for 250 feet (SMT)
No parking All
Twin Oaks Drive/
East
South from Sunken Meadow
Road to Cedar Place (KPK)
[Added 6-24-1986]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Twin Oaks Drive/
West
South from Sunken Meadow
Road to Harbor Oaks Drive
(KPK) [Added 6-24-1986]
No parking 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m
Twixt Hills Road/
East
From Edgewood Avenue
north for 70 feet (SMT)
[Added 6-23-1992]
No parking All
Twixt Hills Road/
West
From 140 feet north of
Edgewood Avenue south to
Edgewood Avenue (SMT)
[Added 6-23-1992]
No parking All
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Upper Old Dock
Road/Both
From Old Dock Road north
to Old Dock Road (KPK)
No stopping All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1240
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Valant Court/
Both
From Mobrey Lane south to
terminus (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Valley Avenue/
East
From 615 feet south of
Oakside Drive North for 130
feet (SMT) [Added
2-9-1999]
No parking All
Valleywood
Road/Both
From Broadview west/south
to Veterans Memorial
Highway (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Valtop Lane/
North
From Truval Lane west for
120 feet (NES) [Added
5-8-2007]
No parking All
Valtop Lane/
South
From 120 feet west of
Truval Lane east for 120
feet (NES) [Added
5-8-2007]
No parking All
Vanderbilt Motor
Parkway/Both
From Commack Road east
to Redleaf Lane (COM)
No stopping All
Vanderbilt Motor
Parkway
(CR67)/North
From Old Willets Path to
Austin Boulevard (HPG)
No stopping All
Verbena Drive/
Both
From Astor Court
Southwest, northwest to
terminus (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Veronica Court/
North
From 630 feet east of Derby
Place west for 65 feet (SMT)
[Added 2-26-2002;
repealed 7-18-2002]
Villa Lane/East From 125 feet south of
Stanwich Road (SMT)
[Added 7-28-1998]
No parking All
Villa Lane/West From Stanwich Road south
for 125 feet (SMT) [Added
7-28-1998]
No parking All
Violet Lane/Both From Zinnia Court east to
Shirley Court (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1241
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Walnut Street/
South
From St. Johnland Road east
for 50 feet (KPK)
No parking All
From 200 feet east of St.
Johnland Road east for 295
feet (KPK)
No parking All
Walter Court/
Both
From Jericho Turnpike
southeast to Wyandanch
Boulevard (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Washington
Boulevard/North
From Plymouth Boulevard
west for 850 feet (SMT)
[Added 9-30-1992;
amended 9-14-1999;
repealed 5-30-2000]
From Washington Court to
Plymouth Boulevard (SMT)
[Added 5-30-2000]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Washington
Boulevard/South
From 850 feet west of
Plymouth Boulevard to
Plymouth Boulevard (SMT)
[Added 9-30-1992;
amended 9-14-1999;
repealed 5-30-2000]
From Plymouth Boulevard to
Washington Court (SMT)
[Added 5-30-2000]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Washington
Court/East
From Washington Boulevard
north to terminus (SMT)
[Added 5-30-2000]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Washington
Court/West
From terminus south to
Washington Boulevard (SMT)
[Added 5-30-2000]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Waverly Avenue/
North
From New York Avenue west
for 75 feet (SMT) [Added
8-23-1988]
No
stopping
All
Waverly Avenue/
South
From New York Avenue west
for 30 feet (SMT) [Added
8-23-1988]
No
stopping
All
From Hanover Place east for
30 feet (SMT) [Added
11-12-1991]
No
stopping
here to
corner
All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1242
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
West Pond
Court/Both
From Hidden Ponds Circle to
its terminus (SMT) [Added
8-26-1992]
No parking All
Wexford Court/
Both [Repealed
9-8-1992]
Wexford Court/
East, North
From terminus to Northern
Boulevard (STJ) [Added
9-12-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Wexford Court/
South, West
From Northern Boulevard to
terminus (STJ) [Added
9-12-2006]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Wexford Court/
West [Added
5-12-1992;
repealed
9-12-2006]
Wheatly Place/
North
From Greenfield Lane to
Harvest Lane (COM) [Added
4-23-2007]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Wheatly Place/
South
From Harvest Lane to
Greenfield Lane (COM)
[Added 4-23-2007]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Whispering
Woods Drive/
East
From the south intersection
of Plymouth Boulevard to the
north intersection of
Plymouth Boulevard (SMT)
[Added 8-12-1997]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Whispering
Woods Drive/
West
From the north intersection
of Plymouth Boulevard to the
south intersection of
Plymouth Boulevard (SMT)
[Added 8-12-1997]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
White Avenue/
East
From Middle County Road
(SR25) north for 210 feet
(STJ) [Added 1-24-1995]
No parking All
White Oak Drive/
Both
From Lone Oak Path south to
Veterans Memorial Highway
(PNS) [Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
White Spruce
Circle/Both
Entire length (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1243
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Wichard
Boulevard/North
From Plymouth Boulevard
west for 850 feet (COM)
[Added 2-23-1993;
amended 8-9-2005]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Wichard
Boulevard/South
From 850 feet west of
Plymouth Boulevard east to
Plymouth Boulevard (COM)
[Added 2-23-1993;
amended 8-9-2005]
No parking 8:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m.,
school days
Wicks Path/Both
[Repealed
4-3-1990]
Wicks Path/East From 390 feet north of Quail
Place north through
terminus (COM) [Added
12-22-1992]
No parking 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Wicks Path/West From 125 feet north of
Seneca Drive to Seneca
Drive (COM) [Added
4-3-1990]
No parking 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m.
From terminus south for 200
feet (COM) [Added
12-22-1992]
No parking 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Wild Run/Both From north terminus to
south terminus (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Wildwood Court/
Both
From Arrowood Drive east to
terminus (STJ) [Added
4-8-1992]
No parking All
Wildwood Lane/
Both
From Maple Avenue east to
New York Avenue (SMT)
No parking All
Willow Street/
Both
From Elm Avenue east for
100 feet (SMT) [Added
5-10-1988]
No
standing
All
From Lawrence Avenue west
for 100 feet (SMT) [Added
5-10-1988]
No
standing
All
Wilson Avenue/
South [Added
9-4-2018]
From Lake Avenue southeast
for 100 feet (NES)
No parking
here to
corner
All
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1244
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Winston Drive/
Both
From Mobrey Lane north to
Jericho Turnpike (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Woodland Drive/
North
From 50 feet east of Landing
Avenue west to Landing
Avenue (SMT) [Added
8-14-1990]
No
standing
All
Woodland Drive/
South
From Landing Avenue east
for 40 feet (SMT) [Added
8-14-1990]
No
standing
All
Woodlawn
Avenue/Both
From Lake Avenue west for
200 feet (STJ) [Repealed
11-24-1987]
From North Country Road
(SR25A) east to Fifty Acre
Road South (STJ) [Repealed
11-24-1987]
From North Country Road
(SR25A) east to First Avenue
(STJ) [Added 11-24-1987]
No parking All
Woodlawn
Avenue/North
From First Avenue to Lake
Avenue (STJ) [Repealed
11-24-1987]
From Second Avenue east to
Third Avenue (STJ)
[Repealed 11-24-1987]
From Tredwell Avenue west
to St. James Avenue (STJ)
[Repealed 11-24-1987]
From 100 feet east of
Second Avenue east to
Moriches Road (STJ) [Added
11-24-1987]
No parking All
Woodlawn
Avenue/South
From Moriches Road west
for 300 feet (STJ)
No
stopping
All
From 100 feet east of
Second Avenue east to 300
feet west of Moriches Road
(STJ) [Added 11-24-1987]
No parking
All
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § J-1
1:1245
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
From Hobson Avenue west
for 125 feet (STJ) [Added
5-22-1984; repealed
11-24-1987]
Woodvale
Avenue/Both
[Added
5-22-2014]
From Woodvale Lane to
terminus (house numbers 6,
8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 16) (KPK)
No parking All
Woodvale Lane/
Both
From Woodvale Avenue
North to Sunken Meadow
Road (KPK) [Added
9-19-1988]
No parking All
Wren Drive/Both From Robin Drive south for
325 feet (HPG)
No parking All
Wyandanch
Boulevard/Both
From Jericho Turnpike south
to Veterans Memorial
Highway (PNS) [Added
4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Wyandanch
Boulevard/Both
From Veterans Memorial
Highway (SR454) north for
170 feet (PNS) [Added
5-22-1990]
No parking All
Wyandanch
Boulevard/East
From Jericho Turnpike
(SR25) to Laurel Drive
(COM) [Added 6-24-1986]
No parking All
Wyandanch
Boulevard/West
From 125 feet south of
Jericho Turnpike (SR25)
south for 150 feet (COM)
[Added 8-12-1986]
No parking All
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Yale Lane/North From Bowman Lane west to
Lawrence Road (KPK)
[Added 7-26-1988]
No parking All
Name of
Street/Side Location Regulation Hours/Days
Zinnia Court/
Both
From Walter Court south to
Pickwick Drive (PNS)
[Added 4-24-1990]
No parking 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Schedule K
§ J-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § J-1
1:1246
PRIVATELY OWNED PARKING AREAS
§ K-1. Privately owned parking areas. [Amended 9-6-1983 by L.L.
No. 4-1983]
In accordance with the provisions of § TC4-1, the following regulations shall
apply to the following parking areas. (NOTE: "FZ" refers to fire zone area;
"HP" refers to handicapped zone.)
Parking Area Regulations
Accompsett Elementary School Lincoln Road
(SMT) [Added 6-24-1986]
FZ
Accompsett Junior High School No. 660
Meadow Road (SMT) [Added 6-24-1986]
FZ
Avalon Condominium Complex Terry Road
(SMT) [Added 9-5-2000]
FZ, HP
Bonwit Village Motor Parkway and Commack
Road (COM) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Boulder Creek Route 347 and Mt. Pleasant
Road (SMT) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Branch Brook Elementary School Ridgely Road
(SMT) [Added 6-24-1986]
FZ
Commack Corners Route 25 and Commack
Road (COM) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Commack Golf Center Crooked Hill Road
(COM) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Commack Mutliplex Crooked Hill Road and
Henry Street (COM) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Commack Plaza [Added 10-7-1997; repealed 9-12-2000]
Commack Plaza Route 25 and Route 454
(COM) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Commack Post Office Veterans Memorial
Highway (COM) [Added 2-23-1993]
HP
Commack Vets Lane Route 25 between Ruth
Boulevard and Old Indian Head Road (COM)
[Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Commerce Plaza 160 Adams Avenue (HPG)
[Added 9-12-2000]
FZ, HP
Community Hospital of Western Suffolk [Added 1-9-1990; repealed
2-20-1990]
Developmental Disabilities Institute 99
Hollywood Drive (SMT) [Added 9-21-1993]
FZ, HP
§ J-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § K-1
1:1247
Parking Area Regulations
Dogwood Elementary School Dogwood Drive
(SMT) [Added 6-24-1986]
FZ
Elliot Garden Apartments 35, 37 and 39 Elliot
Place [Added 10-3-1989]
FZ, HP
Expressway Shopping Center Commack Road
(CR4) north of the Long Island Expressway
(SR495) (COM)
FZ, HP, 4-hour limited
parking at all times
Fairfield at St. James Fairfield Drive (STJ)
[Amended 7-10-1984]
FZ, HP, no parking on all
interior roads within the
entire complex
Fairfield Properties 2171 Jericho Turnpike
(COM) [Added 5-3-1994]
HP
Fairfield Village Fairfield Way east of Commack
Road (CR4) (COM)
FZ, HP
Fort Salonga Shopping center Fort Salonga
Road (SR25A) (KPK)
FZ, HP
Great Hollow Junior High School Southern
Boulevard (NES) [Added 6-24-1986]
FZ
Harrows Route 25 and Ruth Boulevard (COM)
[Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Hauppauge Corporate Center 150 Motor
Parkway (HPG) [Added 2-23-1993]
FZ, HP
Hauppauge Shopping Center Route 347 and
Route 111 (HPG) [Added 1-9-1990]
FZ, HP
Heartland Industries 415 and 425 Oser Avenue
(HPG) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Hebrew Academy 525 Veterans Memorial
Highway (HPG) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Hidden Ponds Condominiums (SR347) (SMT)
[Added 12-3-1996]
FZ, HP
Howard Johnson Hotel Moreland Road and
Motor Parkway (COM) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Indian Trace (KPK) [Added 8-14-2001] FZ, HP
Insurance Plaza 1030 Jericho Turnpike (SMT)
[Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Joseph M. Barton Administration Building New
York Avenue (SMT) [Added 8-12-1986]
FZ
King Kullen Plaza Veterans Memorial Highway
north of Northern Parkway (COM) [Added
10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
§ K-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § K-1
1:1248
Parking Area Regulations
King Kullen Shopping Center Lake Avenue
(STJ) [Added 11-9-1989]
FZ, HP
Kings Park Shopping Center Southwest corner
of Indian Head Road (CR14) and Meadow Road
West (KPK) [Added 11-24-1987]
FZ, HP, 2-hour limited
parking at all times
Kingswood Gardens Church Street (KPK)
[Added 11-12-1991; amended 6-9-1992;
1-27-1998]
FZ
Lake Plaza Smithtown Boulevard (NES)
[Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Landview Apartment Complex 146 Church
Street (KPK)
FZ, HP
Lutheran Center for the Aging (SR25A) (SMT)
[Added 7-26-1988]
FZ, HP
Maple Commons Maple Avenue and Route 111
(SMT) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Mayfair Shopping Center Route 25 between
Walter Court and Mayfair Terrace (COM)
[Amended 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Mount Pleasant Elementary School Plaisted
Avenue (SMT) [Added 6-24-1986]
FZ
Nesaquake Intermediate School Edgewood
Avenue (STJ) [Added 6-24-1986]
FZ
Nesconset Elementary School Gibbs Pond Road
(NES) [Added 6-24-1986]
FZ
Nesconset Plaza Smithtown Boulevard (NES)
[Added 11-9-1989; amended 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
North Atlantic Industries, Inc. 60 Plant Avenue
(HPG) [Added 6-5-1990]
FZ, HP
Northgate Shopping Center Route 25 and Ruth
Boulevard (COM) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Oak Shopping Plaza Route 454 and Harned
Road (COM) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
O.T.B. Tela Race 110 Adams Avenue (HPG)
[Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Parish of the Holy Cross (NES) [Added
11-28-2000]
No parking on the north
side of the entrance from
Nichols Road through the
drop-off area. No parking
on the south side of the
exit from the parking area
to Nichols Road
§ K-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § K-1
1:1249
Parking Area Regulations
Pathmark Shopping Center Smithtown Bypass
(SR347) (NES)
FZ, HP
Price Club Crooked Hill Road (COM) [Added
10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Price Club 3000 Middle Country Road (NES)
[Added 3-24-1992]
FZ, HP
Price Club 3000 Route 25, Lake Grove (NES)
[Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Ralph J. Osgood Administration Building 101
Church Street (KPK) [Added 6-1-1993]
FZ, HP
Reckson Associates Main Street and Maple
Avenue (SMT) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
St. James Elementary School Lake Avenue
(STJ) [Added 6-24-1986]
FZ
St. Johnland Nursing Home 395 Sunken
Meadow Road (KPK) [Added 6-9-1992]
FZ, HP
Seamans Furniture Center 1000 Port Jefferson/
Nesconset Highway (NES) [Added 2-6-1990]
FZ, HP
Sheraton Long Island 110 Vanderbilt Motor
Parkway (SMT) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Shopping Center Route 347 and Alexander
Avenue, Lake Grove (NES) [Added
10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Shopping Center Smithtown Boulevard and
Southern Boulevard (NES) [Added
10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Shopping Center (Ace Hardware) Smithtown
Boulevard and Nichols Road (NES) [Added
10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Smithhaven Mall Middle County Road (SR25)
(NES)
FZ, HP
Smithaven Mall Route 25 and Route 347, Lake
Grove (NES) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Smithtown Elementary School Lawrence
Avenue (SMT) [Added 8-12-1986]
FZ
Smithtown High School East, Northern Boulevard (STJ) [Added
6-24-1986; repealed 1-12-1993]
Smithtown High School West Central Road
(SMT) [Added 6-24-1986]
FZ
Smithtown Middle School 10 School Street
(STJ) [Added 1-12-1993]
FZ, HP
§ K-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § K-1
1:1250
Parking Area Regulations
S. Rotondi & Sons, Associates, Moorewood
Mall Shopping Center, 975 Jericho Turnpike
(SMT) [Added 4-3-1990]
FZ, HP
Star Flea Market of Smithtown 291 West Main
Street (SMT) [Added 6-1-1993]
FZ, HP
Sterns Route 454 and Route 25 (COM) [Added
10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Strip Stores 908 Jericho Turnpike (SMT)
[Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Strip Stores 1020 Jericho Turnpike (SMT)
[Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Strip Stores Jericho Turnpike and Morewood
Drive (SMT) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Strip Stores Main Street and Maple Avenue
(SMT) [Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Strip Stores 281 West Main Street (SMT)
[Added 10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Tackan Elementary School Midwood Avenue
(NES) [Added 6-24-1986]
FZ
Tower Building 330 and 350 Vanderbilt Motor
Parkway (HPG) [Added 3-24-1987; amended
10-7-1997]
FZ, HP
Tri-County Flea Market [Added 6-5-1990; repealed 6-1-1993]
Universal Shopping Center [Repealed 11-24-1987]
Willow Lake Apartments 44 Route 25A (SMT)
[Added 6-7-1994]
HP
Willow Ridge at Smithtown Homeowners
Association Willow Ridge Drive (SMT) [Added
4-13-1999]
FZ, HP
Schedule L
TOWN PARKING AREAS
§ L-1. Town parking areas.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC4-2, the areas described below are
established as town parking areas, and the parking, stopping and standing
of vehicles in such areas shall be subject to the additional regulations and
restrictions indicated:
§ K-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § L-1
1:1251
Parking Area Regulations
Bellemeade
Avenue Parking
Area
Bellemeade
Avenue (SMT)
[Amended
5-5-1987]
Reserved parking for
handicapped, permit
required: 1 space
Brady Park Maple Avenue
(SMT) [Added
6-6-1989;
amended
6-28-2005]
Reserved parking for
handicapped, permit
required: 4 spaces
No parking more than 1/
2 hour after sunset to
sunrise, except for
parking during Townsanctioned
events or
pursuant to a valid
Town-issued permit
Brooksite Park Brooksite Drive
(SMT)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
None additional
Browns Road
Park
Browns Road
(NES)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
No parking more than 1/
2 hour after sunset to
sunrise, except for
parking during Townsanctioned
events or
pursuant to a valid
Town-issued permit
Burr Winkle
Park
Harvest Lane
(COM)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
No parking more than 1/
2 hour after sunset to
sunrise, except for
parking during Townsanctioned
events or
pursuant to a valid
Town-issued permit
Callahans
Beach
SR25A (KPK)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
No parking anytime On both sides of
main roadway from
entrance north to its
terminus
No standing anytime At northern terminus
of main roadway
Commack
Library
Indian Head
Road (CR14)
(COM)
No parking anytime Fire zone on the east
and west ends of the
building
§ L-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § L-1
1:1252
Parking Area Regulations
Reserved parking for
handicapped, permit
required
2 spaces
Cordwood Path
Beach
Cordwood Path
(Head of the
Harbor)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
None additional
Country Village
-- Crestwood
Park
Haig Place (KPK)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
No parking more than 1/
2 hour after sunset to
sunrise, except for
parking during Townsanctioned
events or
pursuant to a valid
Town-issued permit
East Hills Park Fifty Acre Road
South (SMT)
None additional
Edgewater Avenue Commuter Parking Area, Edgewater Avenue (SMT)
[Repealed 8-2-1986]
Fairview
Avenue
Commuter
Parking Lot
Atterbury Drive
(SMT)
No parking anytime On both sides of the
south lane of the
parking lot
Fairview
Avenue
Commuter
Parking Lot
Atterbury Drive
(SMT) [Added
2-4-1992]
No stopping anytime North side of north
driveway from 60
feet east of Atterbury
Drive west to
Atterbury Drive
Gaynor Park Woodlawn
Avenue (STJ)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
No parking more than 1/
2 hour after sunset to
sunrise, except for
parking during Townsanctioned
events or
pursuant to a valid
Town-issued permit
In southeast parking
area
Gibbs Pond
Park
Gibbs Pond Road
(NES)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
None additional
§ L-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § L-1
1:1253
Parking Area Regulations
Greengate Park Veterans
Memorial
Highway
(SR454) (SMT)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
None additional
Harrison Pond
Park
St. Johnland
Road (KPK)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
None additional
Hoyt Farm
Park
New Highway
(COM)
[Amended
7-13-1993;
6-28-2005]
Handicapped parking,
northernmost area;
15-minute parking,
dropoff area on roadway
connecting the parking
lots; No parking more
than 1/2 hour after
sunset to sunrise, except
for parking during
Town-sanctioned events
or pursuant to a valid
Town-issued permit
Kings Park
Bluff Beach
Old Dock Road
(KPK)
[Amended
7-27-2004;
6-28-2005]
No standing anytime Along main north/
south fence in front
of boat ramp
Resident/nonresident
parking area
Northernmost, upper
parking lot
Kings Park
Central
Business
District Parking
Lot
No parking, 6:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m., Monday
through Friday as
posted and designated
by the Director of Traffic
Safety
Renwick Avenue
(KPK)
[Amended
6-21-1994]
No parking in fire zones;
Reserved parking,
handicapped: 2 spaces
Kings Park
Central
Business
District Parking
Lot [Added
12-10-2002]
2-hour parking 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, as
posted and designated
by the Director of Traffic
Safety
§ L-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § L-1
1:1254
Parking Area Regulations
Kings Park
Commuter
Parking Area
North of Main
Street (SR25A)
(KPK)
[Amended
12-26-1989]
Commuter parking
areas (special permit
required) No parking,
5:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m.
Along western lot
line
Business District
parking, 23 stalls
along western lot
line
Kings Park
Library
Church Street
(KPK)
[Amended
6-23-1987;
12-26-1989]
2-hour parking, 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
On south side of
parking areas from
Church Street east
for 200 feet
On north side of
parking area from
Church Street east
for 125 feet
Town employee parking
only (permit required)
Along north lot line
from 127 feet east of
Church Street to 235
feet east of Church
Street (12 stalls)
Reserved parking for
handicapped, permit
required
2 spaces
No parking 5:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
On south side of
parking area from
Church Street east
for 200 feet
On north side of
parking area from
Church Street east
for 125 feet
Kings Park
Memorial Park
Cedar Street
(KPK)
No parking, 12:00
midnight to 6:00 a.m.
On west side of Park
along Avenue K
On east side of Park
along Cedar Street
Cedar Street
(KPK) [Added
6-6-1989]
Reserved parking for
handicapped, permit
required
2 spaces
§ L-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § L-1
1:1255
Parking Area Regulations
Kings Park
Railroad
Parking Area
Indian Head
Road (CR14)
(KPK)
[Amended
10-22-1985;
12-8-1987]
2-hour parking, 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
In area nearest
Indian Head Road
(CR14)
Reserved parking for
handicapped, permit
required
9 spaces
Landing
Avenue Park
Landing Avenue
(SMT)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
None additional
Laurel Drive
Park
Laurel Drive
(COM)
None additional
Little Africa
Beach
Long Beach
Road (NSQ)
No parking anytime In fire zones at
Bulkhead
Long Beach Long Beach
Road (NSQ)
No parking anytime On north side of
main parking field
along Long Beach
Road
Long Beach
Road (STJ)
[Added
5-24-2007]
On south side of
Main Parking Field
along Long Beach
Road
Maple Avenue,
address No. 65,
Personnel
Building (SMT)
[Added
3-24-1987]
Reserved parking for
handicapped, remaining
spaces to be
designated by Di- rector
of Traffic Safety
Maple Avenue
Park
Maple Avenue
(SMT)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
No parking more than 1/
2 hour after sunset to
sunrise, except for
parking during Townsanctioned
events or
pursuant to a valid
Town-issued permit
Maple Avenue
Parking Area
Maple Avenue
(SMT)
[Amended
8-27-1985]
Town employee parking
(special permit
required)
Along west lot line
2-hour parking, 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
In designated areas
No parking anytime Along west lot line
§ L-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § L-1
1:1256
Parking Area Regulations
Reserved parking for
handicapped, permit
required
2 spaces
Mills Pond
House
Mills Pond Road
(STJ) [Added
10-9-1984]
Reserved parking for
handicapped, permit
required
1 space
Morewood
Park
Paul Lane (COM)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
None additional
Nesconset
Library
Smithtown
Boulevard (NES)
None additional
New York
Avenue Parking
Field
New York
Avenue (SMT)
Town employee parking
(special permit
required)
On the south,
southwest and east
sides of the parking
area
Along the northern
lot line behind 124
West Main Street
Pine Cone
Woods Park
Garvey Drive
(HPG)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
No parking more than 1/
2 hour after sunset to
sunrise, except for
parking during Townsanctioned
events or
pursuant to a valid
Town-issued permit
St. James
Commuter
Parking Lot
Lake Avenue
(STJ) [Added
2-6-1996]
Commuter parking area
(special permit
required:
No parking anytime On south lot line
from 180 feet west of
Lake Avenue east for
120 feet.
Northwest corner of
parking lot south for
230 feet.
Reserved parking,
railroad employees
4 spaces
Reserved parking,
handicapped
2 spaces
St. James Railroad Parking Area Lake Avenue (STJ) [Repealed 2-6-1996]
§ L-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § L-1
1:1257
Parking Area Regulations
Senior Citizens
Complex (SMT)
[Amended
6-4-1985]
No parking fire zone Along the northerly
building line
No parking anytime East side of access
road from 40 feet
south of Jericho
Turnpike (SR25)
south for 310 feet
Reserved parking for
the handicapped (permit
required)
South side of the
entrance to the
parking lot, south for
50 feet (4 spaces)
Along the north
property line from
the east side of the
access road west for
38 feet (3 spaces)
Short Beach Boney Lane
(NSQ)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
No standing at time On both sides of
circle driveway at
main building
Smithtown
Landing
Country Club
Landing Avenue
(SMT)
[Amended
6-4-1985;
7-10-1990]
No parking anytime Around both sides of
the main circle
driveway
Town employee parking
(special permit
required)
10 spaces.
Handicapped
parking spaces and
parking prohibitions
as posted and
designated by the
Director of Traffic
Safety
Smithtown
Library
North Country
Road (SR25A)
(SMT)
Reserved parking for
handicapped (permit
required)
2 spaces
Smithtown
Railroad
Parking Area
Redwood Lane
(SMT)
[Amended
4-21-1987]
Commuter parking area
(special permit
required): 1
In area south of
Redwood Lane between
Landing
Avenue and Bank
Avenue, adjacent to
Redwood Lane
§ L-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § L-1
1:1258
Parking Area Regulations
No parking 5:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
In area south of
Redwood Lane between
Landing
Avenue and Bank
Avenue along
southerly lot
Smithtown
Railroad
Station Parking
Field (SMT)
[Amended
8-11-1987]
Commuter parking area
(special permit
required)
Along south side of
the tracks. east and
west of the station
No parking anytime
[Added 2-4-2020]
Along the south
side of the parking
field from Scott
Lane 120 feet east
to the end of the
parking field
No parking anytime Along the south side
of the parking field
from 100 feet west of
Scott Lane, east to
the westerly
terminus
Reserved parking for
the handicapped (permit
required), number of
spaces shall be
designated by the
Director of Traffic
Safety
Town Hall
Parking Area
Redwood Lane (SMT) [Repealed 7-26-1994]
Town Hall
Parking Area
Redwood Lane
(SMT) [Added
7-26-1994]
Handicapped parking
spaces and parking
regulations as posted
and designated by the
Director of Traffic
Safety
§ L-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § L-1
1:1259
Parking Area Regulations
Valmont Park Marie Crescent
(COM)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
No parking more than 1/
2 hour after sunset to
sunrise, except for
parking during Townsanctioned
events or
pursuant to a valid
Town-issued permit
Veterans
Memorial Park
Moriches Road
(STJ) [Amended
6-28-2005]
No parking more than 1/
2 hour after sunset to
sunrise, except for
parking during Townsanctioned
events or
pursuant to a valid
Town-issued permit
Veterans
Memorial Park
Moriches Road
(STJ) [Added
9-7-1993]
Reserved parking for
handicapped (permit
required) 5 spaces.
No parking anytime Both sides parking
field entrance
drivewa
Both sides access
driveway to
northeast parking
field
Whitman
Hollow Park
Map Lane
(COM)
[Amended
6-28-2005]
No parking more than 1/
2 hour after sunset to
sunrise, except for
parking during Townsanctioned
events or
pursuant to a valid
Town-issued permit
Schedule M
TRUCK EXCLUSIONS (2 1/2 TONS)
§ M-1. Truck exclusions.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC5-1, all trucks, commercial
vehicles, tractors or tractor-trailer combinations in excess of 2 1/2 tons'
unladen weight are excluded from the streets or parts thereof described
below.
§ L-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § M-1
1:1260
Name of Street Limits
Alexander Avenue (NES) From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to Nichols
Road
Apple Lane (COM) From Veterans Memorial Highway
(SR454) to Crocus Lane
Arlington Avenue (STJ) From Middle Country Road (SR25) to
Roseville Avenue
Astor Avenue (STJ) From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to
Woodlawn Avenue
Astor Court (COM) From Wyandanch Boulevard to Peony
Lane
Atterbury Drive (SMT) [Added
10-4-1988]
From Landing Avenue to Jericho
Turnpike
Autumn Drive (HPG) From Veterans Memorial Highway
(SR454) to Glenwood Drive
Beechwood Lane (COM) From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to Elder
Drive
Bellemeade Avenue (SMT)
[Added 6-8-1999]
From Main Street (SR25/25A) to
Blydenburgh Avenue
Birch Road (KPK) From St. Johnland Road to Washington
Drive
Blydenburgh Avenue (SMT) From Landing Avenue to River Road
Bowers Lane (SMT) From Maple Avenue to New York Avenue
Bread and Cheese Hollow Road
(KPK)
From Pulaski Road (CR11) to SR25A
Broadway (SMT) From Hauppauge Road (SR111) to Maple
Avenue
Brooks Avenue (NES) [Added
7-10-1990]
Smithtown Boulevard to Pierson Court
Brooksite Drive (SMT) From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to
Smithtown Bypass (SR347)
Browns Road (NES) [Added
6-24-1986; amended
7-8-1986]
From Hudson Avenue to Middle Country
Road (SR25)
Burgundy Lane (NES) From Lake Avenue South to Southern
Boulevard
Burr Avenue (KPK) [Added
3-4-1997]
From Main Street (SR25A) to Lou
Avenue
Cambon Avenue (STJ) From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to
Moriches Road
Cambon Place (NES) [Added
8-12-1986]
From Middle Country Road (SR25) to
Smithtown Bypass (SR347)
§ M-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § M-1
1:1261
Name of Street Limits
Cardinal Lane (HPG) [Added
2-6-1990]
From Old Willets Path to New Highway
Carlson Avenue (KPK) From Main Street (SR25A) to First
Avenue
Cedar Street (COM) From Lincoln Avenue to Parkway Drive
North
Cornell Drive (COM) From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to Shelley
Court
Darling Avenue (SMT) From Hauppauge Road (SR111) to Maple
Avenue
Dawson Avenue (KPK) [Added
1-24-1989]
From Main Street (SR25A) to Lou
Avenue
Dorset Way (COM) From Veterans Memorial Highway
(SR454) to Starlight Drive
Eagle Lane (HPG) [Added
2-6-1990]
From Old Willets Path to Falcon Drive
Eckernkamp Drive (SMT)
[Added 5-25-2004]
From Landing Avenue to Old Landers
Court
Ellen Place (KPK) From Indian Head Road (CR14) to First
Avenue
Fernwood Drive (COM) From Veterans Memorial Highway
(SR454) to Ronde Drive
Fifth Street (STJ) [Added
9-24-1985]
From Northern Boulevard to Lake
Avenue
Fifty Acre Road South (SMT)
[Added 9-11-2007]
From Middle Country Road (SR 25) to
Lindner Place
First Avenue (KPK) [Repealed
9-6-1988]
First Avenue (KPK) [Added
9-6-1988]
From East Northport Road to Ellen Place
First Avenue (STJ) [Added
6-5-1990]
From Woodlawn Avenue to Railroad
Avenue
Florence Street (NES) [Added
11-13-1984]
From Lake Avenue South to Meryl Lane
Florida Avenue (COM) From Harned Road to its easterly
terminus
Fourth Avenue (KPK) [Added
9-6-1988]
From Old Commack Road to Wartburg
Court
Fourth Street (STJ) [Added
9-24-1985]
From Lake Avenue to Lincoln Avenue
§ M-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § M-1
1:1262
Name of Street Limits
Francis Street (NES) [Added
11-13-1984; amended
7-10-1990]
From Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) to
Gaynor Avenue
Franklin Drive (SMT) From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to Howell
Drive
Frank Street (STM) [Added
3-12-1985]
From St. Johnland Road (SR25A) to St.
Nicholas Avenue
Gardiner Road (SMT) [Added
5-24-1988; amended
6-21-1988]
From Meadow Road to Ridge Road
Gatewood Drive (HPG)
[Amended 9-6-1988]
From Veterans Memorial Highway
(SR454) to Cloister Street
Gaynor Avenue (NES) [Added
11-13-1984]
From Lake Avenue South to Francis
Street
Gibbs Pond Road (NES) [Added
6-24-1986; amended
7-8-1986]
From Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) to
Lake Avenue South
Grandview Lane (SMT) From Old Willets Path to Ledgewood
Drive
Grant Avenue (STJ) [Added
9-24-1985]
From Woodlawn Avenue to Railroad
Avenue
Greenwich Lane (SMT) From Parnell Drive to Morewood Drive
Hallock Avenue (SMT) [Added
4-21-1997]
From Terry Road (CR16) to Smithtown
Bypass (SR347)
Hallock Avenue (SMT)
[Repealed 4-21-1997]
Harned Road (COM) [Amended
7-7-1981; 2-28-1984]
From Vanderbilt Motor Parkway (CR67)
to Veterans Memorial Highway (SR454)
Harvard Avenue (SMT) From Maple Avenue west to its terminus
Havemeyer Lane (COM) From Town Line Road to Ruth Boulevard
Hawthorne Road (KPK) From SR25A to Washington Drive
Helen Avenue (SMT) From Smithtown Bypass (SR347) to
Smithtown Boulevard
Heritage Place (NES) From Lake Avenue South to Heritage
Place South
Hill Avenue (NES) [Added
4-11-1989]
From Gibbs Pond Road to Spectacle Lake
Drive
Hillside Avenue (STJ) From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to
Woodlawn Avenue
Howell Drive (SMT) From North Country Road (SR25A) to
Franklin Drive
§ M-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § M-1
1:1263
Name of Street Limits
Hubbell Street (COM) From Town Line Road to Ruth Boulevard
Hudson Drive (KPK) [Added
9-6-1988]
From Indian Head Road (CR14) to First
Avenue
Indian Head Road (CR14) (KPK)
[Added 11-13-1984;
amended 1-22-1985;
repealed 2-7-1995]
Jackson Avenue North (STJ)
[Added 7-24-1990]
From Woodlawn Avenue to Railroad
Avenue
Jefferson Avenue (STJ) From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to
Railroad Avenue
John Street (SMT) [Added
3-12-1985]
From St. Johnland Road (SR25A) to St.
Nicholas Avenue
Joseph Place (NES) From Town Line Road (CR76) to
Smithtown Boulevard (CR16)
Juniper Road (KPK) [Added
4-29-2003]
From Main Street (SR25A) to St.
Johnland Road
Kings Park Road (COM) [Added
4-5-1988]
From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to Indian
Head Road (CR14)
Lake Avenue South (NES)
[Repealed 10-3-1989]
Lake Avenue South (NES)
[Added 10-3-1989]
From Town Line Road (CR76) to
Smithtown Bypass (SR347)
Lancaster Avenue (NES)
[Added 7-10-1990]
Smithtown Boulevard to Pierson Court
Landing Avenue (SMT) From Edgewood Avenue to Landing Road
Landing Road (KPK) From St. Johnland Road to Landing
Avenue
Larsen Avenue (SMT) From Terry Road (CR16) south to
Hallock Avenue
Lawrence Road (KPK)
[Amended 5-7-1985;
repealed 6-27-1995]
Lawrence Road (KPK) [Added
6-27-1995]
From Yale Lane to Old Northport Road
Lillian Drive (NES) [Added
8-23-1988]
From Smithtown Boulevard to Steuben
Boulevard
Lincoln Avenue (STJ) [Added
9-24-1985]
From Woodlawn Avenue to Railroad
Avenue
Lincoln Avenue (COM) From Veterans Memorial Highway
(SR454) to Cedar Street
§ M-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § M-1
1:1264
Name of Street Limits
Lindner Place (SMT) [Added
9-11-2007]
From Middle Country Road (SR 25) to
Fifty Acre Road South
Lou Avenue (KPK) From Pulaski - East Northport Road
(CR11) to Dawson Street
Maplelawn Drive (SMT) From Veterans Memorial Highway
(SR454) to Valley Wood Road
Margaret Avenue (NES)
[Added 2-6-1990]
From Nichols Road to Lake Avenue
South
Marie Crescent (COM) [Added
6-4-1991]
From Parkway Drive North to New
Highway
Mayfair Road (NES) [Added
11-10-2009]
From Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) to
Town Line Road (CR76)
Mayfair Terrace (COM) From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to Astor
Court
Meadow Glen Road North (KPK) From Pulaski - East Northport Road
(CR11) to Sunken Meadow Road
Meadow Road (KPK) (SMT) From Indian Head Road (CR14) to
Jericho Turnpike (SR25)
Meadow Road West (KPK) From Indian Head Road (CR14) to First
Avenue
Melwood Drive (COM) From Vanderbilt Motor Parkway (CR67)
to Pinewood Drive
Midwood Avenue (NES) From Gibbs Pond Road to Nichols Road
Mills Pond Road (STJ) [Added
6-22-1993]
From North Country Road (SR25A) to
Moriches Road
Mobrey Lane (SMT) From Old Willets Path to Ledgewood
Drive
Mon Repose Lane (NES)
[Added 1-28-1992]
From Rosevale Avenue to Smithtown
Boulevard
Montclair Avenue (STJ) From Middle Country Road (SR25) to
Rutherford Street
Morewood Drive (SMT) From Jericho Turnpike to Plymouth
Boulevard
Mount Pleasant Road (SMT) From Smithtown Branch Village line to
Town Line Road
Nesconset Avenue (NES) From Lake Avenue South to Midwood
Avenue
New Highway (COM) From Commack Road (town line) to
Veterans Memorial Highway
New York Avenue (SMT) From Main Street (SR25, 25A) to
Wildwood Lane
§ M-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § M-1
1:1265
Name of Street Limits
Nimitz Road (STJ) [Added
7-11-1995]
From Lake Avenue to Jefferson Avenue
North Avenue (SMT) From Terry Road (CR16) south to its
terminus
Northern Boulevard (STJ)
[Added 8-22-1989; amended
10-3-1989]
From North Country Road (SR25A) to
Rutherford Street
North Hoffman Lane (SMT) From Town Line Road to South Plaisted
Avenue
Oaklawn Drive (COM) From Veterans Memorial Highway
(SR454) to Valley Wood Road
Oak Street (STJ) [Added
9-8-1987]
From Lake Avenue to Astor Avenue
Old Commack Road (COM/KPK) From Scholar Lane to Pulaski - East
Northport Road (CR11)
Old Indian Head Road (COM) From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to Ruth
Boulevard
Old Indian Head Road (KPK)
[Added 8-23-1988]
From Indian Head Road to Old Northport
Road
Old Northport Road (KPK) From Indian Head Road (CR14) to
Meadow Road
Old Road (KPK) From Old Indian Head Road to Old
Northport Road
Park Avenue (KPK) From Main Street (SR25A) to Lou
Avenue
Parkway Drive North (COM) From Cedar Street to Harned Road
Parkway Drive North (COM)
[Added 6-4-1991]
From New Highway to Harned Road
Parkway Drive South (COM) From Oser Avenue to Florida Avenue
Parkway Drive South (COM) From Ricefield Lane to New Highway
Parnell Drive (SMT) From Morewood Drive to Plymouth
Boulevard
Patton Road (STJ) [Added
7-11-1995]
From Lake Avenue to Jefferson Avenue
Penguin Lane (COM) From Veterans Memorial Highway
(SR454) to Ronde Drive
Pine Hollow Road (HPG)
[Added 9-6-1988]
From New Highway to Autumn Drive
Pine Street (STJ) [Added
9-8-1987]
From Lake Avenue to Sunny Road
§ M-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § M-1
1:1266
Name of Street Limits
Plaisted Avenue (SMT) From Smithtown Bypass (SR347) to
Cross Street
Plymouth Boulevard (SMT)
[Added 3-7-1995]
From Jericho Turnpike to Old Northport
Road
Plymouth Boulevard (SMT)
[Added 5-24-1988; amended
6-21-1988; repealed
3-7-1995]
Prospect Street (SMT) [Added
2-21-1989]
From Edgewood Avenue to Atterbury
Drive
Railroad Avenue (STJ) [Added
7-24-1990]
From Jackson Avenue North to
Washington Avenue
Red Leaf Lane (COM) From Vanderbilt Motor Parkway (CR67)
to Deepdale Drive
Redwood Lane (SMT) [Added
5-15-2001]
From West Main Street (SR25/25A) to
Landing Avenue
Rhoda Avenue (NES) [Added
8-31-1999]
From Terry Road to Southern Boulevard
Ridge Road (SMT) [Added
5-24-1988; amended
6-21-1988]
From Gardiner Road to Plymouth
Boulevard
River Heights Drive (SMT)
[Added 5-11-2004]
From St. Johnland Road (SR25A) to
Patricia Street
Rose Street (SMT) From SR25A to Landing Avenue
Roseville Avenue (STJ) From Orchard Avenue to Lake Avenue
Rosewood Road (KPK) [Added
3-12-1985]
From Landing Road to Violet Road
Roxbury Drive (COM) From Indian Head Road (CR14) to Byron
Road
Ruth Boulevard (COM) From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to Vance
Street
Rutherford Street (STJ) From Montclair Avenue to Arlington
Avenue
Ruth Street (SMT) [Added
3-12-1985]
From St. Johnland Road (SR25A) to St.
Nicholas Avenue
St. Johnland Road (KPK)
[Added 3-13-2001]
From East Main Street (SR25A) to Old
Dock Road
Schoolhouse Road (NES)
[Added 7-26-1988]
From Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) to
Brookhaven Town line
Sequoia Drive (SMT) From Smithtown Bypass (SR347) to
Saturn Boulevard
§ M-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § M-1
1:1267
Name of Street Limits
Seventh Street (STJ) [Added
9-24-1985]
From Northern Boulevard to Lake
Avenue
Sherwood Drive (STJ) [Added
7-11-1995]
From Lake Avenue to Jefferson Avenue
Shinbone Lane (COM) Shirley
Court (COM)
From Vanderbilt Motor Parkway (CR67)
to Deepdale Drive From Mayfair
Shopping Center south driveway to
Walter Court
Sixth Street (STJ) [Added
9-24-1985]
From Lake Avenue to Grant Avenue
Somers Lane (COM) From Half Hollow Road to Indian Head
Road (CR14)
South Avenue (SMT) From Terry Road (CR16) south to its
terminus
Southern Boulevard (NES) From Town Line Road to Smithtown
Bypass (SR347)
South Plaisted Avenue (SMT) From Smithtown Bypass (SR347) to
Mount Pleasant Road
Spectacle Lake Drive (NES)
[Added 4-11-1989]
From Smithtown Boulevard to Hill
Avenue
Squire Lane (KPK) [Added
5-7-1985]
From St. Johnland Road to Bowman Lane
Steuben Boulevard (NES) From Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) to
Gibbs Pond Road
Summerset Drive (SMT)
[Added 5-11-2004]
From St. Johnland Road (SR25A) to Noel
Place
Sunken Meadow Road (KPK) From Fort Salonga Road (SR25A) to
Bread and Cheese Hollow Road
Sunny Road (STJ) From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to Oak
Street
Takats Lane (STJ) [Added
12-9-2003]
From Lake Avenue to Jefferson Avenue
Talbot Lane (SMT) From Morewood Drive to Greenwich
Road
Tern Place (COM) From Veterans Memorial Highway
(SR454) to Ronde Drive
Terry Road (NES) From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to Terry
Road (CR16)
Terry Road (NES) From Smithtown Boulevard (CR16) to
Town Line Road (CR76)
§ M-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § M-1
1:1268
Name of Street Limits
Third Street (STJ) [Added
9-24-1985]
From Railroad Avenue to Lake Avenue
Townline Road (COM)(KPK)
[Added 11-13-1984;
amended 9-6-2011]
From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to Pulaski
Road (CR11)
Tredwell Avenue (STJ) [Added
10-3-1989]
From Woodlawn Avenue to Roseville
Avenue
Valmont Lane (COM) [Added
6-4-1991]
From New Highway to Abbey Drive
Verbena Drive (COM) From Mayfair Shopping Center east
driveway to Magnolia Drive
Walter Court (COM) From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to Zinnia
Court
Walter Court (COM) From Wyandanch Boulevard to Laurel
Lane
Wanda Lane (SMT) From Town Line Road to Torlen Court
Washington Avenue (STJ) From Woodlawn Avenue to Railroad
Avenue
Washington Boulevard (SMT)
[Added 5-24-1988; amended
6-21-1988]
From Plymouth Boulevard to Kings Park
Road
White Avenue (STJ) [Added
1-24-1995]
From Middle County Road (SR25) to
Sailer Street
Wichard Boulevard (SMT)
[Added 5-24-1988; amended
6-21-1988]
From Plymouth Boulevard to Kings Park
Road
Wicks Road (COM) [Added
6-4-1991]
From New Highway to Fisher Road
Wildwood Lane (SMT) From Juniper Avenue to Maple Avenue
Wilson Avenue (NES) From Lake Avenue South to Heritage
Place South
Wyandanch Boulevard (COM)
[Added 6-24-1986]
From Jericho Turnpike (SR25) to
Veterans Memorial Highway (SR454)
Schedule M1
TRUCK EXCLUSIONS (5 TONS)
§ M1-1. Truck exclusions. [Added 3-9-2004]
In accordance with the provisions of § TC5-1, all trucks, commercial
vehicles, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations in excess of 5 tons'
§ M-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § M1-1
1:1269
unladen weight are hereby excluded from the streets and highways, or parts
thereof, described below.
Name of Street Limits
Edgewood Avenue
(SMT)
From West Main Street (SR25/25A) to Village of
Head of the Harbor Village line (225 feet +/- east
of Tusa Court)
Lake Avenue (STJ) From North Country Road (SR25A) to Middle
Country Road (SR25)
Lake Avenue South
(NES)
From Middle Country Road (SR25) to Smithtown
Bypass (SR347)
Maple Avenue (SMT) From West Main Street (SR25/25A) to Hauppauge
Road (SR111)
Mills Pond Road (STJ) From North Country Road (SR25A) to Moriches
Road
Moriches Road (STJ) From North Country Road (SR25A) to Brookhaven
Town Line
Oakside Road (SMT) From St. Johnland Road (SR25A) to Landing
Avenue
Woodlawn Avenue
(STJ)
From North Country Road (SR25A) to Moriches
Road
Schedule N
PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
§ N-1. Parking of commercial vehicles. [Amended 9-6-1983 by L.L.
No. 4-1983; 6-25-1985 by L.L. No. 8-1985]
In accordance with the provisions of § TC5-2, all commercial vehicles and
trucks with unladen weights in excess of 2 1/2 tons are prohibited from
parking or stopping on the streets or parts thereof, described below, except
for loading and unloading.
Name of Street/
Side Location Hours/Days
Lisa Court
(NES)/Both
From South Hillside Avenue to the
terminus
All
Maple Glen Lane
(NES)/North and
South
From Southern Boulevard to a point
1,200 feet west
All
§ M1-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § N-1
1:1270
Name of Street/
Side Location Hours/Days
Pines/All
Highways/Both
Within the bounds of the south side of
Jericho Turnpike (SR25); the west
side of Wyandanch Boulevard north of
Shirley Court; the south side of
Shirley Court west of Wyandanch
Boulevard; the west side of Broadview
- Valley Wood Road; the north side of
Veterans Memorial Highway (SR454);
the east side of Old Willets Path; and
the east side of Croft Lane (PNS)
[Amended 2-5-1985]
All
Summit Drive
(NES)/Both
From Smithtown Boulevard to
Sheppard Lane
All
Schedule O
WEIGHT LIMITS ON BRIDGES
§ O-1. Weight limits on bridges.
In accordance with the provisions of § TC5-3, all vehicles in excess of the
posted gross vehicle weight limit are excluded from the bridges or elevated
structures described below.
Location
Capacity
(tons) Posted
Brooksite Drive Bridge over
the Long Island Rail Road
(SMT)
10 Southbound on Brooksite Drive at
Jericho Turnpike (SR25, 25A);
northbound on Brooksite Drive at
Edgewater Avenue
Land Avenue Bridge over
the Nissequogue River
(SMT)
10 Northbound on Landing Avenue at
Edgewood Avenue; southbound on
Landing Avenue at Eckernkamp
Drive
Traffic Code Disposition List
Chapter TCDL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ N-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TCDL-1
1:1271
§ TCDL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-27-2004 Traffic control signals;
parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. A; Sch. J
L.L. No.
5-2004
2-24-2004 Commercial vehicles: weight
limits amendment
Ch. 5
2-24-2004 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
3-9-2004 Truck exclusions Sch. M1
3-23-2004 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
4-13-2004 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
4-27-2004 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
5-11-2004 Parking, stopping and
standing; truck exclusions
Sch. J; Sch. M
5-25-2004 Stop and yield intersections;
truck exclusions
Sch. G; Sch. M
6-8-2004 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
6-22-2004 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
L.L. No.
6-2004
7-27-2004 Off-street parking areas
amendment
Ch. 4
7-27-2004 Parking, stopping and
standing; Town parking
areas
Sch. J; Sch. L
8-10-2004 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
L.L. No.
7-2004
9-14-2004 General provisions
amendment; parking
regulations amendment
Chs. 1 and 3
10-12-2004 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
11-9-2004 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
12-28-2004 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
2-8-2005 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
2-22-2005 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
L.L. No.
4-2005
6-12-2005 Off-street parking areas
amendment
Ch. 4
3-8-2005 School speed limits; parking,
stopping and standing
Sch. I; Sch. J
§ TCDL-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § TCDL-1
1:1272
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-12-2005 Stop and yield intersections;
parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. G; Sch. J
5-10-2005 Prohibited turns; parking,
stopping and standing
Sch. C; Sch. J
5-31-2005 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
6-28-2005 Town parking areas Sch. L
6-28-2005 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
8-9-2005 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
8-23-2005 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
10-11-2005 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
10-25-2005 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
11-8-205 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
11-22-2005 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
12-13-2005 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
1-24-2006 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
2-28-2006 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
3-21-2006 Traffic control signals; stop
and yield intersections;
parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. A; Sch. G;
Sch. J
4-4-2006 Stop and yield intersections;
parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. G; Sch. J
4-18-2006 Speed limits; school speed
limits
Sch. H; Sch. I
5-9-2006 Traffic control signals;
parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. A; Sch. J
5-23-2006 Traffic control signals;
prohibited turns; parking,
stopping and standing
Sch. A; Sch. C;
Sch. J
6-13-2006 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
6-27-2006 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
§ TCDL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TCDL-1
1:1273
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-11-2006 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
8-22-2006 Prohibited turns; one-way
streets; parking, stopping
and standing
Sch. C; Sch. D;
Sch. J
9-12-2006 Turns on red signal; stop and
yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing
Sch. B; Sch. G;
Sch. J
9-26-2006 Prohibited turns; stop and
yield intersections; parking,
stopping and standing
Sch. C; Sch. G;
Sch. J
10-10-2006 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
10-24-2006 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
11-21-2006 Stop and yield intersections;
parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. G; Sch. J
12-5-2006 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
1-9-2007 Stop and yield intersections;
parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. G; Sch. J
1-18-2007 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
2-7-2007 Stop and yield intersections;
parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. G; Sch. J
2-22-2007 Traffic control devices Sch. A
3-13-2007 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
3-29-2007 Stop and yield intersections;
parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. G; Sch. J
4-26-2007 Stop and yield intersections;
parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. G; Sch. J
5-8-2007 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
5-24-2007 Parking, stopping and
standing; Town parking
areas
Sch. J; Sch. L
9-11-2007 Stop and yield intersections;
truck exclusions
Sch. G; Sch. M
§ TCDL-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § TCDL-1
1:1274
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-25-2007 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
11-13-2007 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
11-29-2007 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
3-11-2008 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
5-22-2008 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
6-10-2008 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
8-12-2008 Lane use designations; stop
and yield intersections;
parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. F; Sch. G;
Sch. J
12-2-2008 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
12-18-2008 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
1-22-2009 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
3-26-2009 Stop and yield intersections;
parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. G; Sch. J
4-23-2009 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
8-11-2009 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
9-8-2009 Stop and yield intersections;
parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. G; Sch. J
11-10-2009 Truck exclusions Sch. M
12-1-2009 Traffic control signals Sch. A
12-17-2009 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
1-21-2010 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
4-22-2010 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
7-13-2010 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
8-17-2010 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
9-7-2010 School speed limits; parking,
stopping and standing
Sch. I; Sch. J
10-18-2010 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
§ TCDL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TCDL-1
1:1275
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-14-2010 School speed limits; parking,
stopping and standing
Sch. I; Sch. J
3-24-2011 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
4-5-2011 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
4-5-2011 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
5-10-2011 Turns on red signal; lane use
designations
Sch. B; Sch. F
8-9-2011 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
9-6-2011 Stop and yield intersections;
parking, stopping and
standing; truck exclusions
Sch. G; Sch. J;
Sch. M
9-15-2011 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
12-13-2011 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
1-19-2012 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
2-7-2012 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
3-6-2012 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
5-1-2012 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
9-20-2012 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
10-25-2012 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
2-5-2013 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
2-28-2013 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
3-5-2013 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
5-23-2013 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
8-15-2013 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
12-17-2013 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
3-20-2014 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
5-6-2014 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
§ TCDL-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § TCDL-1
1:1276
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-22-2014 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
7-15-2014 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
9-9-2014 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
9-9-2014 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
L.L. No.
1-2014
9-9-2014 General provisions
amendment; parking
regulations amendment
Chs. TC1; TC3
10-3-2014 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
1-22-2015 Prohibited turns Sch. C
1-22-2015 Speed limits Sch. H
3-3-2015 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
4-7-2015 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
5-21-2015 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
6-18-2015 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
6-18-2015 Prohibited turns Sch. C
8-11-2015 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
9-24-2015 Parking, stopping and
standing
Parking, stopping
and standing
11-3-2015 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
11-3-2015 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
11-3-2015 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
11-19-2015 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
11-19-2015 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
11-19-2015 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
12-15-2015 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
1-21-2016 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
3-17-2016 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
§ TCDL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TCDL-1
1:1277
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-3-2016 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
5-3-2016 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
8-9-2016 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
8-9-2016 Turns on red signal Sch. B
9-6-2016 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
9-6-2016 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
11-1-2016 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
1-19-2017 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
2-7-2017 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
3-7-2017 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
4-27-2017 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
5-25-2017 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
6-22-2017 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
8-8-2017 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
9-5-2017 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
11-7-2017 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
12-12-2017 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
2-6-2018 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
2-22-2018 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
2-22-2018 Parking, stopping and
standing
Sch. J
2-22-2018 Stop and yield intersections Sch. G
4-10-2018 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment
Sch. G
4-26-2018 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment
Sch. G
§ TCDL-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § TCDL-1
1:1278
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-8-2018 Prohibited Turns
Amendment
Sch. C
7-17-2018 Parking, Stopping and
Standing Amendment
Sch. J
8-14-2018 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment
Sch. G
8-14-2018 Traffic Control Signals
Amendment
Sch. A
9-4-2018 Parking, Stopping and
Standing Amendment
Sch. J
9-4-2018 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment
Sch. G
10-9-2018 Parking, Stopping and
Standing Amendment
Sch. J
4-9-2019 Parking, Stopping and
Standing Amendment
Sch. J
4-25-2019 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment
Sch. G
5-7-2019 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment
Sch. G
6-11-2019 Parking, Stopping and
Standing Amendment
Sch. J
7-16-2019 Parking, Stopping and
Standing Amendment
Sch. J
7-16-2019 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment
Sch. G
7-16-2019 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment
Sch. G
9-3-2019 Parking, Stopping and
Standing Amendment
Sch. J
9-3-2019 Stop and Yield Intersections
Amendment
Sch. G
§ TCDL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § TCDL-1
1:1279
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1-23-2020 Parking,
Stopping and
Standing
Amendment
J 75
1-23-2020 Stop and
Yield
Intersections
Amendment
G 75
2-4-2020 Town Parking
Areas
Amendment
L 75
3-19-2020 Parking,
Stopping and
Standing
Amendment
J 75
6-9-2020 Parking,
Stopping and
Standing
Amendment
J 75
6-9-2020 Stop and
Yield
Intersections
Amendment
G 75
§ TCDL-1 SMITHTOWN CODE § TCDL-1
1:1280



ZONING
322 Attachment 3
Town of Smithtown
[Amended 2-25-1969; 2-1-1972; 11-12-1974; 6-7-1977; 7-26-1977;
8-28-1984; 9-11-1984; 8-22-1989; 2-13-1990; 11-24-1992; 1-25-1994; 2-22-1999; 7-2-2008; 3-8-2011; 10-2-2012; 3-17-2016; 11-6-2018]
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS: TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS

Use R-43 R-21 R-15 R-10 R10S RM-7 R-6 TownHouse PRD RC Retirement Community RM-GA Garden Apartments
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit 43,560 21,780 15,000 10,000 7,500 7,260 7,260 4,356 2,500
Minimum lot frontage
at setback line (feet)
150 100 100 75 501,3 100 100 200 200
Minimum road
frontage (feet)
40 40 40 40 40 100 100 40 40
Minimum front yard
depth (feet)
609
509
459
404,9 25 100 100 60 60
Minimum rear yard
depth (feet)
100 75 60 504
35 50 50 60 60
Minimum side yard
width
Any 12
 (feet) 24 16 16 12 8 50 50 60 60
Total of both (feet) 60 34 34 28 18 100 100 120 120
NOTES:
1 Lots which front on streets of inadequate right-of-way width, as specified by the Town of Smithtown, may be reduced in area by not more than 10% in order to comply with right-of-way requirements.
2 For garage entrances in side yards, see § 322-15D.
3 Not including land required for public facilities (such as highways, recharge basins, parks and similar facilities), as determined in the review of subdivision by the Planning Board.
4 Except for lots 110 feet or less in depth which lawfully existed prior to February 9, 1950; in this case, the front yard shall be 25 feet and the rear yard shall be 35 feet.
6 Provided that all parking and dimensional requirements are met.
7 Or 750 square feet, whichever is less. This does not include decks or pools.
8 Two feet for one accessory building less than 150 square feet in area and less than 10 feet in height.
9 With respect to one fence in excess of four feet in height in one required front yard on a corner lot and one required front yard on a through lot, the minimum front yard depth, for the R-10, R-15, R-21, and
R-43 Districts, shall be reduced such that the total distance from the property line shall be at least 10 feet.
322 Attachment 3:1 01 - 01 - 2019
SMITHTOWN CODE
District
Dimension
R-43
OneFamily
R-21
OneFamily
R-15
OneFamily
R-10 and R10S
One-Family
RM-7
One- and
Two-Family
R-6 TownHouse
PRD
Planned
Residential
Development
RC
Retirement
Community
RM-GA
Garden
Apartments
Maximum gross floor
area6 (percent of lot
area)
20 25 25 30 35 30 30 25 25
Minimum landscape
area (percent of lot
area)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Maximum height
Feet 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35
Stories 2½ 2½ 2½ 2½ 2½ 2½ 2½ 2½ 2½
Accessory building or
structure
Maximum occupancy
of required rear yard
(percent)
207
207
207
207
207
0 0 0 0
Maximum height
(feet/stories)
15/1 15/1 15/1 15/1 15/1 15/1 15/1 15/1 15/1
Minimum distance
from any lot line
(feet)
108
8
8
8
8
6
8
4
8
50 50 60 60
NOTES:
1 Lots which front on streets of inadequate right-of-way width, as specified by the Town of Smithtown, may be reduced in area by not more than 10% in order to comply with right-of-way requirements.
2 For garage entrances in side yards, see § 322-15D.
3 Not including land required for public facilities (such as highways, recharge basins, parks and similar facilities), as determined in the review of subdivision by the Planning Board.
4 Except for lots 110 feet or less in depth which lawfully existed prior to February 9, 1950; in this case, the front yard shall be 25 feet and the rear yard shall be 35 feet.
6 Provided that all parking and dimensional requirements are met.
7 Or 750 square feet, whichever is less. This does not include decks or pools.
8 Two feet for one accessory building less than 150 square feet in area and less than 10 feet in height.
9 With respect to one fence in excess of four feet in height in one required front yard on a corner lot and one required front yard on a through lot, the minimum front yard depth, for the R-10, R-15, R-21, and
R-43 Districts, shall be reduced such that the total distance from the property line shall be at least 10 feet.
322 Attachment 3:2 01 - 01 - 2019