TABLE OF CONTENTS



ORDINANCE
    NUMBER  				       TITLE				    PAGE

	  1	Alcoholic Beverages	  5
	  2	Animals at Large	  6
	  3	Building Permits	  7
	  4	Disorderly Operation of Motor Vehicles	  8
	  5	Noise	  9
	  6	Dog Ordinance	11
	  7	Exhibitions	19
	  8	Firearms	20
	  9	Games of Chance	21
	10	Garbage, Rubbish, & Trash	22		11	Hawkers and Solicitors	25
	12	House Numbering and Street Names	26
	13	Muffler Ordinance	27
	14	Parks and Playgrounds	28
	15	Robertson Park	29	
	16	Sidewalk Ordinance	30
	17	Street Excavation Ordinance	31
	18	Street Littering	32
	19	Street Uses	33
	20	Traffic Ordinance	35
	21	Traffic Violations Bureau	38
	22	Trailer Ordinance	42
	23	Weeds and Other Vegetation	44
	24	Hunting (Repealed 9/12/88)	45
	25	Tattooing Prohibited	46
	26	The Electrical Code of the City of Sherrill, New York	47
	27	Automobile Junk Yards	49
	28	Unsafe Buildings	50
	29	Truck Regulations	53
	30	Green Waste	56
	31	Burning	57	

RE-ENACTING AND CODIFYING ORDINANCES
OF THE CITY OF SHERRILL


	Section 1.  The Code of Ordinances of the City of Sherrill, consisting of ordinances numbered 1 – 23 inclusive is hereby adopted and enacted, and shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances of the City relating to the same subject matters enacted on or before March 1, 1983, except as hereinafter provided.

	Section 2.  All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Sherrill not included in such Code are hereby repealed from and after March 1, 1983, except the following:

	a)   Any ordinance of the City relating to planning, zoning or subdivision control;
b)	Any right or franchise granted by the City to any person, firm or corporation;
c)	Any ordinances dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, opening, closing, widening, vacating any street or highway, or establishing street grades;
d)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements or local assessments;
e)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plot of land or subdivision of land in the City;
f)	Any ordinance annexing property to the City or relating to city boundaries;
g)	Any ordinance establishing, adopting or relating to any building code, electrical code, fire safety code;
h)	Any ordinance regulating the use of the municipal sanitary sewer system and private sewage disposal systems.

	Section 3.  The adoption of this ordinance shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof previously repealed.

	Section 4.  Unless otherwise provided in the specific ordinance, the violation of any ordinance included in this Code shall be deemed an “offense” as defined in the Penal Law of the State of New York, and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding Five Hundred Dollars ($500) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten (10) days or both.  Every day any violation of such ordinance shall exist or continue shall constitute a separate offense punishable as set forth herein.

	Section 5.  Those ordinances previously adopted by the City of Sherrill and continued either unchanged or amended and renumbered are briefly described as follows:

	Ordinance #1.  Alcoholic Beverages.  Prohibits the consumption of alcoholic beverages and possession of open containers of same within public streets.  Unchanged.

	Ordinance #2.  Animals At Large.  Violation changed from Misdemeanor to Offense, penalty increased from maximum fine of $10.00 to $20.00.

	Ordinance #3.  Building Permits.  Limits issuance of building permits to property bordered by public streets.  Unchanged.

	Ordinance #4.  Disorderly Operation of Motor Vehicles.  Prohibits operation of a motor vehicle in such manner as to cause or create a disturbance or nuisance, unreasonably disturb the peace, emit excessive fumes or create excessive noise.  Unchanged.

	Ordinance #5.  Noise.  Defines noise and its sources as well as designating quiet hours and exclusions therefrom.  Replaced Disorderly Conduct Ordinance.  

	Ordinance #6.  Dog Ordinance.  Regulates the keeping of dogs within the City.  Unchanged.

	Ordinance #7.  Exhibitions.  Regulates the conduct of circuses, carnivals, shows and other outdoor public exhibitions.  Provides for hours of operation, insurance, license and license fees and clean up.  Excludes amateur athletic events, patriotic and other community services and events.  This is an amended ordinance.

	Ordinance #8.  Firearms.  Regulates the discharge of firearms with the City.  Unchanged.

	Ordinance #9.  Games of Chance.  Regulates the conduct of games of chance by authorized organizations.  Unchanged.

	Ordinance #10.  Garbage, Rubbish, and Trash.  Regulates the disposition of garbage, rubbish, leaves and trash.  This is a revised & readopted ordinance.

	Ordinance #11.  Hawkers and Solicitors.  Regulates the licensing of hawkers and solicitors.  Omits former penalty provision.

	Ordinance #12.  House Numbering.  Provides for the numbering of dwellings and places of business.  Changes violation from misdemeanor to an offense and increases maximum penalty to $25.

	Ordinance #13.  Mufflers.  Requires an adequate muffler on all vehicles powered by an internal combustion engine excluding agricultural and gardening machinery, home lawn mowers and snowplows.  Removes former penalty provision.

	Ordinance #14.  Parks and Playgrounds.  Regulates the use of public parks and playgrounds.  Omits references to the City Planning Board and increases maximum penalty to $50.

	Ordinance #15.  Robertson Park.  Regulates the use and hours of use of Robertson Park.  Unchanged.

	Ordinance #16.  Sidewalks.  Regulates the construction and repair of sidewalks when bituminous mixes are used.  Unchanged.

	Ordinance #17.  Street Excavations.  Regulates the excavation of public streets by private persons and corporations including the issuance of permits and posting of security.  Unchanged.

	Ordinance #18.  Street Littering.  Prohibits the deposit of waste material on any street, sidewalk or other public place.  Unchanged.

	Ordinance #19.  Street Uses.  Regulates the use of public streets for purposes other than public travel.  Eliminates portion of Section 8 relating to street excavations and Section 8-a relating to sanitary sewer connections.

	Ordinance #20.  Traffic Ordinance.  Establishes maximum rates of speed on streets within the City and regulates parking on city streets.  Omits provisions relating to licensing of bicycles.

	Ordinance #21.  Traffic Violations Bureau.  Establishes Traffic Violations Bureau and procedure for enforcement of traffic regulations.  Unchanged.

	Ordinance #22.  Trailer Ordinance.  Regulates the location and use of house trailers, camping trailers and trailers used for commercial purposes.  Reduces violations from misdemeanor to offense.

	Ordinance #23.  Weeds and Other Vegetation.  Regulates the location and height of weeds, grasses and other vegetation and provides for the cutting and removal of same by the property owner or the City at owner’s expense.  Removes section 4 establishing punishment for violations.

	Section 6.  In lieu of seeking the imposition of a fine and/or imprisonment for a violation of a provision of an ordinance, the City Manager may bring a civil action to recover a penalty in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars for each such violation.

	Section 7.   Effect of Partial Invalidity.  If any provision of an ordinance shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder or any other portion thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the provisions thereof directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment shall have been rendered.  

	Section 8.  This ordinance shall take effect on March 1, 1983.

	Ordinance No. 24.  Hunting.  Hunting within the City of Sherrill is hereby prohibited.  Repealed 9/12/88.

	Ordinance No. 25.  Tattooing Prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for any person to tattoo a human being within the City of Sherrill.

	Ordinance No. 26.  Electrical Code.  Since there is danger to life & property inherent in use of electric energy, this electrical ordinance is enacted to regulate the installation, alteration or repair of wiring.

	Ordinance No. 27.  Automobile Junk Yards.  No person shall operate, establish or maintain an automobile junkyard in Sherrill.

	Ordinance No. 28.  Unsafe Buildings.

	Ordinance No. 29.  Truck Regulations.

	Ordinance No. 30.  Green Waste. 

	Ordinance No. 31.  Burning.






























								                              ORDINANCE NO. 1

Alcoholic Beverages

	Section 1.  The consumption of any alcoholic beverage by any person within the boundary of any public street in the City of Sherrill is prohibited.

	Section 2.  The possession by any person of an open bottle, can or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage within the boundary of any public street of the City of Sherrill is prohibited.

	Section 3.  Any violation of this ordinance shall be punishable as provided in Section 26 of the City Charter.



























 
ORDINANCE NO. 2

Animals at Large

	Section 1.  No person shall permit horses, cows, swine, fowls, poultry or domesticated birds to run at large in the City of Sherrill, and no person shall at any time lead, ride or drive any horse on, over or through any of the public parks, paths or sidewalks of said City of Sherrill.  Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of an offense and liable to fine of not less than two dollars nor more than twenty dollars for each violation of the same.

 
ORDINANCE NO. 3

Building Permits


	No permit for the erection of any building shall be issued unless a street or highway giving access to such proposed structure has been dedicated to the City of Sherrill by a deed duly executed and delivered to the City accompanied by an abstract of title certified for a period of not less than 40 years, which dedicated street or highway shall have been suitably improved to the satisfaction of the City Commission in accordance with standards and specifications approved by the City Manager as adequate in respect to the public health, safety and general welfare for the circumstances of the particular street.  Where the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would entail practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, and where the circumstances of the case do not require the structure to be related to existing or proposed streets or highways, the City Commission, upon the petition of the applicant for such permit, in its discretion may make any reasonable exception and issue the permit subject to conditions that will protect any future street layout.                                                       






 
ORDINANCE NO. 4

Disorderly Operation of Motor Vehicles

	Section 1.  Disorderly Operation or Use of a Motor Vehicle.  No person shall operate or use a motor vehicle in the City of Sherrill upon any highway, street, road, driveway, parking lot, or on any other property, public or private, in such manner as to cause or create a disturbance or nuisance, or to cause alarm or fear for the safety of persons or property, or to unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of any person or persons, or in such manner as to cause the emission of excessive fumes or the creation of excessive noise.  (Amended 12/27/99)

	Section 2.  Definition.  The term “motor vehicle” as used herein shall include snowmobiles and mini-bikes as well as motor vehicles as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.

	Section 3.  Penalty for Violation.  Any violation of this ordinance shall be punishable as provided in Section 26 of the City Charter.  (Amended 12/27/99)

	Section 4.  Saving Clause.  If any provision or part of this ordinance shall be declared invalid, such adjustment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof which shall continue in full force and effect.



 
ORDINANCE NO. 5

Noise

	Section 1.  No person shall make or continue or cause to be made any unreasonably loud, unnecessary or unusual noise within the City of Sherrill which annoys, disrupts, disturbs or otherwise interferes with the comfort, repose, or peace of one or more individuals of normal sensitivities.

	Section 2.  As used herein, “unreasonably loud, unnecessary or unusual noise” shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to, the following:

	a.  Sound produced by playing, using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio, receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, tape or compact disc player, television, or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound, if such sound is sufficiently loud that it can be heard at the residence nearest the source of the sound other than the residence on the property from which the sound is produced or reproduced or from a distance of twenty-five (25) yards from the sound source, whichever is less.

	b.  Noise from a burglar alarm or other alarm system of any building, motor vehicle or other equipment which is continuous or intermittent for a period of more than fifteen (15) minutes or which sounds more than three (3) times within a twenty-four (24) hour period.

	c.  Noise resulting from the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or structure, or any excavation, occurring between the hours of 10:00 PM and 7:00 AM, except in the case of a public safety emergency.

	d.  Noise resulting from the use or operation of a lawnmower, blower, trimmer, chain saw, or other item of outdoor power equipment other than a snowblower actually being used for the removal of snow between the hours of 10:00 PM and 7:00 AM, except for the use of a chain saw in the case of an emergency.

	e.  Noise made by the unnecessary and repeated or continuous sounding of any horn or signaling device.

	f.  Noise made by the use or operation of a motor vehicle or other item of equipment in such an unreasonable manner (e.g., squealing of tires, revving engine, inadequate muffler, etc.) or for a continuous period of ten (10) minutes or for a total of any fifteen (15) minutes in a one-hour period.

	Section 3.  Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to apply to:
	
	a.  the making of any sound, including sound made by a siren, alarm or 
other warning device, by any police officer, peace officer or fireman in the performance of his or her official duties;

	b.  noise made in the installation, repair or maintenance of any public utility by one or more persons duly authorized to make such installation, repair or maintenance; 

	c.  noise made by the Sherrill Department of Public Works or any of its employees in the performance of their official duties;

	d.  The use of bells, chimes or sound amplifiers by churches between the hours of 8 AM and 10 PM; or  (Added 9/11/06)

	e.  Activities in public parks, playgrounds, or public buildings under permission or authority of the City of Sherrill Commission, or in a parade for which a permit has been issued by the City.  (Added 9/11/06)

	Section 4.  Any violation of this ordinance shall be punishable as provided in Section 26 of the City Charter.  








 
ORDINANCE NO. 6

Dog Ordinance

	Section 1.  Definitions.

	(a)  Owner.  Any person who owns, keeps, harbors or has the care, custody or control of a dog.  Dogs owned by minors shall be deemed to be in the custody and control of the minor’s parents, or other head of the household where the minor resides.

	(b)  At Large.  Any dog shall be deemed at large when it is off the property of its owner, and not under restraint.

(c)  Restraint.  A dog shall be deemed under restraint when it is leashed or confined within an enclosed motor vehicle or upon the premises of another with the consent of such other person. Leash length must not be greater than 8’ (Eight Feet). (Amended 5/13/19)


	Section 2.  Restrictions.

	(a)  No owner shall permit or allow a dog to be at large within the City of Sherrill, unless such dog shall be restrained as provided in Section 1(c) herein.

	(b)  No person shall keep or harbor a dog:

(1)  which habitually or persistently barks, howls, or whines so as to disturb the peace and quiet of other persons.  (Amended 12/27/99)

	(2)  which, when off the owner’s premises, bites, chases, snaps or snarls at or otherwise harasses or harms another person or causes reasonable apprehension of bodily harm to such person.

	(3)  which chases after moving motor vehicles, bicycles, snowmobiles or other animals.

	(4)  which bites, chases, snaps or snarls at any person lawfully upon the owner’s premises unless such dog is securely muzzled or is otherwise restrained or confined in a building or securely tied or fenced.

	(5)  This ordinance requires that dogs be curbed. Curbing your dog means that owner shall remove or cause to be removed any fecal matter deposited by their dog off the owner’s premises promptly. 

Owners shall not allow their dogs to soil buildings or grounds, nor make a nuisance of its self on the grass, sidewalk, road or any part of a City right of way without property owners consent.  City right of ways are typically 10’ beyond the curb line of any City street.  

The City of Sherrill provides its residents with dog waste stations that include individual waste bags and receptacles to dispose of waste.

(b)  No unspayed female dog in heat shall be permitted outside a building, enclosed vehicle or fenced enclosure unless leashed and accompanied by the owner or his designee.
	
	Section 3.  Seizure of Dogs.  The City of Sherrill Police Department, an Animal Control Officer designated by the City and/or any peace officer shall enforce the provisions of this ordinance by investigating complaints and by seizing any dog, tagged or untagged, found to be at large as above defined.

	A dangerous dog or an untagged dog may be seized on or off the owner’s premises, impounded and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
	Every dog seized shall be maintained, redeemed or disposed of in accordance with Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.  (Amended 12/13/10)

	Section 4.  Enforcement.  Any person who observes a dog in violation of any provision of this ordinance may file a complaint, signed under oath, with the City Judge specifying the nature of the violation, the date thereof, the damage caused, if any, a description of the dog, and the name and address of the owner, if known.  The City Judge shall issue a summons to the owner of such dog requiring the owner to appear in person before him to answer said complaint.  The summons shall be served personally on the owner not less than three (3) days prior to the required appearance.  Should the owner fail to appear, the City Judge may issue a warrant for the owner’s arrest.
	The City of Sherrill Police Department, an Animal Control Officer designated by the City and/or any peace officer observing a violation of this ordinance occurring in his presence may issue an appearance ticket to the owner of any dog in violation of this ordinance without first filing a complaint with the City Judge.  Such appearance ticket shall require the owner to appear and answer the violation specified in the appearance ticket and the proceedings before the City Judge shall be the same as though a summons had been issued and served on the owner.  (Amended 12/13/10)

	Section 5.  Presumption.  In any enforcement proceeding hereunder, it shall be presumed that an unleashed dog on the premises of one other than its owner is there without the consent of the owner of such premises unless the defendant proves such consent.

	Section 6.  Penalties.  Any violation of this ordinance shall be punishable as provided in Section 26 of the City Charter.  (Amended 12/27/99)
Section 7.  Licensing of Dogs.  (Amended 12/13/10)  The purpose of Sections 7 through 7D is to provide for the identification and licensing of dogs, so as to aid in the control and protection of the dog population and the protection of persons, property and domestic animals within the City of Sherrill.  Such Sections shall apply to all areas of the City of Sherrill and to all dogs kept and/or harbored within the City of Sherrill, and to all dog licenses issued by the City of Sherrill on and after January 1, 2011.

	(a)  Definitions.  As used in this ordinance, terms shall have the meanings as in Section 1 hereof and in Article 7 of the NYS Agriculture and Markets Law.

	(b)  Licensing of dogs

	(1)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this ordinance or in Article 7 of the NYS Agriculture and Markets Law, all dogs at large, and all dogs four months of age or older shall be licensed in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

	(2)  All applications for a dog license, both original applications and renewal applications, shall be made to the Sherrill City Clerk.

	(3)  The application shall state the sex, actual or approximate age, breed, color, and official identification number of the dog, and other identification marks, if any, and the name, address and telephone number of the owner.

	(4)  The application shall be accompanied by the license application fee, any applicable license surcharges, and any such additional fees as may be established from time to time by resolution of the City of Sherrill Commission.  Each license application shall be accompanied by a current certificate of rabies vaccination or a statement from a licensed veterinarian in lieu thereof that such vaccination would endanger the dog's life.  In the case of a spayed or neutered dog, every application shall also be accompanied by a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian or an affidavit signed by the owner, showing that the dog has been spayed or neutered, provided such certificate or affidavit shall not be required if the same is already on file with the clerk.  In lieu of the spay or neuter certificate, an owner may present a statement certified by a licensed veterinarian stating that he has examined the dog and found that, because of old age or other reason, the life of the dog would be endangered by spaying or neutering.  In such case, the license fee for the dog shall be the same as for a spayed or neutered dog as set forth in this Section.

	(5)  Upon validation by the City Clerk, the application shall become a license for the dog described therein.  Once an application has been validated, no refund shall be made of the fees paid therefore, or any portion thereof.

	(6)  The City Clerk shall provide an identification tag and a copy of the license to the owner, and retain the license and all documentation supporting the issuance of the license in accordance with the Records Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1 issued by the New York State Archives and Records Administration.  If the application for a dog license (or renewal) is made by mail and the owner requests a validated copy, the owner shall provide a stamped, self-addressed envelope for that purpose.

	(7)  No license shall be transferable.  Upon the transfer of ownership of any dog, the new owner shall immediately make application for a license for such dog.

	(8)  Each initial license issued by the City of Sherrill pursuant to this Section shall expire on the last day of the month one year from the date of the original issuance of the license.  Each renewal license shall expire on the last day of the same month in each succeeding calendar year.  (For example, a license originally issued in January will always expire on January 31st of each succeeding calendar year, regardless of the actual date the license is renewed with the City Clerk — renewing early or late does not change the date of expiration of the license.)

	(9)  Owners of more than one dog may request a common renewal date for their dog licenses, which may be granted by the City Clerk as long as no license is extended beyond the period of validity that would otherwise apply under the provisions of the prior paragraph (8) (i.e., the license may be issued for less than a year, but not for more than a year.)  No license fees or surcharges shall be prorated upon the granting of a request for a common renewal date pursuant to the provisions of this paragraph.

	(10)  Any dog harbored within the City of Sherrill which is owned by a resident of New York City or licensed by the City of New York, or which is owned by a non-resident of New York State and licensed by a jurisdiction outside that State of New York, shall for a period of thirty (30) days be exempt from the licensing and identification provisions of this ordinance.

	(c)  Relocation / Relicensing

	(1)  The owner of any dog currently licensed in another municipality who relocates his place of residence to the City of Sherrill shall apply for and obtain a City of Sherrill dog license for each dog owned.

	(2)  Any dog adopted from an incorporated humane society or similar incorporated dog protective association must be licensed in the City of Sherrill prior to being released from said shelter.

Section  7-A License Fees.

(a)  A fee schedule for all license fees and other fees to be charged and collected  pursuant to this ordinance shall be established by resolution of the City of Sherrill Commission.  Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from time to time by further resolution of the Commission.  The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with, such fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be charged and collected prior to the issuance of the license for which the fees are due.

(b)  All fees established by the Commission shall be in accordance with the following limitations:

(1)  The application fee for an unspayed or unneutered dog shall be at least five dollars more than the application fee for a spayed or neutered dog.

(2)  A surcharge fee in an amount not less than one dollar for spayed and neutered dogs, and not less than three dollars for unspayed or unneutered dogs, for the purpose of supporting animal population control efforts.

(3)  A surcharge fee in an amount not less than five dollars shall be imposed upon a dog identified as unlicensed during an enumeration conducted pursuant to Article 7 of the NYS Agriculture and Markets Law.

(c)  Except as otherwise provided in Article 7 of the NYS Agriculture and Markets Law, and/or under any other provision of this Article, all fees, fines and/or penalties collected upon the application for a license and/or the prosecution of any violation of this Article shall be the property of the City of Sherrill.

	Section  7-B. Identification of dogs.

	(a)  Each dog licensed pursuant to this Article shall be assigned, at the time the dog is first licensed, a permanent official identification number.  The official identification number shall constitute the official identification of the dog to which it is assigned, regardless of changes of ownership, and the number shall not be reassigned to any other dog during the lifetime of the dog to which it is assigned.  Such identification number shall be carried by the dog on an identification tag which shall be affixed to a collar on the dog at all times, provided that a dog participating in a dog show shall be exempt from this requirement during such participation.

	(b)  At the time a dog is first licensed, one identification tag shall be furnished to the owner at no charge.  Should an official City of Sherrill dog tag be lost, a new tag will be issued upon payment of the fee prescribed by resolution of the Commission.

	(c)  No tag carrying an official identification number shall be affixed to the collar of any dog other than the one to which that number has been assigned.

	(d)  The size, shape and form of imprints on identification tags and purebred license tags shall be prescribed by the Commission, and any tag bearing an imprint other than that prescribed shall not constitute valid identification for the purposes of this Article. 

	Section 7-C Change of ownership; lost or stolen dog.

	(a)  In the event of a change in the ownership of any dog which has been assigned an official City of Sherrill identification number or change in the address of the owner of record any such dog, the owner of record shall, within ten days of such change, file with the City Clerk a written report of such change.  Such owner of record shall be liable for a violation of this section until such filing is made, or until the dog is licensed in the name of the new owner.

	(b)  If any dog which has been assigned an official identification number is lost or stolen, the owner of record shall, within ten days of the discovery of such loss or theft, file with the City Clerk, a written report of such loss or theft.  In the case of a loss or theft, the owner of record of any such dog shall not be liable for any violation of this section, and/or of any violation Article 7 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law if committed after such report is filed.

	(c)  In the case of a dog’s death, the owner of record shall so notify the City Clerk, in writing, either prior to renewal of licensure or upon the time of such renewal as set forth in this Article.  Failure to notify the City Clerk of the death of a dog as so required herein shall constitute a violation and the owner of record shall be liable for such violation.

	Section 7-D. Violations.

	(a)  It shall be a violation punishable as provided in Section 7-D(b) of this Ordinance for:

(1)	Any owner to fail to license any dog;

(2)  Any owner to fail to have any dog identified as required by this Article;

(3)  Any person to knowingly affix to any dog any false or improper identification tag;

(4)  Any owner or custodian of any dog to fail to confine, restrain or present such dog for any lawful purpose required pursuant to this Article and/or Article 7 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law;

(5)  Any person to furnish any false or misleading information on any form required to be filed with the City of Sherrill pursuant to this Article and/or Article 7 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law;

(6)  The owner or custodian of any dog to fail to exercise due diligence in handling his or her dog if the handling results in harm to another dog that is a guide, hearing or service dog;

(7)  The owner of a dog to fail to notify the City Clerk of any change of ownership or owner's address as required by this Article.

(b)  It shall be the duty of the City of Sherrill Police Department, Animal Control Officer designated by the City and/or any peace officer, with the assistance of the City Attorney, to prosecute an action or proceeding against any person who has committed within the City of Sherrill any violation of this Ordinance and/or Article 7 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law.  The dog control officer may elect either to prosecute such action as a violation under the penal law or as a civil action to recover a civil penalty.  A violation of this section shall be punishable, subject to such an election, by a fine or penalty of not less than twenty-five dollars, and not more than two hundred fifty dollars, except that

(1)  Where the person was found to have violated this ordinance and/or Article 7 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law within the preceding five years, the fine or penalty may be not less than fifty dollars, and

(2)  Where the person was found to have committed two or more such violations within the preceding five years, the subsequent violation shall be punishable by a fine or penalty of not less than one hundred dollars or imprisonment for not more than fifteen days, or both.

(c)  A defendant charged with a violation of any provision of this Article may plead guilty to the charge in open court.  He may also submit to the magistrate having jurisdiction, in person, by duly authorized agent, or by mail, a statement:

(1)	That he waives arraignment in open court and the aid of counsel,

	(2)  That he pleads guilty to the offense charged,

(3)  That he elects and requests that the charge be disposed of and the fine or penalty fixed by the court,

(4)  Reciting any explanation that he desires to make concerning the offense charged, and

(5)  That he makes all statements under penalty of perjury.  Thereupon the magistrate may proceed as though the defendant had been convicted upon a plea of guilty in open court, provided however, that any imposition of fine or penalty hereunder shall be deemed tentative until such fine or penalty shall have been paid and discharged in full.  If upon receipt of the aforesaid statement, the magistrate shall deny the same, he shall thereupon notify the defendant of this fact, and that he is required to appear before the said magistrate at a stated time and place to answer the charge which shall thereafter be disposed of pursuant to the applicable provisions of law.
(d)  Each day that a person is in violation of any provision of this Article shall constitute a separate offense, with each such offense being subject to the fines and penalties set forth herein.

	Section 8.  Impoundment of Dogs.  Each dog seized in accordance with the provisions of Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law or the provisions of this ordinance shall be properly sheltered, fed and watered for the redemption period as hereinafter provided.  Each dog which is not identified, whether or not licensed, shall be held for a period of five (5) days from the day seized during which period the dog may be redeemed by its owner, provided that such owner produces proof that the dog has been licensed and has been identified pursuant to the provisions of the Agriculture and Markets Law and further provided that the owner first pays the following impoundment fees to the City Clerk:

(a)  $25.00 per day for the first impoundment of any dog owned by that person (amended 12/13/10);

(b)  $50.00 for the first 24 hours or part thereof and $20.00 for each additional 24 hours or part thereof for the second impoundment within one year of the first impoundment of any dog owned by that person (amended 12/13/10);

(c)  $100.00 for the first 24 hours or part thereof and $20.00 for each additional 24 hours or part thereof for the third and subsequent impoundments within one year of the first impoundment of any dog owned by that person (amended 12/13/10).

	Promptly upon the seizure of any identified dog, the owner of such dog shall be notified personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the facts of seizure and the procedure for redemption.  If notification is personally given, such dog shall be held for a period of 7 days after the day of notice.  If such notification is made by mail, such dog shall be held for a period of 9 days from the date of mailing, during which period the dog may be redeemed by the owner.  In either case, the owner may redeem such dog upon payment to the City Clerk of the impoundment fees herein prescribed and by producing proof that the dog has been licensed.
	An owner shall forfeit title to any dog unredeemed at the expiration of the appropriate redemption period.

	Section 9.  Exclusions from Operation of Ordinance.  This ordinance shall not apply to any guide dog actually leading a blind person.

	Section 10.  Separability.  If any provisions of this ordinance be declared invalid, all other provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable.


 
ORDINANCE NO. 7

Exhibitions

	Section 1.  No person, firm or corporation shall conduct, operate or maintain any circus, carnival, outdoor concert, performance, show or exhibition, excluding amateur sporting contests and community observances and events, without first obtaining from the City Manager a license or permit setting forth the conditions, regulations and restrictions governing the holding of such event which he shall deem reasonably necessary to insure and protect the peace and safety of the public.  Such conditions, regulations and restrictions may include provisions for adequate off-street parking, crowd control and security patrol, liability insurance, noise or sound levels, hours of operation, clean-up with bond or cash security therefor.


 
ORDINANCE NO. 8

Firearms

	Section 1.  No person shall discharge any species of firearm, pellet gun, air gun or other weapon within the territorial boundary limits of the City of Sherrill, or discharge any such firearm outside the said city so that the bullet, shot pellet or other projectile therefrom enters the City of Sherrill, except in self-defense, in the reasonable protection of property, or in the discharge of official duty.

	Section 2.  Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the discharge of a firearm under supervised instruction or regulation at an established rifle range or target range situated in a location first approved by the City Commission, having due regard for the health and safety of the residents of the City and the general public.

	Section 3.  Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the lawful hunting of deer by longbow as permitted under Article 11 of the Environmental Conservation Law.

	Section 4.  Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not to exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), by a term of imprisonment not to exceed ten (10) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.




 
ORDINANCE NO. 9

Games of Chance

	Section 1.  It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, upon obtaining the required license therefor to conduct games of chance within the City of Sherrill, subject to the provisions of this ordinance, the provisions of Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law and the provisions set forth by the New York State Racing and Wagering Board.

	Section 2.  The terms “authorized organization” and “games of chance” shall have the meanings stated in Section 186 of the General Municipal Law.

	Section 3.  The unauthorized conduct of a game of chance shall constitute and be punishable as a misdemeanor.


 
    ORDINANCE NO. 10

Garbage, Rubbish and Trash


Section 1 – Garbage & Recyclables 

Residential Collection
a.)	Residential Collection: A residential entity is classified as 1. Single Family or 2. Two Family (2 Units or Less).  
b.)	Location:  Residents desiring to dispose of their normal weekly accumulation of garbage & recyclables via municipal collection, may do so by placing the same in the marginal strip between the sidewalk and the curb.  In the event of snow, residents shall place all garbage and recyclables at the edge of driveway between the sidewalk and road.  No garbage or recyclables shall be set out earlier than 6:00pm of the evening immediately preceding the scheduled day of municipal pick-up.  Emptied containers shall be removed from the marginal strip by 8:00pm of the day of the scheduled municipal pick-up.
c.)	Containers:  Containers shall have handles and be tightly covered, watertight, galvanized iron, non-rusting metal, or plastic with a capacity of no less than 10 gallons and no more than 35 gallons per container.  Plastic bags are not acceptable for garbage containment.  Plastic bags shall not be placed in recyclable bins or used for the containment of recyclables.  The use of rope, bungees, wire, or any other tethering device intended for cover securement on containers is prohibited.  Collection crews reserve the right to cut tethering device if necessary.  The combined weight of a single container and its garbage or recyclable contents shall not exceed 40 pounds. 

Commercial Collection
d.)	Commercial Collection: A commercial entity is classified as 1. Small retail: such as banks, salons, merchandisers, and the like. 2. Small professional offices: such as legal, medical, insurance and the like.  3. Multiple dwellings: such as: Apartment buildings and living units of 3 or more, and other commercial entities.  Commercial collection will include up to, but not exceeding 6 containers of refuse and/or recycling combined.  All containers shall have handles and be tightly covered, watertight, galvanized iron, non-rusting metal, or plastic with a capacity of no less than 10 gallons and no more than 35 gallons per container.  Plastic bags are not acceptable for garbage containment.  Plastic bags shall not be placed in recyclable bins or used for the containment of recyclables.  The use of rope, bungees, wire, or any other tethering device intended for cover securement on containers is prohibited.  Collection crews reserve the right to cut tethering device if necessary.  The combined weight of a single container and its garbage or recyclable contents shall not exceed 40 pounds. 

Commercial entities that create more than 200 Gallons (equivalent to 1 yard) of refuse/recycling weekly are required to have a dumpster.  Commercial and food waste entities such as restaurants, food service, grocery stores, butcher shops, and other like businesses are required to have dumpsters as well.

e.)	Location:  Commercial entities desiring to dispose of their normal weekly accumulation of garbage & recyclables via municipal collection, may do so by placing the same in the marginal strip between the sidewalk and the curb or in area designated by City of Sherrill.  In the event of snow, residents shall place all garbage and recyclables at the edge of driveway between the sidewalk and road.  No garbage or recyclables shall be set out earlier than 6:00pm of the evening immediately preceding the scheduled day of municipal pick-up.  Emptied containers shall be removed from the marginal strip by 8:00pm of the day of the scheduled municipal pick-up.

f.)	Dumpsters:  Effective January 1, 2020 municipal collection of dumpsters will discontinue.
Entities desiring to dispose of their normal weekly accumulation of garbage & recyclables via dumpster may do so via private hauler collection. The size of dumpster and frequency of weekly collection is dependent on the need of the individual business, however ordinance 10 requires commercial dumpsters to be emptied at least once a week.
Commercial properties with dumpsters shall adhere to the following provisions:
•	Dumpsters shall be sized accordingly to ensure garbage is covered and fully enclosed.  Partially covered and/or overflowing dumpsters are prohibited.  Maximum dumpster size shall not exceed 6 cubic yards.
•	Placement of dumpsters shall not be placed in City Right of Ways, or near utilities such as powerlines, water or sewer services or any other condition deemed unsafe or unsuitable for safe pick up.
•	Dumpsters shall be staged at designated, city approved locations.


Section 2 – Disposal

The municipal pick-up of garbage and recyclables is intended to apply to the normal, weekly accumulation of same and is not intended as a means of disposal of unusual accumulation of old building and construction materials, furniture, old tires, hot water heaters, appliances, large metal items, and the like.  Residents and Commercial entities shall adhere to the most current, local regulations on proper disposal of, but not limited to: garbage, recyclables, household hazardous waste, and electronics.  All material generated outside the City of Sherrill shall not be included in municipal pick-ups. Violators will be prosecuted for theft of services.

Electronics may be disposed of at the City of Sherrill Transfer Station 210 Elmwood Pl.  Disposal tickets may be purchased at Sherrill City Hall.

Game Animal Carcasses may not be disposed of in residential collection.  Game Animal Carcasses can be disposed of at any one of the Oneida Herkimer Solid Waste Authority transfer stations (Rome/Utica).

Household Hazardous Waste may be disposed of at the Oneida Herkimer Solid Waste Authority (Leland Ave. Utica, NY)

Section 3 – Sharps
Sharps cannot be set out with your recyclables! Place used needles, syringes and lancets in a puncture-proof container like a laundry detergent bottle with a top. When full, tape lid/top shut, label as "sharps" and place in the garbage.

Section 4 – Manufacturing Districts
The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to Manufacturing Districts governed by Article 5, Industrial Performance Standards, of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sherrill.

Section 5 – Unacceptable Materials
Materials placed at the curbside for municipal collection contrary to the provisions of this ordinance shall not be picked up by collection crews and the owner of the premises shall dispose of same by other, legal means without delay.

Items being disposed of as “free” may only remain curbside for a maximum of a 24 hours.  Items out longer than the 24-hour period will be in violation of this ordinance. 

Section 6 – Violation
Any person who violates this ordinance will be issued a warning via sticker, and/or letter left on or near cans at collection point.  A letter may also be sent. Those that fail to correct problem shall be found guilty upon conviction by a fine of $25.00 for a first offense, $50.00 for each subsequent offense, or imprisonment for not more than ten (10) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Amended 5/13/19)








																			                                         


ORDINANCE NO. 11

Hawkers and Solicitors

	Section 1.  Definition of Solicitor.

(a)  The term “solicitor” as used in this ordinance shall mean a person who goes from place to place or house to house taking or offering to take orders for the future delivery of goods, wares or merchandise, or for services to be performed in the future, or for making, manufacturing or repairing any article or thing whatever for future delivery.  The term shall also include canvassers who go from house to house arranging or attempting to arrange subsequent meetings or interviews in behalf of solicitors or salesmen.  The term shall not include salesmen calling on regular established customers of the salesman or his employer, and persons who have been expressly invited by the occupant to call at the house or other place to solicit such orders.

(b)  The term “hawker” shall mean and include a person standing or going about in any public street or public place who sells or offers for sale in such street or public place any goods, wares, or merchandise including printed material.  The term shall not include persons selling or offering to sell produce from their own farms or gardens.
	
	Section 2.  License Required.  It shall be unlawful for any person, within the corporate limits of the City of Sherrill to act as a hawker or solicitor as herein defined without first having obtained and paid for, and having in force and effect a license therefor.  Said license shall be issued by the City Clerk of the City of Sherrill and shall be in writing signed by said City Clerk, and the fee therefor shall be $25.00 per calendar year.  The Clerk shall not issue a license to any person who has been convicted of any crime or of the offense of disorderly conduct.  

	Section 3.  Penalty for Violation.  Any person who violates this ordinance shall be guilty of an offense punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding One Hundred Dollars or imprisonment not more than thirty days or both such fine and imprisonment.


 
ORDINANCE NO. 12

House Numbering and Street Names

	Section 1.  Each dwelling or place of business in the City of Sherrill shall, after the passage of this ordinance, bear on its front or street face, a number or numbers assigned to it by the City Clerk.  The owner shall cause said numbers to be placed as nearly as possible at the height of five feet from the ground, as near the entrance to the building as there is a suitable place, and where either street or porch lights will illuminate at night.  No vines, shrubs, awnings or obstructions shall be allowed to cover the numbers from easy observation.

	Section 2.  Repealed 12/27/99

	Section 3.  The system of numbering shall conform as far as possible to the following rules and regulations:
	The lots on Sherrill Road shall be numbered from the State Road at the West Shore crossing towards the south by blocks, progressively, as the 100 block, 200 block, etc.  Odd numbers shall be on the westerly side of the road, even numbers on the easterly side.
	The lots on all streets leading from Sherrill Road shall be numbered by blocks progressively from Sherrill Road with the odd numbers on the southerly sides of said streets and even numbers on the northerly sides, and where such streets cross Sherrill Road these shall be further differentiated by the use of the words East and West, as for example:  East Hamilton – West Hamilton.
	The lots on the Seneca Turnpike from its intersection with Sherrill Road shall be numbered from said intersection toward the east and west respectively without reference to block numbers, odd numbers on the south side, even on the north.  Streets running north from Seneca Turnpike shall number from the Turnpike northerly, odd numbers on the east, even numbers on the west.
	The lots on all other streets in the city east of Sherrill Road shall be numbered from their northerly or westerly termini southerly or easterly respectively, by blocks if there be regularity to the subdivisions, with odd numbers on the westerly or southerly sides and even numbers on the easterly or northerly sides – as the streets may run.
	The lots on all other streets of the city west of Sherrill Road shall be numbered from their northerly or easterly termini.  Southerly or westerly respectively, by blocks if there be regularity to the subdivisions, with odd numbers on the westerly or southerly side, even numbers on the easterly or northerly sides – as the streets may run.

	Section 4.  Any person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any building within the City of Sherrill, who shall refuse or neglect for five days after notice from the City Clerk to place a number on said building, shall be guilty of an offense and shall be liable to a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars nor less than one dollar for each neglect or refusal.

ORDINANCE NO. 13

Muffler Ordinance

	No person shall run or operate a motor vehicle in the City of Sherrill unless the vehicle is equipped with an adequate muffler in constant operation and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise.  The term “motor vehicle” as used herein shall include every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported, powered by an internal combustion engine or motor.  For the purpose of this ordinance the term motor vehicle shall not include farm machinery when used for agricultural purposes, construction equipment, riding lawn mowers and snowplows, garden tractors and cultivators, fire and police vehicles.








 
ORDINANCE NO. 14

Parks and Playgrounds

	Section 1.  No person shall pluck, cut, mark, mar or in any way injure any tree, shrub, grass, flower, plant or any lawn or part thereof on any of the parks and playgrounds of this City, without the consent of the City Manager.

Section 2.  No person shall deposit any refuse, garbage, earth or any other material on any of the parks or playgrounds of this City, without the consent of the City Manager.

Section 3.  No person shall remove or injure or in any way deface any bench, playground apparatus, tool, implement or other equipment of any of the parks or playgrounds of this City, without the consent of the City Manager.  

Section 4.  No person shall plant or set out any tree, shrub, plant, flower or grass on any of the parks or playgrounds of this City, without the consent of the City Manager.

Section 5.  All persons in any way using any of the parks or playgrounds of this City, or any of the buildings or equipment thereof, shall conform to such regulations as to their use as the City Manager shall from time to time provide.

Section 6.  No person shall erect any tent, stand, booth, or other structure or enclosure in or upon any of the public parks or playgrounds of this City, without the consent of the City Manager.

Section 7.  No person shall erect or place any sign, billboard or other advertising device within or upon any of the parks or playgrounds of this City, without the consent of the City Manager.

Section 8.  No person shall offer or expose for sale any confectionery, popcorn, peanuts, soft drinks or anything else of any nature in or upon any of the parks or playgrounds of this City, without the consent of the City Manager.

Section 9.  All permits relating to the use of parks and playgrounds shall be in writing and granted by the City Manager.

Section 10.  Any violation of this ordinance shall be punishable as provided in Section 26 of the City Charter.  (Amended 12/27/99)






ORDINANCE NO. 15

Robertson Park

Section 1.  Except as hereinafter provided, Robertson Park shall be closed to all persons between the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 6 a.m., prevailing time, and any person entering or remaining on said premises during these prohibited hours shall be deemed a trespasser, except that the basketball courts and tennis courts may be used between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m., prevailing time.

Section 2.  The City Manager, with the approval of the City Commission, may authorize the use of said park during otherwise prohibited hours to groups or organizations whose activity extends into such prohibited hours, upon satisfactory assurance of adult supervision where youth groups are involved and upon such other requirements as he may reasonably impose.

Section 3.  This ordinance shall not apply to employees of the City of Sherrill engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment.

Section 4.  A violation of this ordinance shall be punishable by fine not exceeding One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), or imprisonment not exceeding ten (10) days, or both such fine and imprisonment.




 
ORDINANCE NO. 16

Sidewalk Ordinance

	Section 1.  No person, firm or corporation shall use and no property owner shall permit the use on the public sidewalk abutting his property of so-called “Blacktop” mixes of stone and asphalt or other bituminous substances in the construction, repair or replacement of sidewalks in the City of Sherrill except in conformance with the following standards:

(a)  Forms of steel or wood shall be used to insure uniform depth and square edges.  Compaction shall be done with a three to five ton roller.

(b)  Where no sidewalk now exists the earth shall be excavated to width of four feet and to a depth of eight inches in line with sidewalks that may exist on either side of one to be installed.  If there is no sidewalk line the City shall establish one.  Crusher run stone shall be used to form a six inch compacted base.  A topping of 1AC hot mix asphalt concrete shall be compacted a depth of two inches.

(c)  Where a concrete sidewalk is to be replaced, a base of three inches of compacted 1AB hot mix asphalt concrete binder shall be placed with a compacted one inch topping of 1AC hot mix asphalt concrete.

(d)  Where a concrete sidewalk now exists but is to be raised or a topping is desired, installation is to be made in accordance with the directions of the Superintendent of Public Works.

	Section 2.  Where sidewalks are constructed, repaired or replaced with bituminous materials, there shall be no rebate to the property owner or other sharing of cost by the City.

	Section 3.  All prior inconsistent ordinances are hereby repealed.


 
ORDINANCE NO. 17

Street Excavation Ordinance

	Section 1.  No person shall excavate in or under any public street without a permit issued by the City Manager.  The word “street” as used herein shall include the public sidewalk and marginal strip between the sidewalk and the pavement or curb line.  The fee for the issuance of such permit shall be Twenty Dollars ($20.00).

	Section 2.  The City Manager shall prescribe minimum standards for the removal, temporary storage and replacement of excavated material.

	Section 3.  The application for the permit shall be in writing and shall accurately describe the location and extent of the proposed excavation and the estimated length of time to complete the work requiring the excavation.

	Section 4.  Upon completion of the work, the excavated area shall be promptly restored to as good condition as existed prior to excavation.  Lawn area shall be restored with a minimum of six inches of suitable topsoil and seeded with permanent grasses.  Concrete and asphalt surfaces shall be restored with like paving material meeting the minimum standards specifications required by the City Manager.

	Section 5.  No permit shall be issued until the applicant has deposited with the City Manager a certified check payable to the City in an amount calculated as follows:

	One Dollar per square foot of unpaved area;
	Three Dollars per square foot of concrete or asphalt surface.

The minimum deposit shall be $150.00.  Where the required deposit exceeds the sum of $300.00, a performance bond may be substituted with the approval of the City Manager.
	Upon the restoration of the excavated area to the reasonable satisfaction of the City Manager, he shall refund the deposit to the applicant.

	Section 6.  No excavation permit shall become effective until the applicant has furnished the City with evidence of public liability insurance with limits not less than 100,000/300,000/10,000 naming the City as an additional insured as well as the applicant and his or its contractors and subcontractors.

	Section 7.  No excavation restored after October 15 shall be approved by the City Manager sooner than May 15 of the following year.

	Section 8.  Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance or of the conditions or regulations contained in any permit granted in accordance with the terms hereof shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100, with an additional penalty for each and every day that such violation shall continue after notification that such violation exists.
ORDINANCE NO. 18

Street Littering

	Section 1.  Dirt, Filth, Etc., Streets and Alleys.  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, spill, place or deposit or leave, or cause to be thrown, spilled, placed, deposited or left, or to permit any servant, agent or employee to throw, spill, place, deposit or leave in or upon any street, highway, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place in the City of Sherrill any dirt, sweepings, filth, shells, garbage, vegetables, dead carcass, sewage, slops, excrement, compost, stable manure, ashes, soot, tin cans, rags, waste paper, leaves, brush, weeds, grass, straw, hay, excelsior, shavings, barrels, crates, boxes, litter or loose combustible material, materials subject to be carried by the wind or unwholesome, noisome or putrescrible matter of any kind.

	Section 2.  Exceptions:  Removal of Containers.  Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prohibit the placing of ashes, refuse or garbage on the outer edge of the sidewalk or near the curb in metallic containers with close-fitting covers thereon for removal by the Sherrill city collection force or licensed or permitted scavengers.  It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized employee or agent of the city, or a licensed or permitted scavenger, if the city has them, to disturb, remove or willfully and maliciously tip over and spill the contents of such containers or to remove the covers thereof.

	Section 3.  Obstructing Sewers and Drains.  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited into any drain, catchbasin, sewer or gutter any substance which may cause obstructions or injury thereto or nuisance therein.  It shall also be unlawful for any person to divert or stop the flow of any drain or sewer.

	Section 4.  Penalty.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than two dollars nor more than twenty-five dollars.


 
ORDINANCE NO. 19

Street Uses

	Section 1.  The City Manager may grant permission in writing to place and keep building materials in a public street for a period not exceeding four months; but such permission shall contain a condition that it shall be void unless the materials are so placed that they occupy no more than one-half the sidewalk and one-half the space between it and the center of the roadway.  The permission may at any time be revoked by the City Manager.

	Section 2.  Every person to whom permission is granted pursuant to the provisions of the foregoing section shall cause all the materials and rubbish arising from his occupation of the street to be removed by the expiration of the time limited by the permission, or upon the revocation of the permission, under the penalty hereafter prescribed for each twenty-four hours they shall remain after the expiration of the time of revocation of the permission.

	Section 3.  Whenever permission is given by the City Commission or City Manager to lay any drain, sewer, aqueduct, or gas or water pipe along or in any street, to make any excavation or hole therein, or erect any poles, or place any wires in, under, over or upon any street, the same shall be done under the direction of the City Manager as to the time and place, and he shall see that it be so done as not unnecessarily to hinder or obstruct the free use of the street or sidewalk, and shall also see that the street is restored to good condition after the work is done, at the expense of the person to whom the permission is given.

	Section 4.  No person shall place or cause to be placed in or upon any street, alley, square or public park, any building materials or other property, or any obstruction to the free and perfect use thereof without a written permission from the City Manager.  In case the owner or person in charge of the same shall neglect or refuse to remove the same from such street, alley, square or public park within twenty-four hours after such notice, or in case such owner or person in charge of the same shall be unknown or cannot be found, then in either case, the City Manager, after the expiration of the said twenty-four hours, shall cause the same to be removed to some safe and secure place at the expense of such owner.

	Section 5.  No person without permission from the City Manager shall dig, remove, or carry away any stone, earth, sand or gravel from any street, highway, alley, square or public grounds.

	Section 6.  No person shall remove, displace, or interfere with any barricade, railing or protection around a defective place in any street or about any trench, excavation, repair or construction work, or pavement, placed by or under the authority of the City Manager or by any authorized board or official of the City of Sherrill.

	Section 7.  No person shall move, or cause or permit to be moved, any building into, along or upon any street, without written permission from the City Manager and then only under the supervision and according to the directions of the City Manager.


 
ORDINANCE NO. 20

Traffic Ordinance

	Section 1.  Through Streets.  Sherrill Road, New York State Route 5, East Hamilton Avenue, West Hamilton Avenue, Willow Place, Betsinger Road, East Seneca Street, Williams Street, Park Street and Kinsley Street, City of Sherrill, are hereby designated as main arteries of travel and all vehicles approaching any of said main arteries of travel from an intersecting street shall, before crossing or turning into the same, come to a full stop whenever designated by a stop sign unless otherwise directed by a traffic officer or signal.

	Section 2.  Rate of Speed.  No vehicle, except duly authorized emergency vehicles in actual performance of duty, shall be driven, operated or propelled over, on, in or upon the public streets and highways within the corporate limits of the City of Sherrill at a greater rate of speed than 30 miles per hour, except within the following posted zones where a greater rate of speed is authorized.  A violation of the provisions of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100) or imprisonment for thirty days or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(1)  Commencing at the westerly city line on Route 5 and extending easterly to Rowland Place, a distance of approximately 0.8 miles, the authorized maximum speed shall not exceed 45 miles per hour;

(2)  Commencing at Rowland Place and extending easterly a distance of 0.2 miles east of Sherrill Road, the authorized maximum speed shall not exceed 35 miles per hour;

(3)  Commencing at a point 0.2 miles east of Sherrill Road and extending easterly to the Sherrill City Line, the authorized maximum speed shall not exceed 45 miles per hour.

	Section 3.  Parking Ordinance.
  
(a)  The parking of motor vehicles on or along any public street in the City of Sherrill, New York, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. from November 1 to April 30 is prohibited.

(b)  No motor vehicle shall be parked at any time on W. Seneca Street between the former railroad underpass and the intersection of W. Seneca St. with Route 5.

	(c)  The parking of motor vehicles along E. Seneca Street in the areas hereinafter defined in excess of the periods of time hereinafter stated is hereby prohibited.  Parking on E. Seneca Street is hereby limited as follows:
	
1.  South side of E. Seneca St. from Sherrill Road to the former Post
Office driveway; a two-hour parking zone from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday;

	2.  South side of E. Seneca St. from Corona garages to Willow Place; a 
one-hour parking zone, from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.

	3.  North side of E. Seneca St. from Willow Place west to the Oneida Ltd.
Fire Station driveway; a one-hour parking zone, from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday.

(d)  The parking of a motor vehicle on either side of Sherrill Road between Prospect Street and Route 5 for a period in excess of two (2) hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. is prohibited.

Any person parking a motor vehicle in violation of this ordinance or paragraph 1203-b of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, and the owner of any vehicle so parked, shall be subject to fines as follows:

$5.00 if paid within ten days of issuance of parking ticket;
$10.00 if paid more than ten days after the issuance of the parking ticket;
$25.00 if the parking violation occurs in a space designated by appropriate sign   for handicapped parking if paid within 10 days.
An additional $5.00 if paid after the 10th day.

(e)  When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any street or public way within the City 
1.  so as to obstruct the movement of traffic; or
2.  where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited;
said vehicle may be removed and stored by or under the direction of any police officer of the City at the expense of the owner.  Such owner or his agent may redeem the same upon payment to the City of the actual expense of removal and storage.

	Section 4.  Miscellaneous Provisions.  

	(a)  No operator of any motor vehicle shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle upon the left side or portion of any street or highway.

	(b)  No person shall drive, ride or lead, any horse, pony, donkey, mule, or other beast of burden, nor shall any person operate any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorbike, motor scooter, tractor or other similar vehicle, in any public park or playground except for the purpose of maintenance or repair, or except as authorized by the Chief of Police.

	Section 5.  Right-of-Way at Intersections.  Pursuant to the provisions of Section 90 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, as amended, the Police Department of the City of Sherrill is hereby authorized to regulate, and designate, by an appropriate sign, the right-of-way on and in, any street intersection within the City of Sherrill.  All drivers are required to obey the rules and regulations prescribed by said City of Sherrill Police Department, for such intersections, where designated by a “Yield Right of Way” sign.

	Section 6.  Traffic Control Signals.  Traffic control signals shall be installed, continued and maintained as follows:

1.  A three-section four faced pre-timed traffic control signal at the following locations:
	a)  The intersection of Sherrill Road and Hamilton Avenue and operated 24 hours a day

b)  The intersection of Sherrill Road and Noyes Boulevard and operated 24 hours a day

	2.  Repealed 12/27/99

	Section 7.  Penalties for Violation.  Except as otherwise provided above, the violation of a provision of this ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not more than One Hundred Dollars or by imprisonment for not more than fifteen (15) days or by both such fine and imprisonment.


 
ORDINANCE NO. 21

Traffic Violations Bureau

	Section l.  Authorization of Bureau.  The City Court of the City of Sherrill is hereby authorized to establish a Traffic Violations Bureau to assist the Court in the disposition of offenses in relation to traffic violations.  Such Bureau shall be in charge of such person or persons and shall be open at such hours as the court may designate.

	Section 2.  Jurisdiction.  The Traffic Violations Bureau is hereby authorized to dispose of violations of traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations when such offenses shall not constitute the traffic infraction known as speeding, or a misdemeanor or felony.

	Section 3.  Procedure.
  
1.  The Traffic Violations Bureau shall permit a person charged with an offense within the limitations herein stated,

a.  To answer within a specified time in the Traffic Violations Bureau either in person or by written power of attorney in the form hereafter prescribed,

		b.  To pay a prescribed fine designated by the Court,

c.  To waive a hearing in Court, plead guilty to the charge and authorize the person in charge of the Bureau to make such a plea and pay such a fine in Court.

2.  Acceptance of the prescribed fine and power of attorney by the Bureau shall be deemed complete satisfaction for the violation and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states.

3.  If a person charged with a traffic violation does not answer as hereinbefore prescribed within the time designated herein, the Bureau shall cause a complaint to be entered against him forthwith and a warrant to be issued for his arrest and appearance before the City Court.

4.  Any person, who shall have been within the preceding 12 months, guilty of a number of parking violations in excess of such number as may be designated by the Court or of 3 or more violations other than parking violations, shall not be permitted to appear and answer to a subsequent violation at the Traffic Violations Bureau, but must appear in City Court at a time specified by the Bureau.

5.  This ordinance shall in no way deprive a person of his right to counsel, or prevent him from exercising his right to appear in City Court and answer and defend any charge or violation over which this Bureau has jurisdiction.

	Section 4.  Attaching of Ticket to Vehicles.  When a police officer ascertains that a person has committed an offense over which this Bureau has jurisdiction, he shall forthwith personally serve such person with, or if the absence of the owner or operator of the vehicle prevents such service, attach to the vehicle by which the offense has been or is being committed, a ticket.  Such ticket shall set forth the offense charged, the time and place of its commission, and direct the owner or operator of such vehicle to appear at the Traffic Violations Bureau within 48 hours either in person or by written power of attorney in the form prescribed thereon.  Such ticket shall be numbered and issued in triplicate, one of which shall be served as hereinbefore provided, one of which shall be filed with the Bureau and one of which shall be filed with the Chief of Police.

	Section 5.  Appearance.  The person so charged may, if he does not desire to appear personally, admit the service of the notice on the ticket, so served, by signing the admission of personal service and the power of attorney printed thereon, and forwarding the same with the fine designated thereon for the offense committed, to the Traffic Violations Bureau.

	Section 6.  Failure to Appear.  If a person, so served, shall fail to appear, as hereinbefore provided, within the designated time or having appeared fails to plead guilty, waive hearing in Court and pay the fine, or if he elects or is required to appear in Court but fails to make the required deposit, the Bureau shall cause a complaint to be entered against him forthwith and he shall be subject to prosecution in the same manner as if this ordinance did not exist.

	Section 7.  Reports of Bureau.  The Bureau shall report to the Chief of Police on appearances and dispositions which occurred on the previous day, and shall keep such records and make such further reports as may be prescribed by the Judge of the City Court and/or the City Commission.

	Section 8.  All fines paid into and collected by the Bureau shall be paid over to the Director of Finance of the City, forthwith, who shall give a receipt therefor.

	Section 9.  Forms.  The forms referred to in this ordinance shall be substantially as follows:

	1.  Traffic Violation Notice

		TRAFFIC NOTICE                           TRAFFIC VIOLATION
			                                               Dept. of Police, Sherrill, NY
	To __________________________________                  No. ____________
                                  Name
	Of __________________________________
                                 Address
	Or to the operator or owner of motor vehicle __________________________
			                                                     make and type of vehicle

	bearing License Plates _________________________________   you are 
                                                     State and Number                     Year
	hereby charged with a TRAFFIC violation by __________________________
			             PARKING                                  Name of offense
	On ___________________________________
	At _______________________________________
		Location, position or zone
	on the _______ day of _______________, 19____, at ______ o’clock ____ m.

You have the privilege of appearing within 48 hours at the TRAFFIC VIOLATION BUREAU, City Court, City Clerk’s Office between 9 A.M. and 5 P.M., either in person or by written power of attorney in the form hereinafter prescribed.  If you fail to do so, you will be prosecuted.
			                            Officer ________________________________
	NOTICE:  Conviction of any moving violation may mean suspension or loss of
	                  license.

	2.  Admission of Personal Service

I hereby admit receipt and personal service of a copy of notice appearing on the reverse side of this form and stipulate that it shall have the legal effect of an information when filed in Court.

	Dated the ____ day of 
         	___________, 19 ___.                                  ______________________________
			                                                         Signature of Person Served
	Disposition ____________________________

	3.  Power of Attorney

	Power of Attorney for Appearance at the Traffic Violations Bureau
	   		(To be signed except in case of Personal Appearance)

I, the undersigned, appoint _____________________ of ___________________ my Attorney, for me and in my name to appear before the City Court of the City of Sherrill, N.Y. and to pay the fine prescribed for the violation with which I am charged, and in writing, waive a hearing in Court, plead guilty to the charge and authorize the person in charge of the Bureau to make such a plea for me and to pay such fine into Court.  This is my __________ offense for this violation within the present calendar year.

	Dated the _____ day of 
	________________, 19 ___.                       _______________________________
			                                                                Signature
            
			                                            Witness _________________________

Operator’s License must accompany this ticket to Bureau for all Traffic Violations.  It will be returned immediately.
                                             - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
The forms hereinbefore prescribed may be combined in one form.  Minor additions to or minor departures from the prescribed forms shall not invalidate the same.  The combined form may also contain a schedule of fines for violations.



 
ORDINANCE NO. 22

Vehicle/Trailer Ordinance

	Section 1.  Legislative Intent.  A clean, wholesome, attractive environment is declared to be of importance to the health and safety of the inhabitants of the City of Sherrill and the safeguarding of their material rights is deemed essential to the maintenance and continued development of the economy of the City and the general welfare of its citizens.  It is further declared that the unrestrained accumulation and storage of vehicles, trailers, crafts or vessels threatens said environment and citizenry thereby necessitating the regulation, restraint and elimination thereof.

	Section 2.  Storage Restrictions.  For all parcels located within an R-1 or R-2 Residence District, the storage, whether permanent or seasonal, of all motor vehicles, trailers, campers, motor homes, boats, crafts, vessels and recreational vehicles/ATV’s (hereinafter referred to collectively as “vehicle/trailer” shall only be permitted in the side yard, no more than 5 feet further than the front of the house; and in the rear yard and shall be limited to two in number.  The location of said vehicle/trailer must be a minimum of five feet from any property boundary  Said restriction applies to both operable and/or inoperable vehicles/trailers as well as any materials/parts from said vehicles/trailers, when taken together, equal two vehicles/trailers.  

	For parcels located in a commercial districts, the above restrictions shall be the same. In the event that a commercial property owner feels that two vehicles/trailers are not sufficient to support their respective commercial activities, the property owner may apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a special use permit for no more than three vehicles/trailers in total provided that their respective property contains at least 16,000 square feet. 
	For purposes of the above restrictions, in the event the parcel does not contain a rear yard or the rear yard is insufficient to store said vehicle/trailer, the property owner may apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a special use permit. Said restrictions do not apply to any vehicles/trailers located in a storage structure that is completely enclosed.  

	Section 3.  Vehicle/Trailer Repair Restrictions.  For all parcels located within an R-1 or R-2 Residence District, the prolonged repair or maintenance of a vehicle/trailer in the driveway of a dwelling is prohibited.  A vehicle/trailer can be located in the driveway of a dwelling for repair or maintenance for no longer than fourteen days.  Permits for an additional fourteen day periods may be obtained by the City Manager upon completion of an application and the payment of a Twenty-Five ($25.00) application fee.  The first application for an additional fourteen days will be granted as of right.  Every subsequent application will be at the discretion of the City Manager.  

	Section 4.  Vehicle/Trailer Sale Restrictions.  For all parcels located within an R-1 or R-2 Residence District, the sale of vehicles/trailers is allowed for the residents of that property but restricted to one vehicle/trailer at any one time with the location of said vehicle/trailer contained to the driveway of the dwelling and for no longer than a thirty day time period of time.  Permits for additional thirty day  periods may be obtained by the City Manager upon completion of an application and the payment of a Twenty-Five ($25.00) application fee.  The first application for an additional thirty days will be granted as of right.  Every subsequent application will be in the discretion of the City Manager.  

	Section 5.  Notice.  For any parcels not in compliance with this ordinance, the City Codes Officer shall issue a written notice instructing the owner to remedy the violation in seven (7) calendar days.  Written notice shall be accomplished by both certified, return-receipt mail to the address on record with the City of Sherrill for mailing of tax assessments and posting of the notice at the physical location, providing there is a structure at the location to accomplish the latter.  If the location contains no structure by which to affix the notice, then the registered mailing shall be the only form of notice.

	Section 6.  Penalties.  Any person violating this local ordinance, who fails to correct the violation after receiving notice, shall be liable to a civil penalty of $500 to be recovered by the City in a civil action or proceeding.  Each day such violation continues shall result in an additional $100 per day penalty, up to a total maximum penalty of $5,000.  The City may also maintain an action or special proceeding for an injunction or other equitable relief to compel compliance with, or to restrain the violation of this local ordinance.  The use of any remedy shall not prevent the use of any other remedy hereunder.  The listing of remedies herein shall not deprive the city of the use of any other remedies provided by any other provisions of law.  

	Section 7.  Definitions – For purposes of this Ordinance, the term “vehicle/trailer” shall mean any motor vehicle, motor home, fifth wheel trailers, tent camping trailers, self contained travel trailer, open air trailers, camper, boat, vessel, craft, snowmobile, construction trailer, ATV  or other recreational vehicles.  


Adopted 9/22/14
 

 
ORDINANCE NO. 23

Weeds and Other Vegetation

	Section 1.  Cutting and Removal of Grass, Weeds and Other Rank, Poisonous or Harmful Vegetation.  It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant, or any agent, servant, representative or employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant having control of any occupied or unoccupied lot or land or any part thereof in the City of Sherrill to permit or maintain on any such lot or land, or on or along the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to the same between the property line and the curb or middle of the alley or for ten feet outside the property line if there be no curb, any growth of weeds, grass or other rank vegetation to a greater height than ten inches on the average, or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush.  It shall also be unlawful for any such person or persons to cause, suffer or allow poison ivy, ragweed or other poisonous plants, or plants detrimental to health to grow on any such lot or land in such manner that any part of such ivy, ragweed or other poisonous or harmful weed shall extend upon, overhang or border any public place or allow to seed, pollen or other poisonous particles or emanations therefrom to be carried through the air into any public place.

	Section 2.  Duty of Owner, Lessee or Occupant.  It shall be the duty of any owner, lessee or occupant of any lot or land to cut and remove or cause to be cut and removed all such weeds, grass or other rank poisonous or harmful vegetation as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of Section 1; provided that cutting and removing such weeds, grass and vegetation at least once in every three weeks between April 1 and November 1, shall be deemed to be a compliance with this ordinance.  (Amended 4/14/14)

	Section 3.  When City to do Work.  If the provisions of the foregoing sections are not complied with the City Manager shall serve, or cause to be served, written notice upon the owner, lessee or occupant or any person having the care or control of any such lot or land to comply with the provisions of this ordinance.  If the person upon whom the notice is served fails, neglects or refuses to cut and remove or to cause to be cut and removed such weeds, grass or other vegetation within five days after receipt of such notice, or if no person can be found in the City of Sherrill who either is or claims to be the owner of such lot or land or who either represents or claims to represent such owner, the city shall cause such weeds, grass and other vegetation on such lot or land to be cut and removed, and the actual cost of such cutting and removal, plus five percent for inspection and other additional costs in connection therewith, shall be certified by the City Manager to the City Commission and shall thereupon become and be a lien upon the property on which such weeds, grass and other vegetation were located and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lot or land and shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same officer and in the same manner as taxes.

 
ORDINANCE NO. 24

Hunting

(Repealed 9/12/88)
	





 
ORDINANCE NO. 25

Tattooing Prohibited

	Section 1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to tattoo a human being within the City of Sherrill.

	Section 2.  Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit a duly licensed physician from tattooing a human being for medical purposes.

	Section 3.  Any person who violates this ordinance shall be guilty of an offense punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

	Section 4.  This ordinance shall take effect upon its filing with the City Clerk.  (2/22/88)


 
ORDINANCE NO. 26

The Electrical Code of the City of Sherrill, New York

	Section 1.  Title.  This ordinance shall be known as The Electrical Code of the City of Sherrill, NY.

	Section 2.  Statement of Purpose.  Since there is danger to life and property inherent in the use of electrical energy, this electrical ordinance is enacted to regulate the installation, alteration or repair of wiring for electric light, heat or power and signal systems operating on 50 volts or more, in or on all real property within the City of Sherrill.

	Section 3.  National Code Adopted.  All electrical installations, heretofore mentioned shall be made in conformity with the requirements of the National Electrical Code except where the provisions of this ordinance or any other local law, ordinance or building code of the City of Sherrill shall differently prescribe, in which event compliance with the provisions of such local law, ordinance or building code shall be recognized as proper compliance with this ordinance.  The requirements of the National Electrical Code shall be those known as National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet #70, as approved and adopted by the American Standards Association.

	Section 4.  Inspector.  Any qualified inspector approved in writing by the City Manager may make inspections and reinspections of all electrical installations heretofore and hereafter described, and to approve or disapprove the same.  In no event, however, will the cost or expense of any such inspection or reinspection be a charge against the City of Sherrill.  No inspector, or any director, officer, agent or employee of any inspector, shall perform any services within the City of Sherrill which services shall be subject to inspection under this ordinance.  (Amended 12/27/99)

	Section 5.  Duties of the Inspector.  It shall be the duty of the Inspector to report in writing to the City Manager.

	Section 6.  Violations of the Ordinance.  It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person, firm or corporation to install or cause to be installed, or to alter or repair electrical wiring for light, heat or power, in or on properties in the City of Sherrill until an application for inspection has been filed with the City Manager.  It shall be a violation of this ordinance for a person, firm or corporation to connect or cause to be connected electrical wiring in or on properties for light, heat or power, to any source of electrical energy supply, prior to the issuance of a temporary certificate, or a certificate of compliance, by the New York Board of Fire Underwriters and/or the Independent Electrical Inspection Agency, Inc.  Upon receipt of a report disapproving electrical installations, the City Manager shall cause a copy thereof to be sent to the owner of the premises together with a notice directing the owner to remedy the defective installations in not less than ten nor more than thirty days.  The owner’s failure to do so shall be a violation of this ordinance punishable by a fine not exceeding Five Hundred Dollars.  Each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.

	Section 7.  No Waiver or Assumption of Liability.  This ordinance shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any electric wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for loss of life or damage to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the City of Sherrill, the New York Board of Fire Underwriters or the Independent Electrical Inspection Agency, Inc. be deemed to have assumed any such liability by reason of any inspection made pursuant to this Ordinance.

	Section 8.  Separability Clause.  If any part or provision of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstance be adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part of provision or application directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of this ordinance or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances and the City Commission of the City of Sherrill hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance or the remainder thereof had such invalid application or invalid provision been apparent.

	Section 9.  Effective Date.  This ordinance shall take effect upon its filing in the office of the City Clerk.    (4/25/88)



 
ORDINANCE NO. 27

Automobile Junk Yards

	Section 1.  Legislative Intent.  A clean, wholesome, attractive environment is declared to be of importance to the health and safety of the inhabitants and the safeguarding of their material rights is deemed essential to the maintenance and continued development of the economy of the City of Sherrill and the general welfare of its citizens.  It is further declared that the unrestrained accumulation of junk motor vehicles is a hazard to such health, safety and welfare of citizens of the city necessitating the regulation, restraint and elimination thereof.

	Section 2.  Definitions.  For the purpose of this section:

(a)  “Automobile junk yard” shall mean any place of storage or deposit, whether in connection with business or not, where more than one unregistered, old, or secondhand motor vehicle, no longer intended or in condition for legal use on the public highways, is held, whether for the purpose of resale of used parts therefrom, for the purpose of reclaiming for use some or all of the materials therein, whether metal, glass, fabric or otherwise, for the purpose of disposing of the same, or for any other purpose; such term shall include any waste materials from motor vehicles, which, taken together, equal in bulk more than one such vehicle provided, however, the term junk yard shall not be construed to mean an establishment having facilities for processing iron, steel or nonferrous scrap and whose principal produce is scrap iron, steel or nonferrous scrap for sale for remelting purposes only.

(b)  “Motor vehicle” shall mean any vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular power originally intended for use on public highways.

	Section 3.  Automobile junkyards prohibited.  No person shall operate, establish or maintain an automobile junkyard in the City of Sherrill.

	Section 4.  Violations.  Violators of this ordinance shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine not exceeding Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) and each week that such violation is carried on or continues shall constitute a separate violation.

	Section 5.  Effective Date.  This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon the filing thereof with the City Clerk.  (5/9/88)







ORDINANCE NO. 28

Unsafe Buildings

	Section 1.  Purpose.  Unsafe buildings pose a threat to life and property in the City of Sherrill.  Buildings and structures may become unsafe by reason of damage by fire, the elements, age or general deterioration.  Vacant buildings not properly secured at doorways and windows also serve as an attractive nuisance for young children who may be injured therein, as well as a point of congregation by vagrants and transients.  A dilapidated building may also serve as a place of rodent infestation, thereby creating a health menace to the community.  It is the purpose of this ordinance to provide for the safety, health protection and general welfare of persons and property in the City of Sherrill by requiring that such unsafe buildings be repaired or demolished and removed.

	Section 2.  Definitions.  

(1)  “Building” means any building structure or portion thereof used for residential, business or industrial purpose.
 
(2)  “Building Inspector” means the code enforcement officer of the City of Sherrill or such other person appointed by the City Commission to enforce the provisions of this ordinance.

	(3)  “City” means the City of Sherrill.

	Section 3.  Investigation and Report.  When in his own opinion or upon receipt of information that a building (1) is or may become dangerous or unsafe to the general public; (2) is open at the doorways and windows making it accessible to and an object of attraction to minors under eighteen years of age, as well as to vagrants and other trespassers; (3) is or may become a place of rodent infestation; (4) presents any other danger to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public; or (5) is unfit for the purposes for which it may lawfully be used, the building inspector shall cause or make an inspection thereof and report in writing to the City Commission his findings and recommendations in regard to its repair or demolition and removal.

	Section 4.  Order.  The City Commission shall thereafter consider such report and by resolution determine, if in its opinion the report so warrants, that such building is unsafe and dangerous and order its repair if the same can be safely repaired or its demolition and removal, and further order that a notice be served upon the persons and in the manner provided herein.

	Section 5.  Notice; Contents.  The notice shall contain the following:  (1) a description of the premises; (2) a statement of the particulars in which the building is unsafe or dangerous; (3) an order outlining the manner in which the building is to be made safe and secure, or demolished and removed; (4) a statement that the securing or removal of such building shall commence within 30 days of the service of the notice and shall be completed within 60 days thereafter, unless, for good cause shown, such time shall be extended; (5) a date, time and place for a hearing before the City Commission in relation to such dangerous or unsafe building, which hearing shall be scheduled not less than five business days from the date of service of the notice; and (6) a statement that in the event of failure or refusal to comply with the order to secure or demolish and remove the building, the City Commission is authorized to provide for its demolition and removal, to assess all expenses thereof against the land on which it is located and to institute a special proceeding to collect the cost of demolition, including legal expenses.

	Section 6.  Service of Notice.  The said notice shall be served upon the owner(s) of the premises and upon each person having any other interest therein as shown by the records of the receiver of taxes or of the Oneida County Clerk.  Service shall be made (1) by personal service or (2) by registered mail addressed to such person at his last known address as shown by the aforementioned records and by posting a copy of said notice upon the premises.  If service is made by registered mail, service shall be deemed to be complete upon actual delivery of the notice to the addressee or the fifth (5th) day following its mailing, whichever shall first occur.

	Section 7.  A copy of the notice served as provided herein shall be filed in the office of the Oneida County Clerk.

	Section 8.  Failure or Refusal to Comply.  In the event of the failure or refusal of the person so notified to comply with said order of the City Commission and after the hearing, the City Commission shall provide for the demolition and removal of such building or structure either by City employees or by contract.  Except in emergency as provided in section 10 hereof, any contract for demolition and removal of a building in excess of $20,000.00 shall be awarded through competitive bidding.

	Section 9.  Assessment of Expenses.  All expenses incurred by the City in connection with the proceedings to repair and secure or demolish and remove the unsafe building, including the cost of actually removing such building, and all reasonable and necessary legal expenses incidental thereto, shall, at the option of the City Commission either:

	(1)  Be assessed against the land on which such building is located and shall be levied and collected in the same manner as provided in Title X of the Charter of the City of Sherrill, or

(2)  Be collected by commencement of a special proceeding against the owner of the said unsafe or dangerous building or structure pursuant to General Municipal Law Section 78-b.

	Section 10.  Emergency Cases.  Where it reasonably appears that there is present a clear and imminent danger to the life, safety or health of any person or property, unless an unsafe building is immediately repaired and secured or demolished, the City Commission may by resolution authorize the building inspector to immediately cause the repair or demolition of such unsafe building.  The expenses of such repair or demolition shall be a charge against the land on which it is located and shall be assessed, levied and collected as provided in Section 9 hereof.

	Section 11.  Separability.  Each separate provision of this ordinance shall be deemed independent of all other provisions herein, and if any provisions shall be deemed invalid, all other provisions hereof shall remain valid and enforceable.

	Section 12.  Effective date.  This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its filing in the office of the City Clerk.  (6/28/93)

		
 
ORDINANCE NO. 29

Truck Regulations

Section 1. Findings. 

	WHEREAS, use of the City’s local streets and thoroughfares by trucks having a gross vehicle weight (“GVW”) of ten thousand (10,000) pounds, or five (5) tons, has an adverse impact on the integrity of the City’s infrastructure and, additionally, has the potential to adversely affect the health, safety, comfort and repose of the City’s populace and neighborhoods; and

	WHEREAS, the City of Sherrill has conducted a truck analysis which has identified, inter alia:  traffic patterns within the City of Sherrill; appropriate thoroughfares for use by trucks having a GVW of more than five (5) tons; and the number of vehicles that utilize various City streets and rights-of-way, and

	WHEREAS, the City has identified rights-of-way and thoroughfares in and around the City of Sherrill that are appropriate for and can handle the adverse effects associated with and/or caused by vehicles having a GVW of more than five (5) tons; and

	WHEREAS, it is the opinion of The City Commissioners of the City of Sherrill’s best interests are furthered by adopting legislation that specifically identifies rights-of-way and thoroughfares that may be utilized by truck and vehicles having a GVW of more than five (5) tons and expressly restricts said vehicles from use of non-permitted rights-of-way or thoroughfares unless for local deliveries or emergency purposes.

	WHEREAS, following enactment of the original ordinance on July 31, 2017 there has been considerable additional public input and concern regarding the practical impact of the regulations as enacted, and the City Commissioners have determined it is in the best interests of the City to revise and re-enact the regulation as revised to address such concerns.

Section 2.  Legislative Purpose.

The Sherrill City Commission adopts the truck regulations and restrictions set forth in this ordinance upon the determination that excluding vehicles and/or combinations of vehicle(s) and trailer(s) from certain streets and rights-of-way in the City of Sherrill is in the City’s best interests for among the following reasons:  said exclusion protects the integrity and useful life of the City’s roadway and traffic infrastructure, thereby reducing costs of maintenance and repair to the City’s taxpayers;  said exclusion protects the health, safety, welfare and repose of the City’s residents; and said exclusion protects and enhances the essential characters of the City’s residential neighborhoods.
  
Section 3. Truck Route System; Regulations and Restrictions.

A.	In the City of Sherrill the truck route system upon which:

	1.  all trucks, commercial vehicles, tractors, tractor-trailer combination, tractors-semitrailer combination or tractors-trailer-semitrailer combination, whether loaded or unloaded having a total gross weight (“GVW”) in excess of five (5) tons; or

	2.  any truck, commercial vehicle, tractor, tractor-trailer combination, tractor semitrailer combination or tractor-trailer-semitrailer more than 25 feet in length, whether loaded or unloaded,

 are permitted to travel and operate shall consist of all numbered New York State highway routes through the City of Sherrill.

B.	No person, firm, corporation or other type of entity shall operate or permit to be driven or operated any trucks, tractors, tractor-trailer combinations or other vehicles or combinations of vehicles identified at subsection 3 (A) hereof on any street, or thoroughfares except those numbered New York State highway routes through the City of Sherrill as permit such driving or operation of said vehicles; provided, however, this exclusion from the driving or operation of said vehicles shall not apply to Sherrill Road.  A violation of this section shall be punishable in accordance with Section 4 hereof. 

C.	Such exclusions shall not prevent the necessary delivery or pick-up of merchandise or other property along the streets from which trucks or other vehicles regulated hereunder are otherwise excluded, provided that the vehicle from which any such delivery is made shall enter and leave any such designated truck route by the street which is the nearest to and provides the safest accessibility to the place where such delivery or pick-up is to be made.    Further, a delivery vehicle that would otherwise be prohibited from the street upon which a delivery is made shall remain on such prohibited streets for a period of time no longer than is necessary and reasonable to make such delivery or to complete a loading or unloading of such vehicle.  Permitted use of city streets as provided for herein shall include necessary delivery or pick-up to or from locations within the City of Sherrill and up to one-quarter mile outside the city’s corporate boundaries. 

D.	Nothing in this section shall be construed to exclude or prevent the necessary operation of trucks or other vehicles regulated hereunder while in use by the United States Postal Service or military services, or by fire, police, sanitation, or street maintenance services, or by school/transport buses, or by public service corporations while on emergency repair work or as otherwise reasonably necessary to complete their work or duties, or for purposes of obtaining a New York State Department of Motor Vehicle license 

E.	Conspicuous and legible signs shall be placed at such locations and contain such information as is necessary to apprise the public and affected persons, corporations and other entities of the restrictions set forth in this Ordinance.

Section 4. Violations.

A violation of this ordinance shall be deemed an “offense” as defined in the Penal Law of the State of New York, and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding Five Hundred Dollars ($500) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten (10) days or both.  Nothing herein shall be construed to limit any other remedies as may be available to the City for violations of the regulations and restrictions imposed hereby, including a civil action for damages to the streets of the City as a result of non-permitted use.

Section 5. Effective Date.

This Ordinance shall take effect January 1, 2018.

(Amended 11/13/17)































       ORDINANCE NO. 30

Green Waste

Green Waste shall be placed curbside in the marginal strip between the road and sidewalk (where applicable).  Green waste shall not be placed in the road way or obstruct pedestrian traffic on a sidewalk or right of way.  Green Waste shall not be placed near or around utility poles, guide wires, hydrants, vehicles, water shut offs, or any other obstructions.

Green waste shall not be placed curbside for municipal collection any earlier than the Friday preceding the scheduled Monday green waste Collection date. Collection applies to the normal, weekly accumulation of same and is not intended as a means of disposal of unusual accumulation of tree trunks, large tree limbs, sod, dirt, stones and the like.

Maximum volume of green waste per scheduled pick up date shall not exceed one dump truck load (8 cu. yd.) per household.

Stick piles shall be placed parallel to the roadway.  Maximum stick/branch lengthy shall be six feet (6’), and maximum diameter shall be four inches (4”).  Do NOT tie sticks and/or branches together, leave loosely piled/stacked.

Do not place any leaves, grass clippings, sticks, etc. in bags of any kind (plastic or paper), and do not place on any tarps.  Loose collection is preferred, however if containers are used for green waste, they shall not be greater than 32 gallons and must have perforated bottoms to allow water to drain. Each container shall weigh no more than 40 pounds.  Emptied containers shall be removed from the marginal strip by 8:00pm on the day of pick up.

Please remember that no foreign matter should be co-mingled with green waste, such as: paper, household garbage, lumber, metal, construction debris, stones, concrete, animal feces, etc. 

All residents can bring their green waste, brush, limbs larger than 4” in diameter to the dedicated green waste area located at the City transfer station (DPW Garage) located at 210 Elmwood Place.  The transfer station is intended only for green waste generated within the City of Sherrill boundaries.

Landscape contractors and Tree removal contractors are prohibited from placing green waste and brush at the curb; they are responsible for their own disposal.  Contractors can purchase a green waste permit from the City at the designated fee.   Contactors performing work inside the City can contact the City of Sherrill at 315-363-2440 for information on registering with the City and obtaining a permit.  Green waste generated from outside the City of Sherrill may not be disposed of at the City of Sherrill transfer station.  
(4/09/18)			
      ORDINANCE NO. 31

Burning

The burning of garbage, rubbish, trash, leaves and other objectionable smoke or fume producing matter out-of-doors in the City of Sherrill, except as otherwise provided herein, is hereby prohibited.  This prohibition does not include the burning of waste paper and the like customarily disposed of in an outdoor household incinerator, nor does it prohibit outdoor cooking fires.  All burning shall be prohibited within the area between resident buildings/structures and city streets.  Any burning deemed unsafe or hazardous by City of Sherrill, shall be extinguished immediately in a safe manner.  Ashes or any remnants related to burning, shall not be placed at curbside for municipal collection.  Residents desiring to dispose of cold ashes may do so at an authorized City designated location. 

NYS DEC Regulations
Burning trash is prohibited statewide in all cases. DEC recommends that you recycle all appropriate materials (such as newspaper, paper, glass and plastic) and compost your organic kitchen and garden waste.

All open burning is prohibited in New York with several exceptions including the following:
•	Campfires less than 3 feet in height and 4 feet in length, width or diameter are allowed.
•	Small cooking fires are allowed.
•	Fires cannot be left unattended and must be fully extinguished.
•	Only charcoal or clean, untreated or unpainted wood can be burned.
•	Ceremonial or celebratory bonfires are allowed.

Burning leaves is banned in New York State. The State encourages you to compost leaves.

Before burning, individuals should check the NYS DEC website at http://www.dec.ny.gov to inquire if a burn ban is active or not. Violators of the state's open burning regulation are subject to both criminal and civil enforcement actions, with a minimum fine of $500 for a first offense. To report environmental law violations, call 1-800-TIPP DEC (1-800-847-7332), or report online on DEC's website.

(04/09/18)







CITY OF SHERRILL

LOCAL ORDINANCES

1 – 31


Ordinances 1 – 23	Reenacted and codified				02/28/83
	10	Revised and readopted				04/22/85
	24	Adopted	12/14/87
	25	Adopted	02/22/88
	26	Adopted	04/25/88
	27	Adopted	05/09/88
	15	Revised and readopted	07/11/88
	 8	Revised and readopted	09/12/88
	24	Repealed	09/12/88
	28	Adopted	06/28/93
	 1	Amended  (Section 3)	12/27/99
	 4	Amended (Section 1, Section 3)	12/27/99
	 5	Repealed (Disorderly Conduct)	12/27/99
	 5	Adopted (Noise)	12/27/99
	 6	Amended (Section 2(b)(1), Section 6)	12/27/99
	12	Repealed (Section 2)	12/27/99
	14	Amended (Section 10)	12/27/99
	20	Repealed (Section 6, sub. 2)	12/27/99
	26	Amended (Section 4)	12/27/99
	 5	New Section 3.d. and 3.e.	09/11/06
	 6	Amended (Sections 3, 4, 8(a), (b), (c)	12/13/10
	 6	Repealed (Sections 7-7A, New (Sections 7-7D)	12/13/10
	23	Amended (Section 2)	04/14/14
	22	Revised and readopted	09/22/14
	29 	Adopted	07/31/17
	29	Revised	12/27/17
	10	Revised and Readopted	04/09/18
	30	Adopted	04/09/18
	31	Adopted	04/09/18
	 6	Amended (Section 1 (c) )	05/13/19
	10	Amended (Section 6)	05/13/19			


1
Zoning Regulations
City of Sherrill
New York
(Adopted April 27, 2015)
2
A LOCAL LAW REGULATING AND RESTRICTING THE LOCATION, CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION AND USE OF BUILDINGS AND LAND IN THE CITY OF SHERRILL, NEW YORK, PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER 21, ARTICLE 2A OF THE CONSOLIDATED LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK.
THE CITY COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF SHERRILL by virtue of the power and authority vested in it by law does hereby ordain and enact as follows:
ARTICLE 1 - TITLE
Section 1 – This local law shall be known and may be cited as “The Zoning Regulations of the City of Sherrill, New York”.
ARTICLE 2 - PURPOSE
Section 2 – Purpose and General Rules
1. These Regulations are enacted for the following purposes:
a. to lessen congestion in the streets
b. to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers
c. to promote health and the general welfare of the public
d. to provide adequate light and air and acceptable noise levels
e. to prevent the overcrowding of land
f. to avoid undue concentration of population
g. to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements
h. to preserve the value of buildings and property and the overall character of the City
i. to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the City
2. General Rules Governing All Zoning Districts
a. Land shall only be used for the purposes permitted in the district in which it is located.
3
b. Buildings erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered; or any part thereof shall be done so according to the regulations of the district in which the building is located.
c. If a use in any structure is hereafter changed to another use then the new use shall comply with these regulations.
ARTICLE 3 - DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
Section 3 – Establishment of Districts
The City of Sherrill is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
R-1 Residence District
R-2 Residence District
C-1 Commercial District
C-2 Commercial District
M-1 Manufacturing District
M-P Manufacturing District – planned
Section 4 – Zoning Maps
The locations and boundaries of the zoning districts hereby established are shown on a map entitled “Zoning Districts”. The District map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are hereby declared to be a part of these Regulations. The City Manager shall delineate on the Zoning Map all amendments to the District boundaries, which are authorized by ordinance/local law immediately upon the effective date of such ordinance/local law, indicating the title and date of the ordinance/local law.
Section 5 – District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists as to the locations of any boundaries shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
1. District boundary lines are intended to follow centerlines of streets and alleys, rights-of-way, watercourses, or lot lines, or be parallel or perpendicular thereto, unless such boundary lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on the zoning maps.
2. Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
3. In subdivided land and where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions shown on the map, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing thereon.
4
4. If, after the application of the foregoing rules, uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a district boundary, the Board of Appeals shall determine and fix the location of said line.
ARTICLE 4 – USE REGULATIONS
Section 6 – R-1 Residence District
In any R-1 Residence District no building shall be erected or extended and no land or building or part thereof shall be used except for any of the following purposes:
1. One-family dwellings
2. Farms and nurseries
3. Formal places of worship or religious education and related living quarters i.e. convent, parish house or rectory
4. Public or private schools or public libraries
5. Public park or playground
6. Golf course
7. Residential daycares per N.Y.S. rules and regulations
8. Accessory structure , provided there shall be no more than two accessory structures, including garages (attached or detached), the square footage of both not to exceed 720 square feet on lots 24,000 square feet or smaller. On lots larger than 24,000 square feet, the combined square footage of the two accessory structures can be up to 1000 square feet. Any accessory structures bigger than 500 square feet are subject to ten foot setbacks from the property line. Structures less than 500 square feet have a 5 foot setback requirement. Accessory structures may not include any activity commonly conducted as a business.
9. Customary home occupation or profession conducted in a residence by resident occupants that do not impact the surrounding neighborhood in any significant way such as excessive traffic, deliveries, parking overflow or noise. Nor shall any retail finished products be stocked or offered for sale on the premises unless it is an incidental aspect to the home occupation and there shall be no external evidence of such occupation except one (1) sign as permitted in Section 23 of these Regulations.
10. Municipal use
5
11. The following uses, subject to approval by the Board of Appeals as provided in Section 41 Special Exception:
a. Nursing or convalescent home
b. Non-profit housing
Section 7 – R-2 Residence District
In any R-2 Residence District no building shall be erected or extended and no land or building or part thereof shall be used except for any of the following purposes:
1. Any use permitted in the R-1 Residence District
2. Two-family dwellings
3. Three family dwellings created by conversion of structures existing at the time of adoption of these Regulations which do not alter the footprint of the existing structure; and provided further that there shall be one off-street parking space provided in the side or rear yard for each dwelling unit.
4. Charitable or philanthropic institutions
5. Bed & Breakfast
6. The following uses, subject to approval by the Board of Appeals as provided in Section 41 Special Exception:
a. Club, lodge, social and recreational building
Section 8 – C-1 Commercial District
In any C-1 Commercial District no building shall be erect or extended and no land or building or part thereof shall be used except for any of the following purposes:
1. Any use permitted in the R-2 Residence District
2. Business, professional or governmental office
3. Bank or other financial institution
4. Retail store to include liquor stores
5. Restaurant and/or restaurants with drive through service lanes
6
6. Confectionery, bakery, millinery, dressmaking, tailoring, florist, and similar shops, provided that all goods made or processed on the premises for retail sale.
7. Personal service shops such as barber, shoe repair, beauty parlor, photographer, optician, letter press and offset printing shop
8. Radio, television, computer, technology and household appliances sales and service/repair.
9. Dry cleaning and pressing shops
10. Laundries and/or laundromats
11. Studios – music, dance, theatrical
12. Funeral Homes
13. Public utility or municipal structure
14. Business sign shop
15. Automotive fuel/service station, car wash, convenience store subject to approval by the Board of Appeals, as provided in Section 40.
16. Apartment Houses
17. Convenience Store
18. Hospital
19. Firehouse
20. Planned shopping center
21. The following uses, subject to approval by the Board of Appeals as provided in Section 41 Special Exception:
a. Motels, hotels and apartment houses.
b. Public garages.
Section 9 – C-2 Commercial District
In any C-2 Commercial District no building shall be erected or extended and no land or building or part thereof shall be used except for any of the following purposes:
7
1. Any use permitted in the C-1 Commercial District
2. Fruit and vegetable market
3. Automobile and farm machinery sales and service and heavy equipment
4. recreation hall
5. Printing and publishing
6. Light manufacturing & assembly plants
7. Development and Research Centers
8. Animal hospital, kennel or pound
9. Garage, public & private storage
10. Automotive Fuel Service Station
11. Laboratories or scientific sample collection centers.
12. Tattoo parlor
Section 10 – M-1 Manufacturing District
All non-residential buildings, structures and uses herein before allowed in Sections 6, 7, 8 and 9 are hereby allowed in the M-1 Manufacturing District, and
1. Any other trade or industry, subject to initial and continued compliance with performance standards as prescribed in Article 5, the use of which does not by reason of the emission of noise, dust or odors become obnoxious or dangerous to the health and safety of the public.
2. It is the intent to include adult entertainment in the M-1 District to provide for adult entertainment establishments. However, such establishments, by their nature, are known to produce deleterious effects on adjacent development and the blighting and downgrading of surrounding neighborhoods, especially where such establishments are clustered. Special regulations of such uses are therefore necessary to ensure that these and other adverse secondary effects will not impact residential neighborhoods, public and quasi-public institutions and facilities serving the youth of the community.
Adult entertainment to include but not limited to escort agencies, adult movie, book and/or video store, adult entertainment establishment, adult cabarets, nightclubs or bars
8
which feature live entertainment that consist in any way of topless or bottomless females and/or males, adult novelty store and other businesses related to adult entertainment activities shall be subject to the following:
a. Merchandise or activities of the establishment shall not be visible from any point outside of the building or structure containing the use; or
b. The observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities from any point outside of the building or structure containing such use is prohibited.
c. The provisions of Subsections 2.a. and 2.b. above shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, and window or other opening.
d. No adult use as set out in Sec. 10-2 above shall be allowed within 1,000 feet of another existing adult use.
e. No adult use as set out in Sec. 10-2 above shall be located within 1,000 feet of any residential zoning district.
f. No adult use as set out in Sec. 10-2 above shall be located within 1,000 feet of any bar or tavern.
g. No adult use as set out in Sec. 10-2 above shall be located within 1,000 feet of an existing church or place of worship, child care center or educational institution.
h. For purposes of Subsections d., e., f., and g., above, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the proposed adult entertainment use to the nearest point on the property line of the said uses.
i. No more than one adult entertainment use shall be conducted within any building or structure containing an adult use.
j. All adult entertainment uses shall be subject to all other articles of the zoning regulations and any other applicable city codes.
3. Warehousing and distribution but not including truck terminals
4. Light manufacturing and assembly plants for the following uses:
a. Manufacturing, compounding, processing and packaging of such products as candy, and food products
9
b. Manufacturing, compounding, assembling, recycling or treatment of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials:
paper
plastics
precious or semi-precious metals or stones
textiles
wood
c. Manufacture or assembly of electrical or electronic instruments or devices,
precision measuring devices, surgical or dental instruments, musical instruments, rubber or metal stamps, toys or novelties.
5. Cellular telephone towers and antennas. .
In the M-1 Manufacturing District the use of buildings and land for any of the following purposes is expressly prohibited:
1. Incineration of garbage, offal or refuse
2. Manufacture of fertilizer and bone grinding
3. Slaughter of animals or meatpacking industry
4. Celluloid manufacture, treatment or storage
5. Junk, scrap metal, automobile salvage and similar uses
6. Rubber reclaiming plants, smelters or blast furnaces; tanning, curing or storing of raw hides or skins, coke ovens
7. And in general, any use similar to those enumerated above which would be injurious to the safety or welfare of the neighborhood by reason of smoke, odor, vibration, dirt, dust, glare, noise, or danger of fire or explosion
The above uses may be approved or modified by the Board of Appeals as provided in Section 41, Special Exception.
Section 11 – M-P Planned Manufacturing District
The regulations for the M-P Planned Manufacturing District are intended to provide a means for the establishment of a community of industries developed according to a comprehensive plan, so located and designed as to be compatible with surrounding areas and uses and to contribute to the economic growth of the City.
In the planned manufacturing district the following buildings and uses are permitted:
10
1. Anything permitted in the C-2 district
2. Public utilities station or structure
3. Municipal building or structure
4. Printing or publishing plant
5. Commercial truck sales and/or service
Permitted accessory uses shall include parking, loading and storage areas, and business signs, all of which shall be planned as an integral part of the site and structures, and be located on the same site with the principal use.
Within the Planned Manufacturing District, the following minimum requirements shall apply:
1. Area. Each development within a Planned Manufacturing District shall include a minimum site of 1 acre.
2. Off-street parking shall be provided at a minimum ratio of one space for each two employees on the major shift. Off-street parking and loading shall be in side and rear yard only.
3. Yards:
a. Front yard - 50 feet minimum
b. Side yard - 50 feet minimum
c. Rear yard - 100 feet minimum
4. Building coverage shall not exceed 25 percent of parcel.
5. Building height shall not exceed three stories.
Application for a Planned Manufacturing District development shall be made to the City Commission. The City Commission shall refer the application to the Planning Board for consideration as to area, off-street parking, ingress and egress, yards, building coverage and building height.
The Planning Board shall require the applicant to furnish such preliminary plans, drawings and specifications as may be required for an understanding of the proposed development.
The Planning Board may require such changes in said plans, drawings, elevations and specifications as are found to be necessary to meet the requirements of these Regulations. The Commission may make such additional requirements as are reasonably necessary to protect
11
established or permitted uses in the vicinity and to promote and protect the orderly growth and sound development of the City. In reaching its decision on the proposed development and the changes, if any, in the preliminary plans, drawings, elevations and specifications, the Planning Board shall be guided in its considerations by performance standards as to the following:
1. Fire and explosion hazards
2. Radioactive or electrical disturbance
3. Noise
4. Vibration
5. Glare
6. Smoke
7. Odor
8. Other forms of air pollution
The Planning Board shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove such application and shall report its decision to the City Commission.
In the event that substantial progress has not been made in the execution of the construction authorized by the City Commission within six (6) months from the date of approval, such approval shall be deemed subject to the same regulations and restrictions as were effective before such approval. The City Commission may extend its approval for additional periods of six (6) months.
ARTICLE 5 – INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Section 12 – General Application
Uses permitted in any M-1 Manufacturing or M-P Planned Manufacturing District, and uses accessory thereto, are subject to the following performance standards and procedures.
Section 13 – Performance Standards Procedures
1. Any application for a building permit or a business permit for a use which shall be subject to performance standards, shall include a description of the intended use, which shall be in accordance with the performance standards set forth herein.
12
2. Continued Compliance. Continued compliance with performance standards is required and enforcement of continued compliance with these performance standards shall be enforced by the Codes Enforcement Officer.
3. Determination of Violation. The Codes Enforcement Officer shall investigate any purported violation of performance standards and, if there is reasonable ground for the same, shall notify the City Manager of the occurrence or existence of a probable violation thereof. The City Manager shall investigate the alleged violation. If after a hearing on due notice, the City Commission finds that a violation occurred or exists, such violation shall be remedied as provided in the following paragraph.
4. Remedy of Violation. All violations, as ascertained in accordance with paragraph 3 above shall be remedied within thirty (30) days of the decision of the City Commission or shall be deemed a separate violation for each day following and subject to fines as set forth herein, except that certain uses established before the effective date of these Regulations and nonconforming as to performance standards shall be made to conform therewith within 30 days as determined by the City Commission, unless especially granted by the City Commission.
Section 14 – Regulation of Nuisance Elements
1. Definition of Elements. No land or building in any M-P Planned Manufacturing District which shall be used or occupied for manufacturing purposes shall be operated in such a manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive or other hazard; noise or vibration, smoke, dust, dirt or other form of air pollution; electrical or other disturbance; glare; or other substance, condition or element in such amount as to adversely affect the surrounding area or premises (referred to herein as “dangerous or objectionable elements”); provided that any use permitted by these Regulations may be undertaken and maintained in the M-P Planned Manufacturing District if it conforms to the regulations of this subsection limiting dangerous and objectionable elements at the specified point or points of the determination of their existence.
2. The determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall be made at:
a. The point or points where such elements shall be most apparent for fire or explosion hazards, for radioactivity and electrical disturbances, for smoke and other forms of air pollution.
b. The property lines of the use creating such elements for noise, for vibration, for glare, and for odors.
Section 15 – Standards to be Enforced
1. Fire and Explosion Hazards. All activities involving, and all storage of, inflammable and explosive materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standard in
13
this industry. Burning of waste materials in open fires is prohibited. The relevant provisions of State and local laws and regulations shall also apply.
2. Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbance. No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity or electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance. All applicable Federal regulations shall be complied with.
3. Noise. At the points of measurement specified in Section 14, paragraph 2b the maximum sound pressure level radiated in each standard octave band by any use or facility (other than transportation facilities or temporary construction work) shall not exceed the values for octave bands lying within the several frequency limits given in Table 1 after applying the corrections shown in Table 2. The sound pressure level shall be measured with a Sound Level Meter and associated Octave Band Analyzer conforming to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association, Inc., New York, N.Y. (American Standard Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, 224.3-1944, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, N.Y., and American Standard Specification for an Octave-Band Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, 224.10-1953, or latest approved revision thereof, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, N.Y. shall be used.)
TABLE 1
Frequency Ranges Containing
Standard Octave Bands in Octave Band Sound Pressure Level
Cycles Per Second in Decibels re 0.0002 dyne/cm
20 - 75 65
75 - 150 55
150 - 300 50
300 - 600 45
600 - 1200 40
1200 - 2400 40
Above - 2400 35
If the noise is not smooth and continuous and is not radiated between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m., one or more of the corrections in Table 2 shall be applied to the octave band levels given in Table 1.
TABLE 2
Type of Location of Operation or Correction in
Character of Noise Decibels
1. Daytime operation only 5
2. Noise source operates less than*
14
a. 20% of any one-hour period 5
b. 5% of any one-hour period 10
1. Noise of impulsive character
(hammering, etc.) -5
2. Noise of periodic character
(hum, screech, etc.) -5
3. Property is located in any M-District and
is not within 200 feet of any R-District 10
4. Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is detectable without instruments at the points of measurement specified in Section 14, paragraph 2b.
* Apply one of these corrections only.
5. Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from flood lights or from high-
temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, so as to be visible at the points of measurement specified in paragraph 2b. This restriction shall not apply to signs otherwise permitted by the provisions of these Regulations..
6. Smoke. No emission shall be permitted from any chimney or otherwise, of visible grey smoke of a shade equal to or darker than No. 2 on the Power’s Micro-Ringlemann Chart, published by McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, Inc., and copyright 1954 (being a direct facsimile reduction of a standard Ringlemann Chart as issued by the United States Bureau of
Mines), except that visible grey smoke of a shade equal to No. 3 on said chart may be emitted for 4 minutes in any 30 minutes.
7. Odors. No emission shall be permitted of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at the property line of the zone lot from which they are emitted without instruments.
8. Other Forms of Air Pollution. No emission of fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases and other forms of air pollution shall be permitted which can cause any damage to health, to animal, vegetation, or other forms of property, or which can cause any excessive soiling.
ARTICLE 6 -
LOT AREA AND WIDTH, YARDS, BUILDING COVERAGE AND HEIGHTS
Section 16 – Additional Area Regulations
1. Lots of less than required dimensions
a. Any lot with an area or a width less than that required in the district in which said lot is located may be used for any purpose permitted in the district, provided that all other regulations prescribed for the district shall be complied with, and further provided that said lot was held under separate ownership at
15
the time of the adoption of these Regulations and the owner thereof owned no adjoining land that could be combined with said lot to meet the dimension requirements.
b. In the event that compliance with the yard and coverage requirements of the district would result in a residential structure of less width than 24 feet, the Board of Appeals shall determine and fix yard and coverage requirements for said lot to permit its reasonable utilization for a permitted use.
c. A single story garage attached to a dwelling may be constructed not nearer than five feet to the property side line, provided that the lot is 70 feet or less in width, and further provided that said lot was held under separate ownership at the time of adoption of these Regulations and the owner thereof owns no adjoining land that could be combined with said lot to meet the dimension required.
2. Reduction of Lot Area. The minimum yards and open spaces, including lot area per family, required by these Regulations for any building existing at the time of adoption of these Regulations, or for any building thereafter erected or structurally altered shall not be encroached upon or considered as yard or open space requirements for any other building, nor shall any lot be reduced below the district requirements of these Regulations..
3. Corner Lot. On a corner lot in any district where a front yard is required, a yard shall be provided on each street equal in depth to the required front yard on such streets. One rear yard shall be provided on each corner lot and the owner shall designate the rear yard on his application for a zoning permit. Nothing in this regulation shall be so interpreted as to reduce the building width of a corner lot facing an intersecting street, and of record at the time of the passage of these Regulations to less than twenty-four (24) feet.
4. Visibility at Street Corners. On a corner lot in any district where a front yard is required, no fence, wall, hedge, or other structure or planting more than three feet in height shall be erected, placed or maintained so as to obstruct visibility of vehicular traffic within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street right-of-way lines and a straight line joining said lines at points 20 feet distant from the point of intersection, measured along said lines.
5. Front Yard Exceptions. The front yard of all buildings and structures hereafter constructed within a Residence District shall be not less than the average front yard of all buildings in the block for a distance of 300 feet on each side of such building. An adjacent vacant lot shall be considered as having the minimum front yard required in the district for the purpose of computing such average front yard.
6. Transition Yard Requirements
a. Where two districts abut on the same street between two intersecting streets, there shall be provided for buildings hereafter constructed or structurally
16
altered within a distance of 50 feet from the district boundary line in the less restricted district a front yard equal in depth to one-half the required depth for the front yard in the more restricted district.
b. Where the side or rear yard of a lot abuts a side or rear yard of a lot in a more restricted district, there shall be provided along such abutting line or lines a side or rear yard equal in depth to that required in the more restricted district.
7. Projecting Architectural Features, Terraces, Porches, Fire Escapes
a. The space in any required yard shall be open and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves and architectural features, provided, however, that such features shall not project more than 2 feet into any required yard.
b. A paved terrace shall not be considered as part of a building in the determination of yard sizes or lot coverage, provided that such terrace is unroofed and without walls, parapets, or other form of enclosure exceeding 6 feet in height.
c. In determining the percentage of building coverage or the size of yards for the purpose of these Regulations, enclosed porches, or porches open at the side but roofed, shall be considered a part of the building.
d. An open fire escape may extend into any required yard not more than 6 feet, provided that such fire escape shall not be closer than 4 feet at any point to any lot line.
e. Unenclosed entrance steps or stairways providing access to the first story of a building may extend into any required yard a distance not to exceed 6 feet.
8. Walls, Fences and Hedges. The yard requirements of these Regulations shall not prohibit any necessary retaining wall nor any fence, wall or hedge, provided that in any residence district, no fence or wall shall exceed 4 feet in height in any front yard or 6 feet in height in any side or rear yard, and provided further that such fence or wall shall be no closer to any front lot line than 2 feet, and shall comply with visibility at street corners as provided in Section 17 of this Article.
9. Minimum Lot Sizes.
a. Residential lots not served by public sewer shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet wide at the building setback line, nor less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in total area, except where percolation tests, in the opinion of the City Engineer (or the City Manager, if there be no City Engineer), require that there be additional area.
17
b. In hillside locations, a slope policy is hereby implemented to require minimum lot sizes, determined by average lot slope, as follows:
Lot Area Average Lot Width
(in square feet) (in feet)
Degrees With Sewers Without Sewers With Sewers Without Sewers
0-10 10,000 20,000 100 100
10-20 15,000 20,000 100 120
Over 20 1 acre 1 acre 150 200
Section 17 – Additional Height Requirements
1. Chimneys, Spires, etc. The height limitations of these Regulations shall not apply to belfries, church spires, cupolas, penthouses and domes which are not used for human occupancy; nor to chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks and necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried above the roof level; nor to flag poles, monuments, transmission towers and cables, radio and satellite antennae or towers and similar structures. Such features, however, shall be erected only to such height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose for which they are intended. No advertising device of any kind whatsoever shall be inscribed upon or attached to that part of any chimney, tower, tank or other structure which extends above the roof limitations.
2. Through Lots. On through lots 120 feet or less in depth, the height of a building may be measured from the grade of either street. On through lots more than 120 feet deep, the height regulations and basis of height measurement for the street permitting the greater height shall apply to a depth of not more than 120 feet from that street.
Section 18 – Residential Floor Area Requirements
Minimum residential ground floor areas, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls, exclusive of garages and open porches, are as follows:
Minimum Ground
Floor Area
District No. of Stories Per Dwelling
Residential R-1 Less than 2 stories 1,000
Two or more stories 800
Residential R-2 Less than 2 stories 800
Two or more stories 700
Commercial C-1 & Less than 2 stories 600
C-2 Two or more stories 600
18
Section 19 – Accessory Structures: Number, Height and Location
1. Number. There shall be not more than two accessory structures, including garages (attached or detached) on each zone lot intended or used for residential purposes except that dwelling groups and large-scale developments shall not be subject to the provisions of this Section.
2. Structure Size Maximum height of accessory structure shall be one story, or 15 feet.
3. Location. Accessory structures in R-Districts which are not attached to a principal building may be erected within the rear yard in accordance with the following requirements:
a. 5 feet from side and rear line except when abutting an alley, then 10 feet.
b. Corner lot – same as for principle building in regards to street side setbacks.
c. Not closer to a principal building than 10 feet.
The following is subject to approval by the Board of Appeals as provided in Section 41 Special Exception.
4. Accessory Structures in Commercial and Manufacturing Districts. Non-dwelling accessory structures shall comply with front and side yard requirements for the principal building to which they are accessory and shall be not closer to any rear property line than 10 feet.
Section 20 – Dwelling Units in Commercial or Manufacturing Districts
In any Commercial or Manufacturing District the requirements for lot area, lot width, side yards, and rear yards as specified for dwellings in the R-2 District shall apply to any commercial or manufacturing building in which one or more dwelling units are also located.
In lieu of the above requirement for such buildings, there may be provided on the lot at ground level free, accessible and usable open space of at least 400 square feet for each dwelling. Said open space shall not be used for storage, automobile parking, accessory buildings or other uses, but shall be available and usable for outdoor recreational use and for household activities which are normally carried on outdoors.
ARTICLE 7 – SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
Section 21 – Lots in Two Districts
Where a district boundary line divides a lot held in one ownership at the time of adoption of said district line, the regulations for the less restricted portion of such lot shall extend not more than 50 feet into a more restricted portion provided the lot has frontage on a street in the less restricted district.
19
Section 22 – Commercial Excavation
Except when incidental to the construction of a building on the same lot, the excavation and removal of sand, gravel, top soil, clay or other natural mineral deposit, or the quarrying of any kind of rock formation is subject to the approval of the Board of Appeals. Before issuing a permit for such use the Board of Appeals shall find that such excavation or quarrying will not endanger the stability of adjacent land nor constitute a detriment to public welfare, convenience or safety by reason of excessive dust, noise, traffic congestion, or other condition. The Board of Appeals may specify any reasonable requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare in granting such permit, and
a. The final slope of material in any excavation or pit shall not exceed the normal limiting angle of repose of such material.
b. The Board of Appeals shall specify the minimum distance between the nearest street and property line and the nearest excavation which will be permitted consistent with the public welfare.
c. The area involved in the commercial excavation shall be restored to a safe, sanitary property drained area and shall be made to conform with the adjacent area.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall, on its own initiative or upon the petition of any resident within 500 feet from the commercial excavation in question, after a public hearing, have the power and authority to revoke a permit previously granted if its continued use shall be found to endanger the stability of adjacent land or constitute a detriment to public welfare, convenience or safety. The Board of Zoning Appeals may decline to issue a permit for commercial excavation in any residential district if it deems such proposed excavation would be contrary to the public interests.
Section 23 – Signs
1. Purpose and intent of sign regulation. It is the purpose and intent of this section to promote and protect the public health, welfare and safety by regulating existing and proposed outdoor signs of all types; to protect property values; to create a more attractive and economic business climate; to enhance and to protect the physical appearance of the community; to reduce sign and advertising distraction and obstructions that my contribute to traffic accidents; to reduce hazards that may be caused by signs occupying, overhanging or projecting into the public right of way; to provide more open space and to curb the deterioration of the community development.
2. No sign shall be erected or maintained in the City of Sherrill except in compliance with the provisions of this section.
3. Residential districts. No sign shall be erected or maintained in any residential district of the City of Sherrill except in compliance with the provisions of this paragraph.
20
a. Identification Sign. One (1) identification sign may be erected and maintained on a residential parcel identifying the name and/or street address of the occupant thereof. Such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area, shall not have a dimension in excess of 6:1 ratio length to width, and no part thereof shall be erected or maintained more than ten (10) feet above ground level. Such sign may be illuminated. Such sign shall not be located nearer than three (3) feet to the city’s sidewalk or, if there be none, then not nearer than ten (10) feet to the paved portion of the road.
b. “For Sale” or “For Rent” Sign. One (1) sign announcing the parcel on which it is located to be for sale or for lease may be erected or maintained. Such sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area, shall not have a single dimension in excess of 4:1 ratio, and no part thereof shall be erected or maintained more than five (5) feet above ground level. Such sign shall not be illuminated. Such sign shall not be located nearer than three (3) feet to the city’s sidewalk or, if there be none, then not nearer than ten (10) feet to the paved portion of the road. Signs in compliance with above do not require prior Zoning Enforcement approval or a permit.
c. Business Sign. Such sign requires Code Enforcement Officer approval. One (1) business sign per parcel may be erected or maintained, and no part thereof shall be erected or maintained more than six (6) feet above ground level. Such sign shall not be located nearer than three (3) feet to the city’s sidewalk or, if there be none, then not nearer than ten (10) feet to the paved portion of the road.
(1) Home Occupations. A home occupation business sign shall be non-illuminated. If located in an R-1 residential district, such sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area; if located in an R-2 residential district, such sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and shall not have a single dimension in excess of a 6:1 ratio.
(2) Churches. A church sign or bulletin board, identifying the church and its denomination, its pastor, times and days of services, and/or upcoming events, may be erected and maintained on the parcel occupied by the church. Such sign may be illuminated. Such sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and shall not have a single dimension in excess of eight (8) feet.
(3) Other Signs. Any other sign, other than for a home occupation or a church, may not be illuminated, shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area, shall not have a single dimension in excess of six (6) feet, and
21
shall not be erected or maintained more than six (6) feet above ground level.
d. Advertising Sign. No advertising sign shall be erected or maintained in a residential district.
e. Event Sign. An “event sign” is a sign announcing a single. One (1) such sign may be erected or maintained on the parcel. The sign shall not be illuminated, shall not exceed nine (9) square feet in area, shall not have a single dimension in excess of nine (9) feet, and shall not be located nearer than three (3) feet to the city’s sidewalk, or if there be none, then not nearer than ten (10) feet to the paved portion of the road. No event sign shall be displayed more than fourteen (14) days prior to the event announced thereon, and no event sign shall be displayed more than five (5) days after the completion of the event announced thereon.
f. Flashing and Neon signs. No flashing sign or neon sign shall be erected or maintained in a residential district.
g. Corner Lots. The owner or occupant of any parcel of land located at the intersection of two public streets shall be authorized to erect one (1) additional sign on said parcel, which sign shall otherwise comply with all other provisions of this paragraph.
4. Non-Residential Districts. In any district other than a residential district, the following provisions shall apply.
a) Prior Approval. No business or advertising sign shall hereafter be erected until the same has been reviewed, approved and awarded a permit by the Code Enforcement Officer. Any person proposing to erect any sign shall submit a scale drawing and/or plan of the proposed sign showing its wording, size and dimensions, materials, proposed location and, if proposed to be affixed to a building more than six (6) feet above ground level, a list of materials and other means by which the same is proposed to be secured to the building, and if the Code Enforcement Officer requires it, a certification to the City of Sherrill from a licensed engineer that the proposed sign and its proposed installation do not constitute a danger to the public health or safety. Upon submission of all materials herein required to the CodeEnforcement Officer. The failure of the Code Enforcement Officer to act within thirty (30) days shall be deemed to constitute his approval of the proposed sign.
b) Business Signs. Not more than two (2) business signs may be erected or maintained by a business, area not to exceed one (1) sq. ft. per linear foot of business building frontage in total. If multiple businesses occupy the business building, they must comply with the aforementioned restrictions in total. Such signs may be illuminated. No portion of any such sign shall be erected or
22
maintained above the roof line of the main structure. Traffic control signs shall be approved as part of proposal, but will not count as part of sq. ft.
c) Advertising Sign. One (1) advertising sign may be erected or maintained on a parcel. Such sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, shall not have a single dimension in excess of eight (8) feet, and no portion thereof shall be above the roof line of the main structure. Such sign shall be located as if it were a business sign.
d) Flashing Signs. No flashing sign shall be erected or maintained in a non-residential district.
e) “For Sale” or “For Rent” Sign. Not more than one (1) temporary sign announcing the parcel on which the sign is located to be for sale or for rent may be erected or maintained. Said signs shall not be illuminated and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. No portion of any such sign shall be erected or maintained above the roof line of the main structure. No such sign shall be located nearer than three (3) feet to the City sidewalk or if there be none, then no nearer than ten (10) feet to the paved portion of the road. Signs in compliance with above do not require prior Zoning Enforcement approval or a permit.
5. Signs not permitted in any district. No signs of any kind shall be attached or affixed to any telephone or utility pole, or on any city owned property without the express consent of the City Manager.
6. Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be allowed in all districts in addition to any other signs permitted by these Regulations, subject to the following additional restrictions and specifications. All temporary signs must be approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
A “temporary sign” is a sign which is freestanding or otherwise not permanently attached to a building or to a post or other structure permanently erected on the premises and is not otherwise described and permitted in these Regulations..
Temporary signs shall require a permit; such permit shall expire Five (_5_) days after the event advertised has concluded or in any case shall expire 90 days after issuance thereof. Permits for such signs shall not be reissued within a given calendar year and in no event shall such permit authorize more than one sign.
In the event such temporary sign has not been removed upon expiration of the permit, the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause that sign to be removed, the cost of which is to be charged to the applicant by deducting the same from the deposit.
23
Dimensions. No such temporary sign shall be larger than thirty-two (32) square feet and shall not exceed twenty (20) feet above ground level in any business or industrial district or four (4) square feet in area and shall not exceed four (4) feet above ground level when placed in any residential district.
Placement. A temporary sign shall not be attached to fences, trees or utility poles and shall not be placed in a position that obstructs or impairs vision of traffic or creates a hazard or nuisance.
7. Permits. A fee of $10.00 shall be paid by the applicant upon the issuance of a permit for a temporary sign; and in addition thereto, the Code Enforcement Officer shall require a deposit of $100.00, and it shall be refundable upon timely removal as hereinafter provided. For all other permanent signs requiring a permit the fee shall be $25.00 and there shall be no deposit required.
8. Signs not affected. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the display of any sign endorsing any candidate for political office or indicating support of or opposition to any political proposition during the sixty (60) days immediately preceding the date on which such election is to be taken or vote is to be held and seven (7) days immediately thereafter. No such sign shall contain obscene or vulgar language so as to disturb the peace and character of the neighborhood. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the display of any holiday decoration, including flashing lights.
9. Enforcement. Any sign previously given City Commission approval shall be deemed in conformance with this section of the Zoning Regulations..
Any nonconforming sign existing on or after the effective date of this law shall be removed by the owner of the premises upon which such sign is located after written notice is provided thereof. The Code Enforcement Officer upon determining that any such sign exists, shall notify the owner or beneficial user of such sign in writing, to remove the said sign within seven (7) days from the date of such notice. Upon failure to comply with such notice within the prescribed time, the Code Enforcement Officer shall remove or cause removal of such sign, and shall assess all cost and expense incurred in the said removal against the property on which such sign is located.
The penalties and procedures prescribed in Article 10 of these Regulations shall apply to this law in addition to any other civil and criminal remedies available.
Section 24 – Prohibited Uses
In all districts the following buildings and uses are prohibited:
1. Any use, similar to those enumerated below, which would be injurious to the safety or welfare of the neighborhood by reason of smoke, odor, vibration, dirt, glare, noise or danger of fire and explosion.
24
a. Manufacture or bulk storage of acetylene gas, ammonia, asphalt, , fertilizer, fireworks, explosives, or pressure tanks must conform to Underwriters specifications.
b. Bulk storage of acetylene, ammonia, asphalt, fireworks, fertilizer, or explosives; gasoline, naphtha, or petroleum refining and pressure tanks, except as specifically approved by the City Manager as meeting Underwriters specifications.
c. Poultry and swine farms.
2. No garage, accessory building, storage units or trailer shall be occupied or used for residence or dwelling purposes.
ARTICLE 8 – OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Section 25 – Off-Street Parking
1. Off-street parking space shall be required as specified in Schedule A and as follows:
a. C-2 District: for new buildings constructed and existing buildings substantially altered after the effective date of these Regulations..
b. All other Districts: for new uses established, new buildings constructed, and existing buildings substantially altered, after the effective date of these Regulations..
2. For any building having more than one use, parking space shall be required as provided for each use.
3. For uses not specified below, the Board of Appeals shall, on appeal, and after consideration of a recommendation by the Planning Board, establish parking requirements in specific cases consistent with those specified in Schedule A.
4. Required parking spaces for residential uses shall be located in the side or rear yard on the same lot or tract as the principal use. This provision shall not apply to multi-story non-profit housing for the elderly. Parking spaces required for other uses may be located within 200 feet of the principal use, subject to the approval of the Board of Appeals.
5. One off-street parking space shall consist of at least 170 square feet. In addition, space necessary for aisles, maneuvering and a street or alley over an approved curb cut.
25
6. Floor areas for the purpose of computing parking requirements shall be the sum of the horizontal area within exterior walls of the several floors of a building, excluding basement and cellar areas used primarily for storage or service.
Schedule A – Off-Street Parking
Use Spaces Required
1. Dwellings and Apartment Houses 1 space for each dwelling unit
2. motel, hotel 1 space for each guest
3. Administrative, professional, Philanthropic 1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of floor
governmental or utility office area
4. Funeral home 10 spaces, plus space for all
employee and resident personnel cars
5. Church or temple 1 space for each 10 seating spaces in
main assembly room
6. School 2 spaces for each classroom
7. Theatre or other place of assembly 1 space for each 5 seating spaces
8. Nursing or convalescent home 1 space for each 4 beds
9. Retail store or bank 1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of floor
area in excess of 1,000 sq. ft.
10. Clubs and restaurants serving food or 1 space for each 50 sq. ft. of floor
beverages for consumption on the premises area devoted to patron use
11. Bowling alley 5 spaces for each alley
12. Wholesale, storage, freight terminal or 1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of
utility use gross floor area
13. Industrial or manufacturing uses 1 space for each 2 employees on the
maximum working shift
14. Home occupation 1 space in addition to any required
26
for the dwelling
15. Non-profit housing for elderly 1 space for each two dwelling units
Section 26 – Off-Street Loading
1. At least one off-street loading facility shall be provided for each commercial or manufacturing establishment hereafter erected or altered to have a gross floor area in excess of 5,000 square feet for commercial uses and 10,000 square feet for industrial uses, computed as described in Section 25-6. Space for off-street loading shall be in addition to space for off-street parking.
2. Each facility shall be subject to the following minimum requirements:
a. Each berth shall be not less than 12 feet wide, 33 feet long, and 14 feet in height when covered.
b. Space for such berth may occupy any part of any required side or rear yard, except no such berth shall be located closer than 50 feet to any lot in any R-District unless wholly within a completely enclosed building or unless screened from such R-District lot by a wall or uniformly painted solid fence not less than 6 feet in height.
ARTICLE 8-A
REGULATION OF SATELLITE RECEIVING ANTENNAS – DISH-TYPE, WIND TURBINES, AND SOLAR PANELS
Section 27
Satellite Receiving Antennas.
a. For all zoned districts, there shall not be more than two satellite antenna/digital television/internet dishes per residential dwelling and the two units shall not exceed a maximum of five feet total combined diameter and shall be set back at least five feet from all property lines. If said satellite antenna/digital television/internet dish is located in the front yard of a residential dwelling, it is required to be attached to the said dwelling versus free standing.
Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems.
a. No wind energy conversion systems including but not limited to windmills and wind turbines shall be installed without application for a special exception permit which shall take into account amongst other things, the fabric of the proposed neighborhood, the effects on the environment, noise and visual appearance.
27
Solar Panels.
a. No solar panels shall be constructed within the City of Sherrill without application for a special use permit.
ARTICLE 9 – NON-CONFORMING USES
Section 28 – Continuation
Any non-conforming use, building or structure which existed lawfully at the time of enactment of these Regulations may be continued, subject to the regulations which follow in this Article.
Section 29 – Identification
The Codes Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for identifying all non-conforming uses and keeping an inventory of same.
Section 30 – Non-Conforming Use of Land
The non-conforming use of land shall not be enlarged or extended beyond the area of land occupied by such use at the time of the adoption of these Regulations. .
A non-conforming use of land may not be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied by such non-conforming use at the time of adoption of these Regulations.
A non-conforming use of land shall not be changed to another non-conforming use.
1. If a non-conforming use of land is discontinued for a period of twelve consecutive months, it shall not be renewed, and any subsequent use of the land shall conform to the regulations of the district in which the land is located.
Section 31 – Non-Conforming Use of Buildings
1. Additions. A non-conforming building which is substantially designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner. However, such building and the use thereof may be made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.
2. Alterations and Repairs. No structural alterations shall be made to any non-conforming building unless such alterations are required by law. However, any maintenance and repairs as are required to keep a non-conforming building or structure in sound condition shall be permitted.
28
3. Changes. A non-conforming use of a building may not be changed except to a conforming use. When so changed, the non-conforming use may not be resumed thereafter.
4. Discontinuance. A non-conforming use of a building or structure which is discontinued for a period of twelve consecutive months shall not be reestablished, and any subsequent use shall conform to the use regulations of the district in which the premises are located. A use shall be deemed to have been discontinued under any of the following conditions:
a. Vacancy of a non-conforming use building for a period of twelve consecutive months.
b. Manifestation of a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon the non-conforming use.
5. Extension. A non-conforming use may be extended throughout any part of a building designed for such use if at the time of adoption of these Regulations a major portion of the building was used for such non-conforming use.
6. Removal. If any building in which any non-conforming use is conducted is hereafter removed, the subsequent use of the land on which such building was located and the subsequent use of any building erected thereon shall conform with the current regulations of the district.
7. Validity of Permit. Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted, and on which the construction has been started and diligently prosecuted before the effective date of these Regulations may be completed.
ARTICLE 10 – ADMINISTRATION
Section 32 – Enforcement Officer
The provisions of these Regulations shall be administered and enforced by a person designated by the City Commission as the “Codes Enforcement Officer” and/or by the City Manager, who shall have the power to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of these Regulations. No building permit or certificate of occupancy required hereunder shall be issued by the Codes Enforcement Officer and/or the City Manager except in compliance with the provisions of these Regulations, or as directed by the Board of Appeals under the provisions of Article 11.
Section 33 – Building Permit
(1) No building shall be erected, moved, structurally altered, added to or enlarged, and no excavation for any building shall be begun unless and until a building permit for such work has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the City Manager.
29
(2) An application for a building permit shall be submitted on a form to be provided by the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the City Manager. Each application shall set forth such information as the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the City Manager may require including, without limitation, the purpose(s) for which the building is intended to be used and shall be accompanied by the following:
a. a survey map or plot plan showing the dimensions of the lot and building, and the dimensions of required and proposed yards;
b. if the application involves a residential building of 1,000 or more square feet (exclusive of garages, open porches, cellars or uninhabitable basements or attics) or commercial or industrial buildings or any addition thereto, two complete sets of specifications and detailed construction plans, including a certification that the plans meet the requirements of the New York State Building and Energy Code, bearing the signature or authorized facsimile signature of an architect or engineer licensed by the State of New York;
c. if the application involves a residential building of less than 1,000 square feet (exclusive of garages, open porches, cellars or uninhabitable basements or attics), a sketch made to scale showing dimension of the building, rooms (each room being identified as to its intended use), windows, doors, lumber sizes, spans and insulation; and
d. such additional information as the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the City Manager may reasonably require to determine if the proposed building, its use and the use of the land are in conformity with the provisions of these Regulations and any and all other applicable law, ordinance, rules and regulations
(3) The specification and detailed constructions plans required under subparagraph “b” of paragraph (2) hereof shall include a site plan and description of the nature of the work to be performed, the materials and equipment to be used and installed, and the details of the structural, mechanical, electrical and plumbing installation and a section through for fireplace footer to top of chimney and stairs.
(4) Within ten (10) business days following his receipt of all information required hereunder in proper form and any follow-up information, if applicable, the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the City Manager shall approve or disapprove the application.
Section 34 – Certificate of Occupancy
A certificate of occupancy is required for any of the following:
1. Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected, altered, moved or extended
30
2. Change in the use of an existing building
3. Occupancy and use of vacant land, except for any use consisting primarily of tilling the soil or similar agricultural use
4. Change in the use of land, except for any use consisting primarily of tilling the soil or similar agricultural use
5. A property where power or utilities have been discontinued for more than five consecutive days. Said Certificate of Occupancy shall only be re-issued if City is made whole for any and all owed utilities and costs.
A certificate of occupancy may be obtained, on application, from the Codes Enforcement Officer and/or City Manager. Such certificate shall be issued only if the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the provisions of these Regulations.. An inspection will be made of each building or lot for which a Certificate of Occupancy has been applied before issuing such certificate. Such inspection shall be made within five (5) business days from the date of application. Failure to make such inspection and determination within the specified period of time shall be deemed to be disapproval of the application for Certificate of Occupancy.
Section 35 – Business Licenses
1. Any business that generates revenue within the City of Sherrill limits shall obtain a business license prior to opening or conducting business within the City.
2. To obtain a business license one must complete the Business License Registration Form, and submit said form, along with the appropriate payment, to the City Clerk at 377 Sherrill Road, Sherrill NY.
3. Each business is required to renew and update their license annually.
4. Upon receipt of a business license, each business owner shall post such business license at the place of business in the public view.
5. For residential home businesses, no fee is required.
Section 36 – Violation and Penalty
a) Any person, firm or corporation that violates or aids or assists in the violation of these Regulations or any part thereof shall be guilty of an offense.
b) Each day that such violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
c) Any person, firm or corporation convicted of an offense as provided in subsection (a) hereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed One Hundred Dollars
31
($100.00) per day, by a term of imprisonment not to exceed ten (10) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
ARTICLE 11 – BOARD OF APPEALS
Section 37 – Appointment
The Mayor shall appoint members of the Board of Zoning Appeals for a term of three years, five people on the Board of Zoning Appeals, to serve in staggered terms.
Section 38 – Organization
The Board of Appeals shall choose its own chairman and an acting chairman to serve in his absence. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure governing the organization of the Board and the conduct of its meetings.
Section 39 – Meetings
1. Meetings of the Board shall be held as provided in rules of procedure adopted by the Board. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question and shall keep records of its hearings and other official actions. If any member is absent or fails to vote, the minutes shall indicate such fact. The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order or decision of the Codes Enforcement Officer and/or the City Manager, or to decide in favor of any applicant on any matter over which the Board has jurisdiction.
2. All hearings of the Board shall be open to the public and the minutes of Board meetings and hearings shall be a public record. Every rule or regulation, amendment or repeal thereof, order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board shall be filed immediately with the Codes Enforcement Officer and/or City Manager and shall be a public record.
Section 40 – Appeals to the Board
1. An appeal from a determination of the Codes Enforcement Officer and/or City Manager may be taken by any aggrieved person, or by an officer, department or board of the City of Sherrill. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the date of the decision, by filing with the Codes Enforcement Officer and/or City Manager a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.
2. All appeals shall be made in writing on forms provided by the Board. The Codes Enforcement Officer and/or the City Manager shall then transmit to the Board of Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
32
3. The Board shall give due notice to the parties at interest, and shall give its decision within 30 days from the date of the hearing.
Section 41 – Jurisdiction
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties prescribed by statute and by these Regulations:
1. Interpretation: On appeal from a determination of the Codes Enforcement Officer and/or the City Manager to hear and decide on questions where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or interpretation of any provision of these Regulations.
2.Variance: On appeal from a determination of the Codes Enforcement Officer and/or City Manager, to grant a use variance pursuant to the following criteria:
As used in this section: (a) "Use variance" shall mean the authorization by the zoning board of appeals for the use of land for a purpose which is otherwise not allowed or is prohibited by the applicable zoning regulations. (b) "Area variance" shall mean the authorization by the zoning board of appeals for the use of land in a manner which is not allowed by the dimensional or physical requirements of the applicable zoning regulations.
Orders, requirements, decisions, interpretations, determinations. The board of appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination appealed from and shall make such order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination as in its opinion ought to have been made in the matter by the administrative official charged with the enforcement of such ordinance or local law and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whose order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination the appeal is taken.
Use variances. (a) The board of appeals, on appeal from the decision or determination of the administrative official charged with the enforcement of such ordinance or local law, shall have the power to grant use variances, as defined herein. (b) No such use variance shall be granted by a board of appeals without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship. In order to prove such unnecessary hardship the applicant shall demonstrate to the board of appeals that for each and every permitted use under the zoning regulations for the particular district where the property is located: (i) the applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by competent financial evidence; (ii) the alleged hardship relating to the property in question is unique, and does not apply to a substantial portion of the district or neighborhood; (iii) the requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood; and (iv) the alleged hardship has not been self-created. (c) The board of appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to address the unnecessary hardship proven by the applicant, and at the same time preserve and protect the character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
Area variances. (a) The zoning board of appeals shall have the power, upon an appeal from a decision or determination of the administrative official charged with the enforcement of such ordinance or local law, to grant area variances as defined herein. (b) In making its determination, the zoning board of appeals shall take into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the variance is granted, as weighed against the detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or community by such grant. In making such determination the board shall also consider: (i) whether an undesirable change will be produced in the character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby properties will be created by the granting of the area variance; (ii) whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved by some method feasible for the applicant to pursue, other than an area variance; (iii) whether the requested area variance is substantial; (iv)
33
whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the neighborhood or district; and (v) whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the board of appeals, but shall not necessarily preclude the granting of the area variance. (c) The board of appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate and at the same time preserve and protect the character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
Imposition of conditions. The board of appeals shall, in the granting of both use variances and area variances, have the authority to impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and incidental to the proposed use of the property. Such conditions shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of the zoning ordinance or local law, and shall be imposed for the purpose of minimizing any adverse impact such variance may have on the neighborhood or community.
Section 42 – Decisions of the Board
All decisions of the Board shall be in writing, and a copy of each decision shall be sent to the applicant and to the Codes Enforcement Officer and the City Manager. The Board shall also retain in its files a copy of each decision, which files shall be available for inspection by the public. Each decision shall set forth fully the reasons for the decision of the Board and the findings of fact on which the decision was based. Such findings and reasons shall include references to the standards of appropriate subsections of Section 41, where the appeal is for a variance or a special exception.
ARTICLE 12 – AMENDMENTS
Section 43 – Declaration of Policy
For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound and stable development and to conserve property values generally, these Regulations shall not be amended except to correct a manifest error in these Regulations, or to provide for regulations more appropriate to an area because of changed or changing conditions.
Section 44 – Amendments, How Initiated
The City Commission may from time to time on its own motion, may amend, supplement, repeal or change the regulations and district boundaries established by these Regulations.
Whenever the owner or owners of frontage in any district shall present a petition duly signed and acknowledged, to the City Commission, requesting an amendment, supplement, change or repeal of the regulations prescribed for such district or part thereof, it shall be the duty of the City Commission to vote upon said petition within 90 days after the filing of the same by the petitioners with the City Clerk.
The Planning Board and/or the Zoning Board of Appeals may, by resolution, propose an amendment, supplement, change or repeal of the regulations to the City Commission.
34
Section 45 – Referral of Proposed Amendments to the Planning Board
All proposed amendments originating by petition, or by motion of the City Commission, shall be referred to the Planning Board for a report and recommendations thereon. The Planning Board shall submit its report and recommendations within 30 days after receiving such referral. Failure of the Planning Board to report within the required time shall be deemed to be the Planning Board approval of the proposed amendment. The Planning Board may submit a request to the City Commission for a 30 day extension to submit its report and recommendation.
Section 46 – Hearing on Proposed Amendment
Before any amendment, supplement, repeal or change in the regulations or district boundaries, there shall be a public notice and hearing thereon by the City Commission, as provided by law. In addition to the public notice of a hearing, notice shall be given in writing to all property owners of record of the land included in such proposed change, and the land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom, and the land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, as said property owners and addresses appear on the latest completed assessment roll of the City.
Section 47 – Adoption of Amendment
After the public hearing, and referral to and report by the Planning Board, a majority vote of the members of the City Commission shall be required to amend the zoning regulations except as described in Section 47, Protest Petitions.
Section 48 – Protest Petitions
If a protest against a proposed amendment, supplement, repeal or change is presented to the City Commission, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent or more of the land included in such proposed change, or by the owners of twenty percent or more of the land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent or more of the land directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, such amendment shall not be passed except by the three-fourth vote of the City Commission.
Section 49 – Periodic Review of Zoning Regulations
From time to time, at intervals of not more than five years, the Planning Board shall re-examine the provisions of these Regulations and the location of district boundary lines and shall submit a report to the City Commission recommending such changes or amendments, if any, which may be desirable in the interest of public welfare, convenience and necessity.
35
ARTICLE 13 – MISCELLANEOUS
Section 50 – Interpretation
In interpreting and applying the provisions of these Regulations, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety and general welfare. When these Regulations impose a greater restriction on the use of buildings or land or on the heights of buildings, or requires larger open spaces, or makes any other greater requirement than is imposed or required by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of these Regulations shall govern.
Section 51 – Severability
If any article, section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of these rules, regulations, restrictions, prohibitions, or districts shall, by court of competent jurisdiction, be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to such article, section, paragraph, district, subdivision, clause or provision so adjudicated.
Section 52 – Effective Date
These Regulations shall be in effect upon its adoption and ten days after publication and posting, as provided by law.
ARTICLE 14 – DEFINITIONS
Section 53 – For the purposes of these Regulations certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows:
Words used in the present tense include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural, and the plural the singular. The word “lot” includes the words “plot” and “parcel”. The word “building” includes the word “structure”. The word “used” shall be deemed also to include “designed, intended or arranged to be used”. The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure detached from a principal building, fifteen feet or less in height, located on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use.
ADDITION: An expansion of the exterior perimeter of a building.
ADULT: Any person aged 18 years or older.
ADULT BOOK and/or VIDEO STORE: An establishment which offers for sale or rental books, magazines, photographs, films, videos, or other visual representations, and other materials
36
oriented toward representation of sexual activity of any kind. This term does not include occasional sales of books, magazines, videos and other materials that may meet this definition or a store that does not have as its primary purpose the sale of these items but which may offer items meeting this description as a small fraction of the items it sells or rents.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT: Any premise which provides adult sexually-oriented entertainment whether live or by motion pictures, videos, photographic reproductions or other means.
ADULT NOVELTY STORY: A commercial establishment offering for sale visual materials, printed matter, instruments, devices, and other paraphernalia designed and intended for use in connection with sexual activities.
ALLEY: A public way not a street, in the rear of or along the side of a lot which fronts on a public street.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of two (2) or more rooms designed or used solely as a residence in a building not used as a hotel, rooming or boarding house or for other transient occupancy.
APARTMENT HOUSE: A building divided into five (5) or more apartments designed or used solely for residential purposes.
AREA VARIANCE: Authorization for the use of land in a manner which is not allowed by the dimensional or physical requirements of the applicable requirements of this code.
ATTACHED: consists of roof, walls, foundation or slab.
BASEMENT: A story partly below grade and having at least half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height above the average grade of the adjoining ground.
BED AND BREAKFAST: A house or portion thereof where transient lodging rooms and breakfast are provided, the premises being owner-occupied.
BUILDING: A structure which is permanently affixed to the land, has one or more floors and a roof, and is intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. When a building is divided into separate parts extending from the ground up, each part so divided is deemed a separate building.
BUILDING, AREA: The total ground area of each building and all accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, steps, and terraces.
BUILDING COVERAGE: That percentage of the lot area covered by the building area.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance measured from the established grade at the curb, or if no grade has been officially established at the curb, measured from the average level
37
of the finished ground surface across the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
CAR WASH: An area of land and/or building with machine- or hand-operated facilities used principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles.
CELLAR: An area wholly or partly below grade and having less than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height above the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CONVENIENCE STORE: Any retail establishment offering for sale of prepackaged food products, household items, newspapers and magazines, and sandwich and other freshly prepared foods, for off-site consumption. Convenience stores may include the sale of gasoline, in which case they shall conform to the requirements of Automotive Fuel Service Stations.
CONVERSION: Modifications wholly within an existing structure. Work including ordinary repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, may be performed provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of adoption of these regulations shall not be increased. See Structural Alteration.
DEVELOPMENT AND RESEARCH CENTER: Centers created for a use engaged in medical or scientific research, testing or experimentation, not the manufacture or sale of products except as incidental to the primary use.
DWELLING UNIT: A building, or portion thereof, with provision for living, sanitary and sleeping facilities for one family.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A detached building containing one dwelling unit only.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A detached building containing two dwelling units only.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building, or portion thereof, containing three or four dwelling units.
ESCORT AGENCY: A company that provides social escorts for paying clients.
FAMILY: One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit.
FARM: A parcel or tract of land having an area of at least five (5) acres which is used for the production or raising agricultural or dairy products.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A roofed or enclosed space designed or used primarily for the storage of one or more motor vehicles, provided that no business, occupation or service is conducted for profit therein.
38
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A commercial and/or business building or part thereof used for the storage, renting selling, servicing, and repair of motor vehicles, operated for gain.
GARAGE, STORAGE: A commercial and/or business building or part thereof, used only for the storage of vehicles and at which automobile fuels and oils are not sold and motor-driven vehicles are not equipped, serviced, repaired, rented or sold.
AUTOMOTIVE FUEL SERVICE STATION: Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used or designed for the sale of gasoline or oil or other motor vehicle fuel and which may include facilities for servicing motor vehicles, but not including the painting or body repair thereof by any means.
HOME OCCUPATION: A "home occupation" is a business, profession, occupation or trade conducted for gain or support entirely within a residential building or a structure accessory thereto, which is incidental and secondary to the use of such building for dwelling purposes and which does not change the essential residential character of such building. Common examples of home occupations include but are not limited to offices for accountants and lawyers, shop for beauticians and barbers and studios of an artist or photographer.
HOSPITAL: A building or structure for the diagnosis and medical or surgical care of human sickness or injuries. The term shall be deemed to include sanitarium and medical clinic/urgent care.
HOTEL or MOTEL: A building for renting sleeping rooms which may include dining rooms, kitchens, and other facilities for use by temporary guests, excluding bed and breakfast establishments.
JUNK YARD: A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, and for the sale of the parts thereof.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING & ASSEMBLY PLANTS: Establishments engaged in the transformation of materials into new products in a process general considered to be free of potentially dangerous, offensive or hazardous methods and materials.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one building and accessory buildings or uses, or by a group of buildings united by a common use or interest;
LOT, AREA: The total horizontal area included within lot lines, except that no part of the area within a public right-of-way may be included in the computation of lot area.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. and having an interior angle at the corner of intersection of less than one hundred and thirty five (135) degrees.
39
If the angle of intersection is more than one hundred thirty-five degrees, the lot is an “interior lot.”
LOT, COVERAGE: The cumulative square footage of all structures on a lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot bounded by a street on one side only at an angle greater than one hundred thirty five degrees.
LOT LINE: The established division line between different parcels of property.
LOT, THROUGH: An interior lot bounded by a street on front and back.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines.
MUNICIPAL USE: Any use directly related to governing the City and/or the internal affairs of the City in a building owned by the City.
NON-CONFORMING USE: A building, structure or lot occupied by a use at the time of enactment of these Regulations or any amendment which fails by reason for such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform with the present regulations of the district in which it is located.
NURSERY: A facility for the growing, display or sale of plant, stock, seeds or other horticultural items.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME: Any building used for the accommodation and care of persons with, or recuperating from, illness or incapacity, where nursing services are furnish
PARKING SPACE: An off-street space available for the parking of one motor vehicle and having an area of not less than one hundred seventy (170) square feet, exclusive of passage-ways and driveways thereto, and having direct access to a street or alley. Parking spaces for disabled people shall be at least eight (8) feet wide and shall have an adjacent aisle at least eight (8) feet wide.
ROOMING HOUSE: A multiple dwelling in which one or more rooms are rented for lodging.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the street, rear or side lines of the lot and the front, rear or side lines on the building. When two (2) or more lots under single ownership are used, the exterior property lines so grouped shall be used in determining offsets.
SIGN: Any device affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or land and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business.
40
SIGN, ADVERTISING: An “advertising sign” is a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is located, or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A “business sign” is a sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted or to a commodity, service, or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located, or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, FLASHING: A “flashing sign” is any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use. For the purpose of these Regulations any revolving, illuminated sign shall be considered a “flashing sign”.
SPECIAL USE: a certain use of land or buildings that may not be appropriate under all circumstances in any zoning district, but may be appropriate where adequate precautions can be taken to assure compatibility with surrounding uses. Special uses are restricted and approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: the documentary evidence of authority granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals when a certain use of land or buildings may not be appropriate under all circumstances in any zoning district, but may be appropriate where adequate precautions can be taken and conditions imposed to assure the compatibility with surrounding uses.
STABLE, PRIVATE: An accessory building in which one or more horses or ponies are kept for private use and not for hire, remuneration or sale.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor directly above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling directly above it.
STORY, HALF: That part of a building between a pitched roof and the uppermost full story, said part having a ceiling height of 7 feet or more for an area not exceeding one-half the floor area of said full story, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished off as rooms.
STREET: A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
STRUCTURE: Includes anything constructed or erected, the use of which demands a temporary or permanent location on the ground, or attached to something having a temporary or permanent location on the ground.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: As applied to a building or structure, any change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities or any enlargement, either by extending a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one location or position to another. See Conversion.
41
THROUGH LOTS: Lots other than corner lots with frontage on more than one street.
TOURIST HOME: A dwelling in which overnight accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation.
USE: The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The term “permitted use” or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use.
USE, PERMITTED: A specific principal use of a building, structure, lot or land, or part thereof which the code provides for a particular district.
USE VARIANCE: Permission for the use of land or buildings for a use which is not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations.
VARIANCE: A modification of the regulation of this code, granted on grounds as set forth in applicable regulations of this code.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a building.
YARD, FRONT: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building, between the front line of the building and the street or highway line, and extending the full width of the lot.
YARD, REAR: An open, unoccupied space, except for accessory buildings, on the same lot with the building between the rear line of the building and the rear lot line and extending the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building, situated between the building and the side lot line, and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.