Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-1-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Town of Seneca
Falls and the former Village of Seneca Falls, as codified by General Code,
and consisting of Chapters 1 through 300, together with an Appendix, shall
be known collectively as the “Code of the Town of Seneca Falls,” hereafter
termed the “Code.” Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions contained in the Code of the Town of Seneca
Falls to any other local law, ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code,
such reference shall be changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter
number, article number or section number appearing in the Code as if such
local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Town Board of the Town of Seneca Falls, and it is the
intention of said Town Board that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions
of former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of inconsistent enactments.
Except as provided in § 1-4 below, all local laws and ordinances, or parts of
such local laws or ordinances, inconsistent with the provisions contained in
the Code adopted by this local law are hereby repealed as of the adoption
and filing of this local law as set forth in § 1-13; provided, however, that
such repeal shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid
legislation of the Town of Seneca Falls or the former Village of Seneca Falls
which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to
remain in full force and effect.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Town of Seneca Falls or the former Village of
Seneca Falls prior to the effective date of this local law or any action or
proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Town of Seneca
Falls or the former Village of Seneca Falls or any penalty, punishment or
forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Town of Seneca
Falls or the former Village of Seneca Falls.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Town of Seneca
Falls or the former Village of Seneca Falls.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Seneca Falls or the former
Village of Seneca Falls providing for the laying out, opening, altering,
widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing
name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way,
easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place within the
Town of Seneca Falls or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Town of Seneca Falls or the former
Village of Seneca Falls appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond of the Town of Seneca Falls or other
instruments or evidence of the Town’s indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for Town employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the Town.
N. Any local law or ordinance adopted subsequent to October 2013.
§ 1-4 SENECA FALLS CODE § 1-5
1:4
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk of the Town of Seneca Falls and shall remain there for use
and examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law;
and, if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the
Town Clerk of the Town of Seneca Falls by impressing thereon the Seal
of the Town of Seneca Falls, and such certified copy shall remain on file
in the office of said Town Clerk to be made available to persons desiring
to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect. The
enactment and publication of this local law, coupled with the availability of
a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the “Code of
the Town of Seneca Falls” or any new local laws, ordinances or resolutions,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Town to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Town Board deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Town of Seneca Falls required to
be filed in the office of the Town Clerk for use by the public. All changes
in said Code and all local laws, ordinances and resolutions adopted by the
Town Board subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
as to indicate the intention of said Town Board to be a part of said Code
shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary
attachment of copies of such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions
until such changes, local laws, ordinances or resolutions are printed as
supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Town Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a
fee to be set by resolution of the Town Board. The Clerk may also arrange
for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who alters or tampers with the Code of the Town of Seneca
Falls in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the
Town of Seneca Falls to be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any
other provision of this local law, shall be guilty of an offense and shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for a term of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions for
publication as the Code of the Town of Seneca Falls, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have
been made. In addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Town Board that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Town of Seneca Falls, such local law to be entitled “General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code,” and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 1-8 SENECA FALLS CODE § 1-13
1:6
Chapter 7
ASSESSMENTS
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7

ARTICLE I
Coordinated Assessment Program
§ 7-1. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to § 579 of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 7-2. Authority to enter into agreement.
The Supervisor of the Town of Seneca Falls is hereby empowered to enter
into an agreement with the Town of Fayette pursuant to § 576 of the Real
Property Tax Law, providing that one Assessor shall be appointed to hold the
office of Assessor in all the participating assessing units in the coordinated
assessment program.
§ 7-3. Contents of agreement.
Such a cooperative assessment agreement shall provide that, effective no
later than 60 days after the date on which the agreement is effective,
the same individual shall be appointed to hold the office of Assessor in
all of the assessing units participating in this agreement and further that
the appointment of the Assessor must be approved by a majority of each
participating assessing unit's town boards. In addition, the agreement shall
provide for the compensation of the Assessor and for the allocation of
expenses among the participating assessing units.
§ 7-4. Appointment of Assessor.
Upon the expiration of the term of the appointed Assessor, or in the event
that the Assessor so appointed resigns or is otherwise unable to remain in
office, one individual shall be appointed to succeed him or her in all the
participating assessing units.
§ 7-5. Assessment of property.
Effective with the first assessment roll produced in cooperation with the
other participating assessing units in the coordinated assessment program,
all real property shall be assessed at the same uniform percentage of value
in each assessing unit participating in the coordinated assessment program
throughout the term of this cooperative assessment agreement.
§ 7-6. Assessment dates.
The dates applicable to the assessment process in each participating
assessing unit, including taxable status date and the dates for the filing
of the tentative and the final assessment rolls, shall be the same for each
assessing unit participating in this coordinated assessment program.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6
1:9
Chapter 13
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 300, Art.
XI.
§ 7-6 SENECA FALLS CODE § 7-6
1:10
ARTICLE I
Heritage Area Commission
§ 13-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a Heritage Area Commission to
govern the activities of and functions at the Visitor Center and the Heritage
Area.
§ 13-2. Function; duties; appointment of members.
§ 13-3. Membership; officers; terms of office; appointment.
A. The general function of the Heritage Area Commission shall be to
operate the Seneca Falls Heritage Area Visitor Center within the
parameters of the annual budgetary appropriation provided by the
Town Board.
B. It shall be the duty of the Commission to meet on a regular basis, at
least monthly, to keep minutes and to file the same with the Town
Board. In addition, the Commission shall file a year-end report of
activities with the Town Board.
C. The Commission shall review the operations of the Visitor Center,
including hours of operation, staffing, group tours, maintenance, etc. In
addition, the Commission will also review the entire parameters of the
Heritage Area, proposed improvements and proposed projects.
D. The Commission may make recommendations to the Town Board on any
Heritage-Area-related matter, reserving for the Town Board all
decisions relating to the expenditure of monies outside the parameters
of the annually established Heritage Area budget. Decisions relative to
the parameters of the Heritage Area budget shall be reserved to the
Town Board.
A. The Heritage Area Commission shall consist of five members serving
staggered five-year terms. The Commission shall appoint a Chairperson
annually.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Town Board to appoint the
Commission members. Their removal, demotion, promotion or
discipline shall be handled in accordance with applicable law.
§ 13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-3
1:11

ARTICLE II
Heritage Preservation Commission1
[Amended 8-4-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
§ 13-4. Membership; Chair; attendance at meetings; term limits.
§ 13-5. Powers and duties.
A. There is hereby established a Heritage Preservation Commission
consisting of seven members serving seven-year terms of office. All
such members shall have demonstrated interest, competence or a
knowledge of historic preservation, and, to the extent available within
the Town, said members shall be recruited from the disciplines of
history, architectural history, architecture, archeology, engineering,
construction and other historic-preservation-related professions. Every
effort shall be made to represent each ward of the former Village of
Seneca Falls on the Commission. One Commissioner will preferably be
a representative of the Central or Sackett District as a merchant or
property owner.
B. Appointments. Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the
Town Supervisor subject to approval of the Town Board. No person
appointed to the Commission can also serve as a member of the Town
Board establishing the Commission.
C. The Chair shall be elected by the Commission membership at the start
of each official year.
D. Attendance at meetings. Any Commission member missing three
consecutive meetings shall automatically forfeit his or her appointment.
Further, any member missing four meetings in a calendar year, except
for major illness, shall forfeit his or her appointment.
E. Vacancies. Vacancies occurring in the Commission other than by
expiration of term of office shall be filled by appointment of the Town
Supervisor. Any such appointment shall be for the unexpired portion of
the term of the replaced member, and the appointment must be made in
accordance with the criteria established above for original
appointments.
F. Term limits. A member appointed to the Heritage Preservation
Commission may serve no more than two consecutive seven-year terms.
Two years after his or her prior service, a former Planning Board
member may again be considered for appointment to the Heritage
Preservation Commission.
A. It shall be the duty of the Seneca Falls Heritage Preservation
Commission to exercise aesthetic judgment and maintain the desirable
character of the historic properties and prevent construction,
1. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 173, Historic Preservation.
§ 13-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-5
1:13
reconstruction, alteration or demolition out of harmony with existing
properties insofar as style, materials, color, line or detail are concerned;
and thus to prevent degeneration of property, safeguard public health,
prevent fire, promote safety and preserve the beauty and character of
the historic properties.
B. In addition to the aforementioned powers, the Seneca Falls Heritage
Preservation Commission shall have power to:
(1) Conduct surveys of buildings for the purpose of determining those
of historic and/or architectural significance and pertinent facts
about them.
(2) Maintain an inventory of locally designated historic resources or
districts within the Town and publicize inventory.
(3) Formulate, recommendations concerning the preparation of maps,
brochures and historical markers for selected historic and/or
architectural sites and buildings.
(4) Cooperate with and advise the governing body, the Planning Board,
and other municipal agencies in matters involving historic
properties.
(5) Advise owners of historic properties on problems of preservation
and restoration.
(6) Recommend to the Town Board the designation of landmarks and
restoration.
(7) Evaluate an application for a certificate of appropriateness,
approve with modifications, or deny any proposal for exterior
changes to a designated individual landmark or property within a
designated historic district resulting from any such application.
(8) Evaluate an application for a certificate of economic hardship;
approve, approve with modifications, or deny any such application.
(9) Evaluate an application for a certificate of appropriateness for
demolition, removal or relocation; approve, approve with
modifications, or deny any such application.
C. Nothing contained in this article or in Chapter 173, Historic
Preservation, shall be construed as authorizing the Seneca Falls
Heritage Preservation Commission, in acting with respect to any
designated property, to amend the existing zoning requirements or to
grant any variance from those requirements.
D. Except as provided in Subsection C of this section, the Commission may,
in exercising or performing its powers, duties or functions under this
article or Chapter 173, Historic Preservation, with respect to any
improvement to a designated property, apply or impose, with respect to
the construction, reconstruction, alteration, demolition or use of such
§ 13-5 SENECA FALLS CODE § 13-5
1:14
§ 13-6. Basis for decisions.
Because of the irreversible nature of demolitions and the potential loss to
the community of significant historic structures, the following shall apply to
all applications for demolition:
improvement, determinations or conditions which are more restrictive
than those prescribed or made by or pursuant to other provisions of law
applicable to such activities, work or use.
A. The waiting period contained in Chapter 173, Historic Preservation,
§ 173-9, shall apply.
B. The decision of the Commission shall be based on the pertinent
historical significance, economic viability of alternate use to demolition,
present condition of the structure, public comment, future plans for the
property, the relationship of the affected parcel to its surrounding
parcels and other local factors within the Historic District.
§ 13-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-6
1:15

ARTICLE III
Cemetery Commission2
§ 13-7. Membership; purpose.
There is hereby established a Cemetery Commission, the purpose of which
is to govern the activities and functions of all aspects of the operation and
maintenance of the Town cemetery.
§ 13-8. Powers and duties.
§ 13-9. Appointment; terms of office.
Members of the Cemetery Commission shall be appointed by the Town
Board. Said Commission shall consist of five members whose terms of office
shall be for five years and shall be so fixed that one shall expire each official
year.
A. The general function of the Cemetery Commission shall be to oversee
the operation and maintenance of the Town Cemetery within the
parameters of the annual budgetary appropriation provided by the
Town Board.
B. It shall be the duty of the Commission to meet on a regular basis, to
keep minutes, and to file the same with the Town Board. In addition, the
Commission shall file a year-end report of activities with the Town
Board.
C. The Commission shall review the operations of the cemetery and make
recommendations to the Town Board from time to time on any matter
related to the cemetery, reserving for the Town Board all decisions
relating to the expenditure of moneys outside the parameters of the
annually established cemetery budget.
D. All matters relating to cemetery personnel shall be reserved for the
Town Board.
2. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 135, Cemeteries.
§ 13-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-9
1:17

ARTICLE IV
Community Center and Parks Commission
§ 13-10. Name.
The purpose of this article is to establish a commission to be known as the
"Seneca Falls Community Center and Parks Commission."
§ 13-11. Duties.
The duties of the Commission shall be as follows:
§ 13-12. Membership; terms of office.
A. To advise the Town Board on the administration of the recreation
programs of the Town of Seneca Falls.
B. To maintain parklands, playing fields and playgrounds.
C. To issue and recommend park facility permits.
D. To formulate and make recommendations for basic policy with respect
to the parks and recreation programs of the Town.
E. To develop and recommend long-range plans for acquisition of land for
park purposes.
F. To recommend plans for facility development in conjunction with the
Commissioner of Parks and Recreation, which must be approved by the
Town Board.
G. To formulate a capital projects plan in conjunction with the
Commissioner of Parks and Recreation, which in turn must be approved
by the Town Board.
H. To formulate a yearly operating budget in conjunction with the
Commissioner of Parks and Recreation and approved by the Town
Board.
I. To regulate user fees and charges in regard to parks and recreation.
J. To make recommendations upon any proposed sale or purchase of
parklands.
K. To hire part-time help to assist in the operation and maintenance of the
parks and recreation facilities of the Town of Seneca Falls.
A. The Commission shall consist of seven members and two alternate
members, who shall be residents of the Town of Seneca Falls, to be
appointed by the Town Board. The Commissioner of Parks and
Recreation shall be an ex officio member of such Commission but shall
have no vote. The seven members and two alternate members shall be
selected with an emphasis on a demonstrated interest in parks,
§ 13-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-12
1:19
§ 13-13. Officers.
§ 13-14. Meetings; attendance requirements.
recreation, youth service or related areas. In addition, members should
be individuals of diverse backgrounds from different areas of the Town.
B. The terms of appointed members of the Commission shall be seven
years, each to expire at the end of a calendar year.
A. Appointment or designation.
(1) Chair. The Chair shall be elected by the members of the Community
Center and Parks Commission.
(2) Vice Chair. The Chair will designate a Vice Chair, subject to the
approval of a majority of the Community Center and Parks
Commission.
B. Duties of officers.
(1) Chair. The Chair shall preside at all meetings of the Community
Center and Parks Commission as a whole. He or she shall be an ex
officio member on any committee of the Community Center and
Parks Commission. He or she shall be responsible for the review of
all reports and studies coming from the work of the standing
committees.
(2) Vice Chair. The Vice Chair shall, in the absence, death or
resignation of the Community Center and Parks Commission Chair,
carry on the duties of the Chair until the return of the Chair, in the
case of temporary absence, or the appointment of a new Chair by
the Town Board.
A. Meetings of the full Community Center and Parks Commission. The
Commission shall hold monthly meetings throughout the calendar year,
with a minimum of 10 meetings per year. The Commission may hold
other such meetings as required. Four members shall constitute a
quorum. Whenever approval by the Commission is required, a majority
of the whole Commission shall be required.
B. Attendance at meetings. Any Commission member missing three
consecutive meetings shall automatically forfeit his or her appointment.
Further, any member missing four meetings in a calendar year, except
for major illness, shall forfeit his or her appointment. However, the
Chair of the Community Center and Parks Commission may recommend
to the Town Board waiver of such forfeiture. It shall be the
determination of the Town Board whether to waive such forfeiture.
§ 13-12 SENECA FALLS CODE § 13-14
1:20
ARTICLE V
Planning Board
§ 13-15. Establishment; membership.
There shall be a Planning Board for the Town of Seneca Falls, Seneca
County, New York, to be known as the "Town of Seneca Falls Planning
Board," consisting of five members appointed according to the
requirements of Article 16 of the Town Law.
§ 13-16. Alternate members.
The Town Board of the Town of Seneca Falls, New York, may, in any year
it deems necessary, appoint alternate members to the Planning Board to
serve as provided in this section. The number of alternate members so
appointed pursuant to this section in any year shall not exceed three. Each
alternate member shall be appointed for a one-year term of office. The Chair
of the Planning Board shall assign the alternate members as necessary
when absence of regular members of the Board or a conflict of interest of
regular members of the Board would otherwise prevent a quorum of the
Board from considering any pending matter. No more than two alternate
members shall sit in determination on any pending matter. Such designation
shall be entered into the minutes of the initial Planning Board meeting at
which the substitution is made. The alternate members shall be designated
on a rotating basis in the manner provided in the general governing rules
of the Planning Board so that each alternate member shall be afforded an
equal opportunity to serve. Once designated to serve on a particular matter
before the Board, the alternate member shall have the same powers and
duties as a regular member of the Board until that matter is concluded. Any
determination by the Board consisting of alternate members shall have the
same weight and be entitled to the same authority as the act or deed of the
regular Planning Board, and all laws, statutes and regulations shall apply
and be applied with equal force and effect.
§ 13-17. Term limits.
A member appointed to the Planning Board may serve no more than two
consecutive five-year terms. Two years after his or her prior service, a
former Planning Board member may again be considered for appointment
to the Planning Board.
§ 13-18. Attendance at meetings.
Any Planning Board member missing three consecutive meetings shall
automatically forfeit his or her appointment. Further, any member missing
four meetings in a calendar year, except for major illness, shall forfeit his or
her appointment.
§ 13-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-18
1:21

ARTICLE VI
Waste Management Advisory Committee
§ 13-19. Committee established; membership.
There is hereby established a Waste Management Advisory Committee
consisting of five members to be appointed by the Town Board.
§ 13-20. Responsibilities.
§ 13-21. Access to waste management facilities.
In furtherance of the responsibilities of the Waste Management Advisory
Committee, the Town Board hereby authorizes the Waste Management
Advisory Committee to obtain access, upon reasonable notice and at
reasonable times, to waste management facilities pursuant to permits
issued by the Town or a host community agreement executed by the Town
and facility and in accordance with the Town Code.
§ 13-22. Membership; appointments; terms of office.
A. The Waste Management Advisory Committee will report to the Town
Board regarding the construction and operation of waste management
facilities in the Town of Seneca Falls. Waste management facilities
include, but are not limited to, solid waste management facilities as
defined in Chapter 300, Zoning, wastewater processing facilities and
any other waste facility designated by the Town Board.
B. The Waste Management Advisory Committee will have the following
responsibilities:
(1) Monitor compliance with permits, approvals or registrations issued
by local, state and federal agencies, host community agreements,
the Town Code of the Town of Seneca Falls and other applicable
state and federal regulations and requirements.
(2) Provide the Town Board with recommendations regarding the
Town's oversight of waste management facilities and basic policy
regarding waste management; including, but not limited to,
suggested amendments to the Town Code, enforcement
proceedings, permits or host community agreements.
(3) Such other responsibilities which are reasonable and necessary to
carry out the functions of the Committee.
A. The Waste Management Advisory Committee will consist of four
members who shall be residents of the Town of Seneca Falls who will be
appointed by the Town Board and an ex officio member who will be a
member of the Town Board. The appointed members shall serve without
compensation. The Town Board member of the Committee will be
selected annually by the Town Board. The Town Board member will
serve as Chairperson of the Committee.
§ 13-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-22
1:23
§ 13-23. Meetings; technical and legal assistance.
The Waste Management Advisory Committee will meet at least quarterly at
the Town Hall or at a place designated by the Committee. The Committee
will provide public notice of its meetings and will include in the notice a
proposed meeting agenda. The Committee, upon the approval of the Town
Board, may consult with the Town Engineer and the attorney for the Town
regarding technical and legal issues and request assistance in reviewing
operations at waste management facilities. The Town Clerk will provide
assistance to the Committee, as directed by the Town Board.
B. Except for the initial terms of office, the Waste Management Advisory
Committee members will serve for terms of four years. The term of
office will commence on January 1. Appointments to the Committee will
be made by the Town Board in December. The initial terms of office for
Committee members will be staggered such that the Town Board will
appoint the members of the Committee to terms of one, two, three and
four years.
§ 13-22 SENECA FALLS CODE § 13-23
1:24
Chapter 24
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 13.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 55.
§ 24-1. Legislative intent.
The New York State Legislature has enacted legislation permitting public
entities, including towns, to provide for the defense and indemnification of
officers and employees of the Town. This chapter implements that concept
and the statutory intent set forth in Article 2, § 18, of the Public Officers
Law of the State of New York.
§ 24-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any commissioner, member of a public board or commission,
trustee, director, officer, employee, volunteer expressly authorized to
participate in a publicly sponsored volunteer program or any other person
holding a position by election, appointment or employment in the service of
the Town of Seneca Falls, Seneca County, New York (hereinafter referred
to as "the Town"), whether or not compensated. The term "employee" shall
include a former employee, his or her estate or judicially appointed personal
representative.
TOWN ATTORNEY — Either the "Town Attorney," as such term is defined by
§ 20, Subdivision (2)(a), of the Town Law of the State of New York, or, if no
such office exists, the "attorney for the Town" appointed by resolution of the
Town Board of the Town.
§ 24-3. Defense.
A. Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 24-5 of this
chapter, the Town shall provide for the defense and indemnification of
the employee in any civil action or proceeding, state or federal, arising
out of any alleged act or omission which occurred or allegedly occurred
while the employee was acting during the course of his or her
employment and within the scope of his or her public employment or
duties. This duty to provide for a defense and indemnification shall not
arise where such civil action or proceeding is brought by, or at the
behest of the Town.
B. Subject to the conditions set forth in this chapter, the employee shall be
represented by the Town Attorney or an attorney employed or retained
§ 13-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-3
1:25
§ 24-4. Indemnification.
by the Town for the defense of the employee. The Town Board shall
employ or retain an attorney for the defense of the employee whenever
the Town does not have a Town Attorney; the Town Attorney
determines, based upon its investigation and review of the facts and
circumstances of the case, that representation by the Town Attorney
would be inappropriate; or a court of competent jurisdiction determines
that a conflict of interest exists and that the employee cannot be
represented by the Town Attorney. Reasonable attorney's fees and
litigation expenses shall be paid by the Town to such attorney employed
or retained, from time to time, during pendency of the civil action or
proceeding, subject to certification by the Town Supervisor that the
employee is entitled to representation under the terms and conditions
of this chapter. Payment of such fees and expenses shall be made in the
same manner as payment of other claims and expenses of the Town.
Any dispute with respect to representation of multiple employees by
the Town Attorney or by an attorney employed or retained for such
purposes, or with respect to the amount of the fees or expenses, shall
be resolved by the court upon motion or by way of a special proceeding.
C. Where the employee delivers process and a written request for a
defense to the Town under § 24-5 of this chapter, the Town shall take
the necessary steps on behalf of the employee to avoid entry of a default
judgment pending resolution of any question pertaining to the
obligation to provide for a defense.
A. The Town shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the
amount of any judgment obtained against such employees in a state or
federal court or in the amount of any settlement of a claim, provided
that the act or omission from which such judgment or claim arose
occurred while the employee was acting during the course of his or her
employment and within the scope of his or her employment or duties;
provided, further, that in the case of a settlement, the duty to indemnify
and save harmless shall be conditioned upon the approval of the
amount of settlement by the Town Board of the Town or its insurance
company. This obligation by the Town to indemnify shall not apply to
any claims against officers and employees of the Town, currently
outstanding, or reduced to judgment or settlement.
B. Except as otherwise provided by law, the duty to indemnify and save
harmless prescribed by this section shall not arise where the injury or
damage resulted from intentional wrongdoing or recklessness on the
part of the employee.
C. Nothing in this section shall authorize the Town to defend, indemnify or
save harmless an employee with respect to any claims filed, or money
recovered from an employee pursuant to § 51 of the General Municipal
Law or for any claims alleging intentional wrongdoing or a reckless act;
provided, however, that the Town shall indemnify and save harmless its
employees in the amount of any costs, attorneys' fees, damages, fines or
§ 24-3 SENECA FALLS CODE § 24-4
1:26
§ 24-5. Duty to notify.
The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this
chapter shall be conditioned upon:
§ 24-6. Other rights.
The benefits of this chapter shall inure only to employees as defined herein
and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party, nor shall any
provision of this chapter be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provision
of the Worker's Compensation Law.
§ 24-7. Notice.
This chapter shall not in any way affect the obligation of any claimant to
give notice to the Town under § 10 of the Court of Claims Act, § 50-e of the
General Municipal Law or any other provisions of law.
§ 24-8. Insurance.
The Town is hereby authorized and empowered to purchase insurance from
any insurance company created by or under the laws of the State of New
York, or authorized by law to transact business in this state, against any
liability imposed by the provisions of this chapter or to act as a self-insurer
with respect thereto.
penalties which may be imposed by reason of an adjudication that an
employee, acting within the scope of his or her public employment or
duties, has, without willfulness or intent on his or her part, violated
a prior order, judgment, consent decree or stipulation of settlement
entered in any court of this state or of the United States.
D. Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee or upon the
settlement of the claim, the employee shall serve a copy of such
judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or registered mail,
within 30 days of the date of entry or settlement, upon the Town Clerk
of the Town and the Town Attorney; and, if not inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter, the amount of such judgment or settlement
shall be paid by the Town.
A. Delivery by the employee to the Town Attorney and to the Town Clerk of
the Town of a written request to provide for his or her defense, together
with the original or a copy of any summons, complaint, process, notice,
demand or pleading, within 10 days after he or she is served with such
document; and
B. The full cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action or
proceeding and in defense of any action or proceeding against the Town
based upon the same act or omission and in the prosecution of any
appeal.
§ 24-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-9
1:27
§ 24-9. Payments.
All payments made under the terms of this chapter, whether for insurance
or otherwise, shall be deemed to be for a public purpose and shall be
audited and paid in the same manner as other public charges.
§ 24-10. Insurer rights.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit
or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of
insurance.
§ 24-11. Immunity.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions of
this chapter shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify,
abrogate or restrict any immunity to liability available to or conferred upon
any unit, entity, officer or employee of the Town by, in accordance with or by
reason of any other provision of state or federal statutory or common law.
§ 24-12. Other enactments.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, benefits accorded to
employees under this chapter shall supplement and be available in addition
to defense or indemnification protection conferred by any other enactment
of the Town Board of the Town or common law. Notwithstanding anything
contained herein to the contrary, the Town shall be entitled to contribution
and/or indemnification by the employee and/or other agency in the event
that such other agency is also obligated to provide a defense for the
employee and/or pay any sums of money by way of indemnification and/or
judgment or award.
§ 24-13. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all actions or proceedings
specified herein which have been commenced, instituted or brought on or
after the effective date of this chapter.
§ 24-14. Limitation on duty to defend and/or indemnify.
A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, there shall
be no duty of the Town to defend or indemnify any employee unless the
Town Board finds that the claim arose during the course of the
employee's normal employment and within the scope of his or her
employment in a matter in which the Town had an interest, the
employee was acting in discharge of a duty imposed or authorized by
law and the employee acted in good faith and without malice.
B. In the event the Town assumes the duty of defense and in the event a
court determines that the employee acted in bad faith or with malice or
in a wanton or willful manner so as to cause the claim or was not acting
§ 24-9 SENECA FALLS CODE § 24-14
1:28
Chapter 55
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 24.
in a bona fide discharge of his or her municipal duties, the employee
shall reimburse the Town for all expenses incurred for defense of claims
arising out of the alleged civil action or civil proceeding. Upon finding
by a court, the Town shall have no duty to satisfy any judgment or claim
against the employee, and in the event the Town has satisfied or is
ordered to satisfy said judgment or claim, the employee must reimburse
the Town for any sum paid for said satisfaction.
§ 24-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-14
1:29

ARTICLE I
Terms of Office
[Adopted 10-1-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
§ 55-1. Clerk and Superintendent of Highways.
The terms of office of the Town Clerk and Town Superintendent of Highways
of the Town of Seneca Falls shall be four years.
§ 55-2. Town Supervisor
A. The term of office of the elective Town Supervisor of the Town of Seneca
Falls shall be four years.
B. This section shall supersede in its application to the Town of Seneca
Falls § 24 of the Town Law of New York State with respect to the term of
office of the elective Town Supervisor.
§ 55-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-2
1:31

ARTICLE II
Town Attorney Residency Requirements
[Adopted 10-3-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
§ 55-3. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of § 10(1)(ii)(d)(3) of the
Municipal Home Rule Law which authorizes the Town Board to adopt a
local law which may amend or supersede any provision of the Town Law in
relation to property, affairs, or government of the Town or in relation to any
of the enumerated subject matters in such § 10 absent a state legislative
restriction on such amendment or supersession.
§ 55-4. Findings; suspension of statutory requirements.
Pursuant to the exemption created by § 23(1)(a) of the New York State Town
Law pertaining to eligibility of Town officers, the Town determines there
are no eligible resident attorneys who are without conflict, and otherwise
eligible for Town Attorney, and the Town hereby suspends any such
residence restriction to an appointed Town Attorney.
§ 55-5. Effective date.
This article shall take effect October 3, 2017.
§ 55-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-5
1:33
Chapter 61
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 24.
§ 55-5 SENECA FALLS CODE § 55-5
1:34
ARTICLE I
Police Investigation Fund
§ 61-1. Creation and appropriation.
There shall be created a fund, in an amount to be determined by the
Supervisor and the Town Board, which shall be called the "Police
Investigation Fund." The amount appropriated therefor shall be consigned
to the custody of the Chief of Police to be handled by him or her pursuant to
the following guidelines.
§ 61-2. Custody of funds.
§ 61-3. Application for funds; release of moneys.
§ 61-4. Accountability.
A. The Chief of Police shall secure the funds transferred to him or her for
the purposes of police investigation in whatever manner he or she may
determine, including but not limited to a separate, special checking
account or in cash, presuming the fund in such form is secure against
loss, theft or destruction.
B. Upon determining the method of custody he or she intends to utilize,
the Chief of Police shall so advise the Town Supervisor, and such
method or combination of methods shall be adhered to without
exception, unless circumstances and experience indicate the
advisability of changing the method, which change should promptly be
instituted, with appropriate notice to the Town Clerk.
A. Any police officer having reasonable grounds to believe moneys from
the Police Investigation Fund would materially assist in obtaining of
information or evidence in a current crime investigation may apply for
such funds to the Chief of Police, stating fully his or her belief in the
need he or she perceives.
B. The Chief of Police, prior to releasing any moneys, shall personally
review the reasonableness of the request and, if his or her response to
the same is in the affirmative, shall record in a special ledger an
accurate summary of the request, his or her reasons for granting it and
the amount of money advanced, which will not be subject to view by
anyone except the Chief of Police, except under circumstances recited
in § 61-4C below.
C. The Chief of Police himself shall make no direct withdrawals from the
fund for use in any criminal investigation he or she may be conducting
on his or her own. In the unlikely event of such a circumstance, such a
withdrawal may only be authorized by the Supervisor and one Town
Board member of the Public Safety Committee, both of whom shall note
their authorization in the special ledger maintained by the Chief of
Police.
§ 61-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-4
1:35
§ 61-5. Termination.
The Town Board of the Town of Seneca Falls may, by local law, terminate
the existence of the Police Investigation Fund, and, upon the enactment
of such a local law, the Chief of Police shall provide the Board with a full
accounting of his or her custody of the fund and shall remit all moneys
remaining therein to the Town Treasurer, pursuant to and not inconsistent
with the accounting procedures heretofore outlined.
A. On the first day of each month, the Chief of Police shall submit a written
report to the Town Clerk stating the amount of any moneys expended
from the fund and, in general terms, that is, terms which would not
specifically identify the particular investigation for which the moneys
were expended, stating the purpose of such expenditure. The report is
to be made to the Town Clerk even if no expenditures are made during
said month.
B. If and in the event that there is a depletion of the moneys in said fund to
the point where the Chief of Police believes the fund should be
replenished, vouchers for moneys expended must be submitted to the
Town Clerk, and the same shall be audited by the Supervisor and the
Town Board as any other voucher would be reviewed by them. Said
voucher will describe the expenditure in general terms, as described in
Subsection A above.
C. If and in the event any particular voucher is of such a nature that the
auditing body, in acquitting its responsibility, cannot approve payment,
such voucher is to be referred to the Supervisor and one Town Board
member of the Public Safety Committee. Upon such a referral, the Chief
of Police will, from the entries in his or her confidential ledger, provide
the Supervisor and the Board member with specifics of the matter for
which the moneys were expended. Upon the recommendation of the
Supervisor and said Board member, the voucher shall be deemed
approved and a sum equal to the amount thereof shall be reimbursed to
the fund by the Town Treasurer.
D. If and in the event that the Supervisor and the Board member, pursuant
to the review prescribed in Subsection C above, deny recommendation
of approval of payment of said voucher, in which event the Chief of
Police would be personally liable for the amount involved, the Chief of
Police, utilizing witnesses from his or her Department, as well as other
witnesses, may present his or her claim to the full Board, sitting in
executive session, and the determination of the full Board shall be final,
except for appellate remedies available to the Chief of Police in the Civil
Practice Law and Rules (CPLR).
§ 61-4 SENECA FALLS CODE § 61-5
1:36
ARTICLE II
Residency Requirements
§ 61-6. Restriction.
Any person hereafter employed by the Town of Seneca Falls Police
Department shall, at the time of employment, reside within the Town of
Seneca Falls, or within a radius of 30 miles from the Town limits, and shall
continue to reside within a radius of 30 miles during such employment.
§ 61-7. Applicability.
This section shall not apply to applicants to the Police Department, but shall
apply to any police officer after permanent appointment by the Town Board.
§ 61-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-7
1:37
Chapter 70
RECORDS
§ 61-7 SENECA FALLS CODE § 61-7
1:38
ARTICLE I
Records Retention
§ 70-1. Adoption of schedule.
Records Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1, issued pursuant to
Article 57-A of the Arts and Cultural Affairs Law and containing legal
minimum retention periods for municipal government records, is hereby
adopted for use by all municipal officers in disposing of municipal
government records listed herein.
§ 70-2. Disposal of records.
In accordance with Article 57-A:
A. Only those records will be disposed of that are described in Records
Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1 after they have met the
minimum retention period prescribed therein.
B. Only those records will be disposed of that do not have sufficient
administrative, fiscal, legal or historical value to merit retention beyond
established time periods.
§ 70-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-2
1:39

ARTICLE II
Public Access
§ 70-3. Purpose and scope.
§ 70-4. Designation of records access officer; duties.
A. The people's right to know the process of government decisionmaking
and the documents and statistics leading to determinations is basic to
our society. Access to such information should not be thwarted by
shrouding it with the cloak of secrecy or confidentiality.
B. These regulations provide information concerning the procedures by
which records may be obtained.
C. Personnel shall furnish to the public the information and records
required by the Freedom of Information Law,3 as well as records
otherwise available by law.
D. Any conflicts among laws governing public access to records shall be
construed in favor of the widest possible availability of public records.
A. The Town Board is responsible for ensuring compliance with the
regulations herein and designates the Town Clerk as records access
officer.
B. The records access officer is responsible for ensuring appropriate
agency response to public requests for access to records. The
designation of the records access officer shall not be construed to
prohibit officials who have in the past been authorized to make records
or information available to the public from continuing to do so.
C. The records access officer shall ensure that personnel:
(1) Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
(2) Assist the requester in identifying requested records, if necessary.
(3) Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions:
(a) Make records available for inspection.
(b) Deny access to the records, in whole or in part, and explain, in
writing, the reasons therefor.
(4) Upon request for copies of records, take one of the following
actions:
(a) Make a copy available upon payment of or an offer to pay the
established fees, if any, in accordance with § 70-10.
(b) Permit the requester to copy those records.
3. Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 84 et seq.
§ 70-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-4
1:41
§ 70-5. Location of records.
Records shall be available for public inspection and copying at the Town
Clerk's office, Town Hall, Seneca Falls, New York.
§ 70-6. Hours for public inspection.
Requests for public access to records shall be accepted and records shall
be produced during all hours that the Clerk's office is regularly open for
business.
§ 70-7. Requests for access to records.
(5) Upon request, certify that a record is a true copy.
(6) Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
(a) The Town is not the custodian for such records; or
(b) The records of which the Town is a custodian cannot be found
after diligent search.
(7) Contact persons seeking records when a request is voluminous or
when locating the records sought involves substantial effort, so
that Town personnel may ascertain the nature of records of primary
interest and attempt to reasonably reduce the volume of the
records requested.
A. A written request may be required, but oral requests may be accepted
when records are readily available. The Town will accept e-mail
requests.
B. When the Town maintains requested records on the Internet, a
response shall inform a requester that the records are accessible via
the Internet and in printed form either on paper or other information
storage medium.
C. A response shall be given within five business days of receipt of any
request reasonably describing the record or records sought by:
(1) Informing a person requesting records that the request or portion
of the request does not reasonably describe the records sought,
including direction, to the extent possible, that would enable that
person to request records reasonably described;
(2) Granting or denying access to records in whole or in part;
(3) Acknowledging the receipt of a request in writing, including an
approximate date when the request will be granted or denied in
whole or in part, which shall be reasonable under the
circumstances of the request and shall not be more than 20
business days after the date of the acknowledgment, or if it is
known that circumstances prevent disclosure within 20 business
§ 70-4 SENECA FALLS CODE § 70-7
1:42
§ 70-8. Subject matter list.
§ 70-9. Denial of access to records; appeals.
days from the date of such acknowledgment, providing a statement
in writing stating the reason for inability to grant the request
within that time and a date certain, within a reasonable period
under the circumstances of the request, when the request will be
granted in whole or in part; or
(4) If the receipt of request was acknowledged in writing and included
an approximate date when the request would be granted in whole
or in part within 20 business days of such acknowledgment, but
circumstances prevent disclosure within that time, providing a
statement in writing within 20 business days of such
acknowledgment stating the reason for the inability to do so and a
date certain, within a reasonable period under the circumstances of
the request, when the request will be granted in whole or in part.
D. A request shall reasonably describe the record or records sought.
Whenever possible, a person requesting records should supply
information regarding dates, file designations or other information that
may help to describe the records sought.
E. If the records access officer does not provide or deny access to the
record sought within five business days of receipt of a request, he or
she shall furnish a written acknowledgment of receipt of the request
and a statement of the approximate date when the request will be
granted or denied. If access to records is neither granted nor denied
within 20 business days after the date of acknowledgment of receipt of
a request, the request may be construed as a denial of access that may
be appealed.
A. The records access officer shall maintain a reasonably detailed current
list by subject matter of all records in his or her possession, whether or
not records are available pursuant to § 87, Subdivision 2, of the Public
Officers Law.
B. The subject matter list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit
identification of the category of the record sought.
C. The subject matter list shall be updated annually. The most recent
update shall appear on the first page of the subject matter list.
A. Denial of access to records shall be in writing, stating the reason
therefor and advising the requester of the right to appeal to the body
established to hear appeals.
B. If requested records are not provided promptly, as required in § 70-7E
of this article, such failure shall also be deemed a denial of access.
§ 70-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-9
1:43
§ 70-10. Fees.
Fees shall be charged in amounts as set from time to time by resolution of
the Town Board and in accordance with state regulations.
§ 70-11. Posting of public notice.
A notice containing the title or name and business address of the records
access officer and appeals body and the location where records can be seen
or copies may be made shall be posted in a conspicuous location wherever
records are kept.
C. The Supervisor shall hear appeals for denial of access to records under
the Freedom of Information Law.4
D. Any person denied access to records may appeal within 30 days of a
denial. The time for deciding an appeal by the person designated to
hear appeals shall commence upon receipt of a written appeal
identifying:
(1) The date of the appeal.
(2) The date and location of the request for records.
(3) A description of the records to which the requester was denied
access.
(4) Whether the denial of access was in writing or due to failure to
provide records promptly as required by § 70-7E.
(5) The name and return address of the requester.
E. The person designated to hear appeals shall inform the requester of his
or her decision, in writing, within 10 business days of receipt of an
appeal. Failure to determine an appeal within 10 business days of its
receipt by granting access to the records sought or fully explaining the
reasons for further denial in writing shall constitute a denial of the
appeal.
F. The person designated to hear appeals shall immediately forward to the
Committee on Open Government copies of all appeals upon receipt and
the ensuing determination thereon.
G. A final denial of access to a requested record shall be subject to court
review, as provided in Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
4. Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 84 et seq.
§ 70-9 SENECA FALLS CODE § 70-11
1:44
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 102
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 193.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
Special events — See Ch. 250.
§ 102-1. Findings and purpose.
§ 102-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTENT TO CONSUME — Includes any of the following:
OPEN CONTAINER — A container not (or no longer) securely capped,
corked or sealed, and includes a can or similar container which has been
perforated or a container on which the secure capping, sealing or corking
(normally provided by the manufacturer of the alcoholic beverage) has been
disturbed, as would be exemplified by containers on which the cap has been
loosened or the cork displaced or the seal torn or mutilated.
§ 102-3. Prohibitions.
A. The Town Board finds that the unrestricted consumption of alcoholic
beverages in certain public places often leads to disorder and related
problems as well as the littering of such public places and threatens
peace and good order.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the consumption of alcoholic
beverages in certain public places in order to prevent disorderly
behavior and littering in public places; and to protect the public health,
safety and welfare and to promote the public good.
A. Drinking from the container.
B. Possession with movement of the container to the mouth.
Any circumstances evidencing an intent to ultimately consume on any
public lands.
C.
A. Consumption in certain public places prohibited. No person shall,
within the Town of Seneca Falls, drink or otherwise consume liquor,
wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages while such person is in or upon
any public sidewalk, street, highway, parking lot, bathing beach, public
§ 70-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-3
1:45
§ 102-4. Presumptions.
§ 102-5. Exceptions.
The provisions of § 102-3 shall not apply to any activity sponsored by
an organization having proper license issued by the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Board of Seneca County to dispense alcoholic beverages upon
public property in the Town of Seneca Falls, provided that such organization
shall previously have obtained permission from the Town Board of the Town
of Seneca Falls for the granting of this exception. This exception shall apply
only to the public property of the Town of Seneca Falls upon which the
alcoholic beverages are dispensed.
§ 102-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined not more than $500 or be imprisoned in the county jail
for not more than 15 days, or both.
Chapter 106
ANIMALS
park or such other public place as defined by § 240.00 of the Penal Law
of the State of New York.
B. Possession of open containers. No person shall carry or have in his or
her possession, within the Town of Seneca Falls, any open bottle or
open container containing liquor, wine, beer or other alcoholic
beverage with the intent of the possessor or another to consume same
in any of the public places described in Subsection A of this section.
A. The possession of an open bottle or open container unwrapped or with
the top exposed in a public place as herein defined shall be presumptive
evidence that the contents of such open bottle or open container are
intended to be consumed in a public place.
B. An open bottle or open container in any vehicle while in or on any public
sidewalk, street, highway, parking lot, bathing beach, public park or
other public place, as defined by § 240.00 of the Penal Law of the State
of New York, shall be presumptive evidence that the same is in the
possession of all the occupants thereof.
§ 102-3 SENECA FALLS CODE § 102-6
1:46
ARTICLE I
Control of Certain Animals
§ 106-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HOUSEHOLD PET — A small animal (generally under 150 pounds) that is
customarily kept for company or enjoyment and one that may be properly
and safely kept within a dwelling unit or yard. Household pets shall include
dogs, cats, pet rabbits, domestic tropical birds, rodents (gerbils, hamsters
and guinea pigs), reptiles and amphibians.
§ 106-2. Restrictions.
§ 106-3. Running at large prohibited.
No person owning an animal, or having charge thereof, shall permit such
animal (except dogs, as regulated by Article II of this chapter) to run at
large in any public street or in any public place or to go upon the premises
of another person in the Town of Seneca Falls.
§ 106-4. Penalties for offenses.
An offense against the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine
of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or
both.
A. No person shall keep or house horses, ponies, cattle, sheep, swine,
poultry or pigeons or any animals other than household pets or operate
a kennel of three or more dogs over six months old within the Town,
except in a designated A-1 or A-2 District.
B. No horses, ponies, cattle, swine or poultry shall be allowed to run at
large within the Town.
§ 106-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-4
1:47

ARTICLE II
Dog Control
§ 106-5. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Dog Control Law of the Town
of Seneca Falls, New York."
§ 106-6. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law and the Municipal Home Rule Law of the
State of New York.
§ 106-7. Findings and purpose.
The Town Board of the Town of Seneca Falls, New York, finds that the
running at large and other uncontrolled behavior of licensed dogs have
caused physical harm to persons and damage to property and have created
nuisances within the Town. The purpose of this article is to protect the
health, safety and well-being of persons and property by imposing
restrictions on the keeping and running at large of dogs within the Town.
§ 106-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following
respective meanings:
DOG — Male and female, licensed and unlicensed members of the species
Canis familiaris.
DOG CONTROL OFFICER — Any individual appointed by the Town Board
pursuant to the provisions of Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law
of the State of New York to assist in the enforcement of this article, or any
authorized officer, agent or employee of any incorporated humane society
or similar incorporated dog protective association under contract with the
Town to assist in the enforcement of this article.
OWNER — The person entitled to claim lawful custody and possession of a
dog and who is responsible for purchasing the license for such dog unless
the dog is or has been lost and such loss was promptly reported to the
Dog Control Officer and a reasonable search has been made. If a dog is
not licensed, the term "owner" shall designate and cover any person or
persons, firm, association or corporation who or which at any time owns or
has custody or control of, harbors or is otherwise responsible for any dog
which is kept, brought or comes within the Town. Any person owning or
harboring a dog for a period of one week prior to the filing of any complaint
charging a violation of this article shall be held and deemed to be the owner
of such dog for the purpose of this article.
PROPERTY — Includes both real and personal property.
§ 106-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-8
1:49
RUN AT LARGE — A dog shall be deemed to be running at large if it is
elsewhere than on the premises of the owner while not in the control of the
owner or his or her agent and without the knowledge, consent or approval
of the owner of such lands.
TOWN — The Town of Seneca Falls, New York.
§ 106-9. Prohibited acts.
No person, being the owner or agent of the owner of any dog, shall permit
such dog to commit any nuisance within the Town of Seneca Falls or cause
damage to the person or property of others. The following are declared to
be nuisances and are set forth herein for explanatory purposes only, and
are not to be construed as excluding other types of activity that would
constitute a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog in the
Town to permit or allow such dog to:
A. Run at large, unless the dog is restricted by an adequate leash or unless
it is accompanied by its owner or a responsible person and under the
full control of such owner or person. For the purpose of the article, a
dog or dogs hunting in the company of a hunter or hunters shall be
considered as accompanied by its owners.
B. Engage in habitual loud howling, barking, crying or whining or conduct
itself in such a manner so as to habitually annoy or disturb the comfort
or repose of any person other than the owner of such dog. "Habitual" is
defined as howling, barking, crying, or whining for repeated intervals of
at least 10 minutes with less than two minutes of interruption and
which can be heard by any person, including a law enforcement or dog
control officer, located outside the dog's owner's or caretaker's
premises.
C. Uproot, dig or otherwise damage any vegetables, lawns, flowers,
garden beds or other property without the consent of or approval of the
owner thereof.
D. Chase, jump upon or otherwise harass any person in such a manner as
to reasonably cause intimidation or fear or to put such person in
reasonable apprehension of bodily harm or injury.
E. Habitually chase, run alongside of or bark at motor vehicles,
motorcycles or bicycles while on a public street, highway or place or
upon private property without the consent or approval of the owner of
such property.
F. Create a nuisance by defecating, urinating or digging on public
property or on private lands other than the property of the owner of
such dog without the consent or approval of the owner of such property.
G. If a female dog, when in heat, be off the owner's premises unrestrained
by a leash.
§ 106-8 SENECA FALLS CODE § 106-9
1:50
§ 106-10. Restriction on number of dogs.
Except in an Agricultural District, no person shall own, house, board, keep
or harbor more than three dogs over six months of age within a dwelling
unit in the Town.
§ 106-11. Dogs to be seized; keeping and disposal of seized dogs.
The Dog Control Officer or any peace officer shall seize any unlicensed
dog of licensing age, whether on or off the owner's premises; any dog not
wearing a tag and not identified and which is not on the owner's premises;
any dog found in violation of § 106-10A of this article; and any dog which
poses an immediate threat to the public safety. Such seized dog shall be
kept and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law. The Dog Control Officer shall see that the
order of the Town Justice in such case is carried out.
§ 106-12. Effect of ownership by minor.
In the event that the owner or harborer shall be a minor under the age of
16 years, then the head of the household in which such minor resides shall
be deemed to have the care, custody and control of said dog and shall be
responsible for any acts in violation of this article.
§ 106-13. Fees.
The fees for seizure and impoundment of dogs in violation of Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law and of § 106-10A of this article shall be set
from time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 106-14. Dog Control Officer.
H. Cause physical injury of any nature to any person other than the owner
of such dog.
I. Be upon the school grounds of any school within the Town of Seneca
Falls during the time of year when said schools are open between one
hour prior to commencement of the school day and one hour after the
end of the school day or upon a playground within said Town at any
hour during the time of year when playground activities are conducted.
J. Run in or form a pack of three or more dogs.
A. The Town Board may appoint a Dog Control Officer, who shall have the
duty of enforcing this article. The Dog Control Officer, in enforcing this
article, shall have all the powers and authority as provided in Article 7
of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York.
B. In lieu of appointing a Dog Control Officer, the Town Board may
contract for dog control officer services with any other municipality or
with any incorporated humane society or similar incorporated dog
protective association, or may appoint, jointly with one or more
§ 106-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-14
1:51
§ 106-15. Administration and enforcement.
§ 106-16. Penalties for offenses.
Penalties for violations of this article shall be as provided in Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law.
municipalities, one or more dog control officers having jurisdiction in
each of the cooperating municipalities.
A. Any person who observes or has knowledge of a dog violating any
provision of this article may file a signed complaint under oath with the
Dog Control Officer or any police officer of the Town of Seneca Falls,
specifying the nature of the violation, the place of occurrence, the date
thereof, the description of the dog and the name and address, if known,
of the owner or person harboring said dog. Such complaint may serve
as the basis for enforcing the provisions of this article.
B. Upon receipt by the Dog Control Officer or any police officer of the
Town of Seneca Falls of any such complaint, or in the event that any dog
is found by the Dog Control Officer to be in violation of any provision of
this article, the Dog Control Officer or any police officer of the Town of
Seneca Falls shall, if possible, seize and take into custody said dog and,
in any event, issue or deliver to the owner of said dog an appearance
ticket pursuant to the provisions of Article 7 of the Agriculture and
Markets Law of the State of New York and Article 150 of the Criminal
Procedure Law of the State of New York detailing the violations and
instructing the owner to appear before the Justice Court of the Town of
Seneca Falls, or to answer such appearance ticket by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, within five days of the date of
such violation. If said appearance ticket is disregarded by such person,
the Dog Control Officer or any police officer of the Town of Seneca Falls
or complainant may file an information with said court, which court
shall then issue a warrant for the arrest of such person.
§ 106-14 SENECA FALLS CODE § 106-16
1:52
ARTICLE III
Redemption Period for Seized Dogs
§ 106-17. Extension of redemption period authorized.
The Town of Seneca Falls in the County of Seneca, State of New York,
hereby extends the redemption period for the redemption of dogs seized
pursuant to § 118 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law as it
is enabled to do so pursuant to § 118, Subdivision 8, of the Agriculture and
Markets Law.
§ 106-18. Redemption period.
All redemption periods set forth in said § 118 shall be for a period of 10
days, except that where notice to the owner is required to be given by mail
according to said section, such period shall be for 14 days.
§ 106-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-18
1:53

ARTICLE IV
Dog Licensing
§ 106-19. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Dog Licensing Law of
the Town of Seneca Falls."
§ 106-20. License required.
All dogs in the Town of Seneca Falls, unless otherwise exempted by New
York State Agriculture and Markets Law, must be licensed with the Town
Clerk of the Town of Seneca Falls by the age of four months.
§ 106-21. Application.
The owner of each dog required to be licensed shall, for new applications
and renewal applications, obtain, complete and return to the Town Clerk:
§ 106-22. Identification tag.
Each dog licensed pursuant to this article shall be assigned, at the time the
dog is first licensed, a municipal identification number. Such identification
number shall be carried by the dog on an identification tag which shall be
affixed to a collar on the dog at all times. No tag carrying an identification
number shall be affixed to the collar of any dog other than the one to which
that number has been assigned.
A. A dog license application.
B. The license application fee.
C. Any applicable license surcharges.
D. Such additional fees as may be established by the Town Board of the
Town of Seneca Falls.
E. Proof that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies or a statement
from a licensed veterinarian that such vaccination would endanger the
dog's life, in which case vaccination shall not be required.
F. In the case of a spayed or neutered dog, a certificate signed by a
licensed veterinarian or an affidavit signed by the owner, showing that
the dog has been spayed or neutered, provided such certificate or
affidavit shall not be required if the same is already on file with the
Town Clerk. In lieu of the spay or neuter certificate, an owner may
present a statement certified by a licensed veterinarian stating that he
or she has examined the dog and found that, because of old age or other
reason, the life of the dog would be endangered by spaying or
neutering. In such case, the license fee for the dog shall be the same as
for a spayed or neutered dog.
§ 106-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-23
1:55
§ 106-23. License term.
All dog licenses will be for a period of one year and will expire at the end of
the month one year from the date of issue.
§ 106-24. Licenses nontransferable.
No license issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable. Upon the
transfer of ownership of any dog, the new owner shall immediately make
application for a new license for such dog.
§ 106-25. Purebred licenses.
The Town of Seneca Falls will not issue purebred licenses.
§ 106-26. Guide dog, service dog, hearing dog or detection dog tag.
The Town of Seneca Falls will issue a special tag for identifying any guide
dog, service dog, hearing dog or detection dog. Such tag shall be in addition
to the identification tag required by § 106-22 of this article.
§ 106-27. Fees and surcharges.
The fees and surcharges for issuing dog licenses shall be fixed by the Town
Board. Such fees and surcharges may from time to time be changed as the
Town Board may determine. These fees and surcharges may include:
§ 106-28. Exemptions.
A. The license fee for a spayed or neutered dog.
B. The license fee for an unspayed or unneutered dog (such fee having to
exceed the fee for a license for a spayed or neutered dog by such
amount as mandated by the New York State Agriculture and Markets
Law).
C. In addition to the license fee authorized by this article and established
by the Town Board, a surcharge if the dog to be licensed is altered (such
surcharge shall be, at a minimum, such amount as mandated by the
New York State Agriculture and Markets Law).
D. In addition to the license fee authorized by this article and established
by the Town Board, a surcharge if the dog to be licensed is not altered
(such surcharge shall be, at a minimum, such amount as mandated by
the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law).
E. In addition to the license fee authorized by this article and established
by the Town Board, a surcharge to recover and defray the cost of an
enumeration of dogs living with the Town of Seneca Falls.
A. Excepted from payment of the license fee are applications submitted for
a dog license for any of the following dogs, provided written
§ 106-23 SENECA FALLS CODE § 106-28
1:56
§ 106-29. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this article shall be punishable by:
documentation is provided with such application that certifies such dog
as being any of the following:
(1) Guide dog;
(2) Hearing dog;
(3) Service dog;
(4) War dog;
(5) Working search dog;
(6) Detection dog;
(7) Police work dog; or
(8) Therapy dog.
B. A dog participating in a dog show within the Town of Seneca Falls shall
be exempt, during such participation only, from the requirement of
wearing its identification tag, contained in § 106-20 and, if applicable,
§ 106-22, of this article and in § 111, as amended, of the New York State
Agriculture and Markets Law.
C. Any dog harbored within the Town of Seneca Falls for a period of 30
days or less shall be exempt from the licensing and identification
provisions of this article, provided that any such dog is licensed by a
jurisdiction outside the Town of Seneca Falls.
A. A fine of $25 for a first violation;
B. A fine of $50 for a second violation within five years of the first
violation; and
C. Where the person was found to have committed two or more such
violations within the preceding five years, either a fine of nor more than
$500 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 106-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-29
1:57
Chapter 111
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 285.
§ 111-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
§ 111-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CERTIFIED TESTER/INSPECTOR — That individual or firm approved by the
Town Board to accomplish the necessary inspections and operational tests
of backflow prevention devices.
CLERK — The Town Clerk of the Town of Seneca Falls.
REDUCED-PRESSURE-ZONE DEVICE, ACCEPTABLE — A device
containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves, together
with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located
between the two check valves. During normal flow and at the cessation of
normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less than the
upstream (supply) pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to
maintain the pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves
located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with
properly located test cocks.
§ 111-3. Responsibilities of Town and consumers; design and
approval.
A. Protect the public potable water supply of the Town of Seneca Falls
from the possibility of contamination by isolating within its customers'
internal distribution system(s) or its customers' private water system(s)
contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water
supply system; and
B. Comply with the requirements of the New York State Sanitary Code
§ 5-1.31.
A. The Town of Seneca Falls shall be responsible for the protection of the
water distribution system from contamination due to the backflow of
contaminants through the water service connection. If, in the judgment
of the Town Board, an acceptable backflow prevention device is
required at the Town's water service connection to any customer's
§ 106-29 SENECA FALLS CODE § 111-3
1:58
§ 111-4. Operational tests.
It shall be the duty of the customer at any premises where backflow
prevention devices are installed to contact the Town's certified tester/
inspector to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least
once a year. In those instances where the Town Board deems the hazard
to be great enough, it may require certified inspections at more frequent
intervals. Certified inspections and operational tests must also be made
when any backflow prevention device is to be installed, repaired,
overhauled or replaced, in addition to the requirement of an annual certified
inspection and operational test. All inspections and tests shall be at the
expense of the customer and shall be performed by the Town's certified
tester/inspector or any other qualified firm or persons approved of in
advance by the Town. These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or
replaced by and at the expense of the customer whenever said devices are
found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhauls shall be
maintained. Copies of all testing and maintenance records shall be sent to
the Town immediately after the work is performed.
§ 111-5. Existing devices.
All presently installed prevention devices which do not meet the
requirements of this chapter but were approved devices for the purposes
described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly
maintained shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements
under this chapter, be excluded from the requirements of these rules, so
long as the Town is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the utility
system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location
or requires more than minimum maintenance or constitutes a hazard to
health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting
the requirements of this chapter.
premises, for the safety of the water system, the Clerk or his or her
designated agent shall give notice, in writing, to said customer to install
such backflow prevention device approved of by the Town Board at each
service connection to this premises.
B. Consumer responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of each consumer,
at his or her own expense, to furnish, install and keep in good working
order and safe condition any and all protective devices required by this
chapter. The Town shall not be responsible for any loss or damage
directly or indirectly resulting from or caused by the improper or
negligent installation, operation, use, repair or maintenance of or
interfering with any protective device by any customer or any other
person.
C. Design and approval. The design for the installation of a backflow
prevention device must be prepared in accordance with New York State
laws and regulations and must be approved by the Town Board and all
agencies required by state laws and regulations.
§ 111-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-6
1:59
§ 111-6. Water supply protection required; failure to install or
maintain devices.
No water service connection to any customer's water system shall be
installed or maintained by the Town unless the water supply is protected as
required by state laws and regulations and this chapter. Service of water to
any premises shall be discontinued if a backflow prevention device required
by this chapter is not installed, tested and maintained or if it is found that a
backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed. Service will not
be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
§ 111-7. Penalties for offenses.
An offense against the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days,
or both.
Chapter 115
BINGO AND GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 111-6 SENECA FALLS CODE § 111-7
1:60
ARTICLE I
Bingo
§ 115-1. Authorization.
Pursuant to Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law, the conduct of bingo
games is authorized in the Town of Seneca Falls.
§ 115-2. Games on Sunday.
Any game of bingo conducted within the Town pursuant to a license issued
in accordance with this article and the applicable statutes may be operated
by authorized organizations on the first day of the week, commonly known
as "Sunday."
§ 115-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-2
1:61

ARTICLE II
Games of Chance
§ 115-3. Statutory authority; title.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law of the State of New York and shall be known as the "Games
of Chance Law of the Town of Seneca Falls."
§ 115-4. Definitions.
The words and terms used in this article shall have the same meanings
as such words and terms are used in Article 9-A of the General Municipal
Law unless otherwise provided herein or the context requires a different
meaning.
§ 115-5. Authorization.
Games of chance may be conducted in the Town by an authorized, organized
organization after obtaining a license therefor in accordance with
provisions, requirements and limitations of Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law, the rules and regulations of the New York State Racing and
Wagering Board and this article.
§ 115-6. Games on Sunday.
The conduct of games of chance on Sundays is authorized, except as
otherwise provided in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law.
§ 115-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-6
1:63
Chapter 123
BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 123-1. Enforcement.
On and after January 1, 1984, the Town of Seneca Falls in the County of
Seneca will not enforce the Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code as
described and set forth in Article 18 of the Executive Law of the State of
New York.5
Chapter 131
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
§ 131-1. Findings and purpose.
Unsafe buildings pose a threat to life and property in the Town of Seneca
Falls. Buildings and structures may become unsafe by reason of damage
by fire, the elements, age or general deterioration. Vacant buildings not
properly secured at doorways and windows also serve as an attractive
nuisance for young children who may be injured therein, as well as a point
of congregation by vagrants and transients. A dilapidated building may also
serve as a place of rodent infestation, thereby creating a health menace to
the community. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the safety,
health protection and general welfare of persons and property in the Town
of Seneca Falls by requiring that such unsafe buildings be repaired or
demolished and removed.
§ 131-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Unsafe Buildings Law of the Town of
Seneca Falls."
§ 131-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any building, structure or portion thereof used for residential,
business or industrial purposes.
ZONING OFFICER — The Zoning Officer of the Town of Seneca Falls or such
other person appointed by the Town Board to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
5. Editor's Note: The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code is enforced
in the Town of Seneca Falls by the County of Seneca. In addition, the duties of the Zoning
Officer include those generally assigned to the Building Inspector.
§ 115-6 SENECA FALLS CODE § 131-4
1:64
§ 131-4. Investigation and report.
When, in his or her own opinion or upon receipt of information, the Zoning
Officer determines that a building is or may become dangerous or unsafe
to the general public; is open at the doorways and windows, making it
accessible to and an object of attraction to minors under 18 years of age,
as well as to vagrants and other trespassers; is or may become a place of
rodent infestation; presents any other danger to the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the public; or is unfit for the purposes for which
it may lawfully be used, he or she shall cause or make an inspection
thereof and report, in writing, to the Town Board his or her findings and
recommendations in regard to its repair or demolition and removal.
§ 131-5. Action by Board; order.
The Town Board shall thereafter consider such report and, by resolution,
determine, if, in its opinion, the report so warrants, that such building
is unsafe and dangerous and order its repair, if the same can be safely
repaired, or its demolition and removal and further order that a notice be
served upon the persons and in the manner provided herein.
§ 131-6. Contents of notice.
The notice shall contain the following:
§ 131-7. Service of notice.
Said notice shall be served:
A. A description of the premises.
B. A statement of the particulars in which the building is unsafe or
dangerous.
C. An order outlining the manner in which the building is to be made safe
and secure or demolished and removed.
D. A statement that the securing or removal of such building shall
commence within 30 days of the service of the notice and shall be
complete within 60 days thereafter, unless for good cause shown such
time shall be extended.
E. A date, time and place for a hearing before the Town Board in relation
to such dangerous or unsafe building, which hearing shall be scheduled
not less than five business days from the date of service of the notice.
F. A statement that, in the event of neglect or refusal to comply with the
order to secure or demolish and remove the building, the Town Board is
authorized to provide for its demolition and removal, to assess all
expenses thereof against the land on which it is located and to institute
a special proceeding to collect the costs of demolition, including legal
expenses.
§ 131-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-7
1:65
§ 131-8. Copies of notice to be filed with county.
A copy of the notice served as provided herein shall be filed in the office of
the County Clerk of the County of Seneca.
§ 131-9. Remediation by Town; award of contracts.
In the event of the refusal or neglect of the person so notified to comply
with said order of the Town Board and after the hearing, the Town Board
shall provide for the demolition and removal of such building or structure
either by Town employees or by contract. Except in emergency as provided
in § 131-11 hereof, any contract for demolition and removal of a building in
excess of $7,500 shall be awarded through competitive bidding.
§ 131-10. Costs to be assessed against land.
All expenses incurred by the Town in connection with the proceedings to
repair and secure or demolish and remove the unsafe building, including
the cost of actually removing such building, shall be assessed against the
land on which such building is located and shall be levied and collected in
the same manner as provided in Article 15 of the Town Law for the levy and
collection of a special ad valorem levy.
§ 131-11. Emergencies.
Where it reasonably appears that there is present a clear and imminent
danger to the life, safety or health of any person or property, unless an
unsafe building is immediately repaired and secured or demolished, the
Town Board may, by resolution, authorize the Zoning Officer to immediately
cause the repair or demolition of such unsafe building. The expenses of such
repair or demolition shall be a charge against the land on which it is located
and shall be assessed, levied and collected as provided in § 131-10 hereof.
§ 131-12. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter may be punishable by a fine of not more than
$500 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
A. By personal service of a copy thereof upon the owner, executor,
administrator, agent, lessee or any person having a vested or
contingent interest in such unsafe building as shown by the records of
the receiver of taxes (or Tax Collector) or of the County Clerk or, if no
such person can be reasonably found, by mailing such owner by
registered mail a copy of such notice directed to his or her last known
address as shown by the above records;
B. By personal service of a copy of such notice upon any adult person
residing in or occupying said premises, if such person can be
reasonably found; or
C. By securely affixing a copy of such notice upon the unsafe building.
§ 131-7 SENECA FALLS CODE § 131-12
1:66
Chapter 135
CEMETERIES
§ 135-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CEMETERY — Any place set aside or dedicated for the burial of the human
dead within the Town of Seneca Falls or under Town control.
§ 135-2. Burial in cemeteries required.
§ 135-3. Written consent required for interment or disinterment.
No person shall dig any grave, inter or disinter any dead human body in
a cemetery within or controlled by the Town of Seneca Falls without the
written consent of the cemetery superintendent.
§ 135-4. Fences, markers and decorations.
No person shall put up any fence, gravestone or marker or decoration of
any kind at any grave or dig up any sod in any of the cemeteries of the Town
without the approval of the cemetery superintendent and in accordance
with cemetery regulations as prescribed by the Town Board of the Town of
Seneca Falls.
§ 135-5. Use of vehicles; hours; liability.
A. No person shall bury or inter or aid or assist in the burial or interment
of any human body within the Town of Seneca Falls except in one of the
cemeteries.
B. Only human bodies may be buried in cemeteries within or controlled by
the Town of Seneca Falls.
A. No person shall walk or drive any vehicle or other conveyance over or
upon any lot or path in any cemetery within the Town, except upon or
over the parks and roads therein laid out, or leave any vehicle standing
in any road or path in any cemetery so as to hinder the free passage of
other persons using such roadway. No person shall enter into or upon
any cemetery except through the gate and entrances thereto.
B. No person shall use any cemetery as a common thoroughfare or public
walk, and all traveling through or across any cemetery, except in
connection with cemetery purposes or for the purpose of visiting a
burial lot, is forbidden.
C. Only passenger-type vehicles and other authorized vehicles required
for grave preparation, interment and perpetual care may be driven
within the bounds of any Town cemetery. Autos pulling trailers or
§ 131-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-5
1:67
§ 135-6. Injury to trees and plants; solid waste.
No person shall cut, break or in any manner injure or destroy any tree,
shrub or plant or pick, crush or gather or in any manner injure or destroy
any flower, either wild or cultivated or the fruit or product of any tree,
shrub or plant or catch, shoot, wound or kill or rob, disturb or destroy any
bird's nest or animal or deposit any filth, waste or rubbish within any of the
cemeteries within or controlled by the Town of Seneca Falls.
§ 135-7. Injury to monuments or other markers.
No person shall injure, destroy, remove, deface or write upon any
monument, fence, stake, post or other marker in or connected with any
cemetery within or controlled by the Town of Seneca Falls.
§ 135-8. Loitering.
No person shall loiter, stroll, wander, prowl, lurk or lie down in, about or
upon any cemetery within the Town of Seneca Falls.
§ 135-9. Fees.
Fees shall be as set by resolution from time to time by the Town Board.
§ 135-10. Cemetery transactions.
campers, motor homes, trucks (other than those classified as "pickup")
and motorcycles are not allowed.
D. Cemeteries within the Town or under the control of the Town shall be
accessible to visitors only during daylight hours.
E. The Town of Seneca Falls is not responsible for any injury or
inconvenience sustained by any visitor to a Town cemetery.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish procedures for
receipt and disbursement of funds acquired by the Town of Seneca Falls
which relate to the operation and maintenance of the cemetery.
B. Prior funds. Funds received by the Town shall be held by the Town in a
nonexpendable Cemetery Lot Trust Fund.
C. Current revenues.
(1) Proceeds from the sale of cemetery lots, maintenance of
unendowed plots, ash burials, vault use and grave openings shall
be recorded as revenues to the general fund for the purpose of
reimbursing such fund for expenses incurred in the operation of the
cemetery.
(2) Proceeds derived from perpetual care of lots or plots bequeathed or
devised to be held in trust for the care or improvement of the
§ 135-5 SENECA FALLS CODE § 135-10
1:68
§ 135-11. Penalties for offenses.
An offense against the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days,
or both.
Chapter 146
EXPLOSIVES AND COMBUSTIBLES
§ 146-1. Fireworks.
§ 146-2. Combustible materials near buildings.
No person, firm or corporation shall deposit, keep or permit to be deposited
or kept any straw, waste papers or other combustible material in any street,
sidewalk or place adjacent to any building, or within 10 feet of any place
where fire exists or ashes are stored, unless such combustible material is
kept within a closed and separate receptacle.
cemetery shall be recorded and maintained with the funds cited in
Subsection B and shall remain intact in perpetuity.
(3) Interest earnings on funds received in accordance with Subsections
B and C(2) shall be recorded in an expendable trust fund. The Town
Account Clerk shall, in December of each fiscal year, transfer such
interest earned to the general fund of the Town for the purpose of
reimbursing such fund for expenses incurred in the operation of the
cemetery.
D. Current expenses. All expenses incurred in the operation, maintenance
and improvement of the cemetery shall be a charge against the general
fund of the Town of Seneca Falls.
E. Review of policy. It shall be the duty of the Town Treasurer to review
this policy and its impact on the general fund of the Town of Seneca
Falls and, on an annual basis, report such findings to the Town Board
for the purpose of reviewing rates set by the Town Board in accordance
with this chapter.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall manufacture, concoct, prepare or
detonate any fireworks within the Town of Seneca Falls unless granted
permission to do so by action of the Town Board.
B. No fireworks of any kind shall be transported, possessed, stored, kept,
used, given away or otherwise distributed in the Town of Seneca Falls,
at any time, and no fireworks shall be fired or discharged within the
Town of Seneca Falls, except that permission may be given by
resolution of the Town Board for the discharge of fireworks at a public
exhibition when the same is sponsored by a fraternal or patriotic
organization of said Town.
§ 135-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-3
1:69
§ 146-3. Bonfires.
No person shall cause any fire to be burned under open air in the Town
without first having obtained permission from the Fire Chief and the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
§ 146-4. Discharge of firearms and weapons.
No person shall fire or discharge any air gun, gun, pistol, rifle, revolver,
cannon or firearm of any kind within the former Village of Seneca Falls
boundary. No bow shall be used within the former village boundary.
§ 146-5. Conflicts with statute.
If any of the foregoing regulations are in conflict with statutory provisions,
said statutory provisions shall prevail.
§ 146-6. Penalties for offenses.
An offense against the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days,
or both.
Chapter 158
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 158-1. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of Seneca Falls, Seneca County, New York,
finds that the potential and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion
may be a problem to the residents of the Town of Seneca Falls and that
such damages may include destruction or loss of private and public housing,
damage to public facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and injury to
and loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and
to achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is
adopted.
§ 158-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
§ 146-3 SENECA FALLS CODE § 158-2
1:70
§ 158-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
§ 158-4. Word usage and definitions.
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages.
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood-blight areas.
G. Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or VO Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths
§ 158-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-4
1:71
from one foot to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate
and where velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1
through 99, V, VO, VE or V1 through 30. It is also commonly referred to
as the "base floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended, through its design and construction, to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation
system.
BUILDING — Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for
occupancy or storage.
CELLAR — The same meaning as "basement."
COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA — The area subject to high-velocity
waters, including but not limited to hurricane wave wash. The area is
designated on a FIRM as Zone V1 through 30, VE, VO or V.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations
located within the area of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built to have the
lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid
foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear
walls.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
§ 158-4 SENECA FALLS CODE § 158-4
1:72
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
defined but no water surface elevation is provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk-premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood
profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and the
water surface elevations of the base flood.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FLOOR — The top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including
basement, i.e., the top of the slab in concrete slab construction or the
top of wood flooring in wood frame construction.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair. The
term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest level, including basement or cellar, of
the lowest enclosed area. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers
and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180
consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or
§ 158-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-4
1:73
other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — The same meaning as "manufactured home."
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — As corrected in
1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The same meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 158-12B of this chapter.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges
or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The initiation, excluding planning and
design, of any phase of a project or physical alteration of the property
and shall include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
installation of streets and/or walkways; excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations; or the erection of temporary forms.
It also includes the placement and/or installation on the property of
accessory buildings (garages or sheds), storage trailers and building
materials. For manufactured homes, the "actual start" means affixing of
the manufactured home to its permanent site.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or
a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or
repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this
definition, substantial improvement is considered to commence when
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local building, fire, health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or
(1)
§ 158-4 SENECA FALLS CODE § 158-4
1:74
§ 158-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Seneca Falls, Seneca County, New York.
§ 158-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 158-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
Any alteration of a structure or contributing structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places.
(2)
A. The areas of special flood hazard are identified and defined on the
following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map (multiple panels) Index No. 360756
0001 – 0009, the effective date of which is August 3, 1981.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled “Flood Insurance Study,
Town of Seneca Falls, New York, Seneca County” dated February 3,
1981.
(3) Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (multiple panels) Index No.
360756 0001-0009, the effective date of which is August 3, 1981.
(4) LOMR effective July 5, 2000, FEMA case #99-02-712P, revising
FIRM and floodway panels 0001 and 0004.
(5) LOMR effective April 2, 2009, FEMA case #08-02-1344P, revising
FIRM Panel 0005B.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the
Town Hall of the Town of Seneca Falls, Seneca Falls, New York.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through November 11, 1989, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the highest standards, shall govern.
§ 158-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-8
1:75
§ 158-8. Penalties for offenses.
No structure shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted
or altered and no land shall be excavated or filled without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and any other applicable regulations. Any
infraction of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any
of its requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute
a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no more
than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 15 days, or both. Each day
of noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Town of Seneca Falls from taking such other
lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure
found not compliant with the requirements of this chapter for which the
developer and/or owner has not applied for and received an approved
variance under §§ 158-16 and 158-17 will be declared noncompliant and
notification will be sent to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 158-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town
of Seneca Falls, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 158-10. Designation of local administrator.
The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed local administrator to administer
and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 158-11. Development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before the start of construction or
any other development within the area of special flood hazard as established
in § 158-6. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the local administrator and may include but not be limited
to plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of
the foregoing.
A. Application stage. The following information is required where
applicable:
§ 158-8 SENECA FALLS CODE § 158-11
1:76
§ 158-12. Duties of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include but not be limited to:
(1) The elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the proposed lowest
floor, including basement or cellar, of all structures.
(2) The elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
(3) When required, a certificate from a licensed professional engineer
or architect that the utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in
§ 158-13C(1).
(4) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
the nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 158-14B.
(5) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
B. Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor or floodproofing
by whatever means, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to
the local administrator a certificate of the elevation of the lowest floor
or floodproofed elevation in relation to mean sea level. The elevation
certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the
same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the
floodproofing certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and
certified by the same. Any further work undertaken prior to submission
and approval of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The
local administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies
detected shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
A. Permit application review. He or she shall:
(1) Review all development permit applications to determine that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permit applications to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or
local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permit applications to determine if the
proposed development adversely affects the areas of special flood
hazard. For the purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means
physical damage to adjacent properties. An engineering study may
be required of the applicant for this purpose.
(a) If there is no adverse effect, then the permit shall be granted
consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 158-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-12
1:77
(b) If there is an adverse effect, then flood damage mitigation
measures shall be made a condition of the permit.
(4) Review all development permits for compliance with the provisions
of § 158-13E, Encroachments.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
data has not been provided in accordance with § 158-6, Basis for
establishing areas of special flood hazard, the local administrator shall
obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, including
data developed pursuant to § 158-13D(4), in order to administer
§ 158-14, Specific standards, and § 158-15, Floodways.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. He or she shall:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, of the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, of all new or
substantially improved structures and whether or not the structure
contains a basement or cellar.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, to which the structure has been floodproofed.
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in §§ 158-13
and 158-14.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter, including variances, when granted, and
certificates of compliance.
D. Alteration of watercourses. He or she shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the
Regional Director, Federal Emergency Management Agency,
Region II, 26 Federal Plaza, New York, New York 10278.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.
(1) The local administrator shall have the authority to make
interpretations when there appears to be a conflict between the
limits of the federally identified area of special flood hazard and
actual field conditions.
§ 158-12 SENECA FALLS CODE § 158-12
1:78
§ 158-13. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:
(2) Base flood elevation data established pursuant to § 158-6 and/or
Subsection B, when available, shall be used to accurately delineate
the areas of special flood hazard.
(3) The local administrator shall use flood information from any other
authoritative source, including historical data, to establish the
limits of the areas of special flood hazard when base flood
elevations are not available.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) All floodplain development found ongoing without an approved
permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stop-work order by the
local administrator. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject the
violator to the penalties described in § 158-8 of this chapter.
(2) All floodplain development found noncompliant with the provisions
of this chapter and/or the conditions of the approved permit shall
be subject to the issuance of a stop-work order by the local
administrator. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject the
violator to the penalties described in § 158-8 of this chapter.
G. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify that the
development is in compliance with the requirements of either the
development permit or the approved variance.
H. Certificate of compliance.
(1) It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or to permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly
altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating that
the building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
(2) All other development occurring within the designated flood hazard
area will have, upon completion, a certificate of compliance issued
by the local administrator.
(3) All certificates shall be based upon the inspections conducted
subject to Subsection G and/or any certified elevations, hydraulic
information, floodproofing, anchoring requirements or
encroachment analysis which may have been required as a
condition of the approved permit.
A. Anchoring.
§ 158-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-13
1:79
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and
practices which minimize flood damage. Manufactured homes must
be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement. Manufactured homes shall be elevated to or above the
base flood elevation or two feet above the highest adjacent grade
when no base flood elevation has been determined. Methods of
anchoring may include but are not to be limited to use of over-thetop
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding. When
designed for location below the base flood elevation, a professional
engineer's or architect's certification is required.
(2) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
§ 158-13 SENECA FALLS CODE § 158-13
1:80
§ 158-14. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in § 158-6, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, and § 158-12B, Use of other base flood and floodway data, the
following standards are required:
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments, including proposals
for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than either
50 lots or five acres.
E. Encroachments.
(1) All proposed development in riverine situations where no flood
elevation data is available (unnumbered A Zones) shall be analyzed
to determine the effects on the flood-carrying capacity of the areas
of special flood hazard set forth in § 158-12A(3). This may require
the submission of additional technical data to assist in the
determination.
(2) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data is available pursuant to § 158-12B or Subsection D(4) and no
floodway has been determined, the cumulative effects of any
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
(3) In all areas of special flood hazard where floodway data is provided
or available pursuant to § 158-12B, the requirements of § 158-15,
Floodways, shall apply.
A. Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any resident structure shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above the base flood elevation.
(2) Have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
§ 158-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-14
1:81
(b) The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
B. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall
either have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above the base flood elevation or be floodproofed so that the structure
is watertight below the base flood level with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components located
below the base flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
(1) If the structure is to be elevated, fully enclosed areas below the
base flood elevation shall be designed to automatically (without
human intervention) allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters for
the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or a licensed architect or meet the
following criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(2) If the structure is to be floodproofed:
(a) A licensed professional engineer or architect shall develop and/
or review structural design, specifications and plans for the
construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice to make the structure watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, with
structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(b) A licensed professional engineer or licensed land surveyor
shall certify the specific elevation, in relation to mean sea level,
to which the structure is floodproofed.
§ 158-14 SENECA FALLS CODE § 158-14
1:82
§ 158-15. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as
floodways. (See definition in § 158-4B.) The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to high-velocity floodwaters carrying debris and posing
additional threats from potential erosion forces. When floodway data is
available for a particular site as provided by §§ 158-6 and 158-12B, all
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements
and other development, are prohibited within the limits of the floodway
unless a technical evaluation demonstrates that such encroachments shall
not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
§ 158-16. Appeals Board.
(c) The local administrator shall maintain on record a copy of all
such certificates noted in this section.
C. Construction standards for areas of special flood hazard without base
flood elevations. New construction or substantial improvements of
structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation as
may be determined in § 158-12B or two feet above the highest adjacent
grade where no elevation data is available.
(1) New construction or substantial improvements of structures,
including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest
adjacent grade next to the proposed foundation of the structure.
(2) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically (without human
intervention) allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or a licensed architect or meet the
following criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one
foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals, as established by the Town of Seneca
Falls, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 158-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-16
1:83
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area.
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search-and-rescue operations during periods of
flooding.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search-and-rescue operations and
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
§ 158-16 SENECA FALLS CODE § 158-16
1:84
§ 158-17. Variances.
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes
of this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that the items in
§ 158-16D(1) through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures and contributing structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic
Places, without regard to the contributing structures procedures set
forth in the remainder of this section.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met.
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
§ 158-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-17
1:85
Chapter 169
HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION
§ 169-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "1990 Highway Construction
Specifications Local Law of the Town of Seneca Falls, New York."
§ 169-2. Applicability.
The specifications and requirements of this chapter shall apply to all street
construction in and to all work performed within the highway rights-of-way
of the Town of Seneca Falls, New York, outside the Village of Seneca Falls.
§ 169-3. Effect on subdivision and zoning regulations.
Nothing herein shall supersede the requirements of the Town of Seneca
Falls Subdivision Regulations and/or Zoning Local Law.6
§ 169-4. Compliance required.
All owners, contractors and their agents performing work regulated by this
chapter shall be responsible for compliance therewith. Compliance with the
specifications and requirements of this chapter shall be a precondition to
the acceptance of streets by the Town of Seneca Falls.
§ 169-5. Submission of plans; approval required.
Two copies of construction plans shall be submitted for approval by the
Town Highway Superintendent and the Town Engineer. The plans shall
include a site plan, street layout, site grading, street center-line alignment,
location and profile, drainage layout and details and roadway typical
sections. The plans shall have been prepared in accordance with the current
Town Subdivision Regulations7 and the construction specifications and
typical sections as contained herein and shall be signed and sealed by a
registered professional engineer or licensed land surveyor. No construction
shall commence until plans have been approved.
§ 169-6. Notification prior to commencement; grade letter.
G. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from lowest floor elevation.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Subdivision of Land; and Ch. 300, Zoning.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Subdivision of Land.
§ 158-17 SENECA FALLS CODE § 169-6
1:86
§ 169-7. Construction of bituminous pavement or concrete gutters.
No part of the bituminous pavement or concrete gutters shall be
constructed until all utilities have been installed and until the subbase has
been approved by the Town Engineer.
§ 169-8. Material and workmanship standards.
All construction materials and workmanship shall be as shown on the
approved plans and in accordance with the most recent issue of the New
York State Department of Transportation Standard Specifications and
Addendums, and all materials shall be obtained from sources approved by
the New York State Department of Transportation or sources approved, in
writing, by the Town Engineer prior to construction or incorporation in the
work.
§ 169-9. Inspections.
A. The contractor shall notify the Town Supervisor at least 10 days prior to
start of any clearing, site grading, drainage work and roadway
construction.
B. The contractor shall cause a grade letter prepared by a licensed land
surveyor or professional engineer to be filed in the office of the Town
Engineer prior to commencing the construction of the subbase course.
A. The Town Highway Superintendent and Town Engineer will periodically
inspect the work during its progression. The contractor shall be
responsible for the survey and stakeout of all streets and facilities and
for furnishing and installing all materials and facilities in accordance
with the plans and specifications.
B. The Town Highway Superintendent and/or Town Engineer shall
maintain the right to reject any and all materials not meeting
specifications which the contractor desires to incorporate into the
work.
C. The contractor shall notify the Town Engineer prior to placing subbase
material and also prior to placing asphalt concrete. Neither material
shall be placed until prior work has been inspected and approved by the
Town Engineer.
D. An inspection by the Town Highway Superintendent and Town Engineer
will be made upon substantial completion of all work. A checklist of
items requiring further work will be prepared and submitted to the
contractor. Upon completion of the work required by the checklist, a
final inspection will be made for the purpose of ascertaining that all
work has been completed.
E. All inspections by the Town will be made on a timely basis.
§ 169-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-10
1:87
§ 169-10. As-built drawings.
Upon completion of the work, the contractor shall prepare and submit to
the Town Engineer one reproducible copy of as-built drawings showing the
as-constructed roadway center-line elevations, drainage pipe inverts, catch
basin inverts and top of grate elevations, underdrain locations and outlet
inverts and all field modifications made to the approved plans, including
alignment, profiles, pavement, drainage and roadway typical sections.
These as-built drawings shall be in addition to those required by the Town
Subdivision Regulations.8
§ 169-11. Acceptance by Town; bonds.
In addition to the requirements as set forth in the Subdivision Regulations
of the Town of Seneca Falls for the acceptance of subdivision
improvements,9 the following conditions shall also apply for acceptance of
streets and roads:
A. The prospective dedicator shall tender to the Town Attorney the
originals of all deeds and easements, along with any necessary
subordination or other agreements so as to convey an unencumbered
interest in the proposed streets and right-of-way areas to the Town of
Seneca Falls, properly signed and acknowledged in recordable form; a
signed real property transfer gains tax affidavit (Form TP-584 or
acceptable substitute); and a print of the filed subdivision map. The
dedicator shall also provide, at the dedicator's expense, either a policy
of title insurance naming the Town of Seneca Falls or an attorney's
certificate of title certified to the Town of Seneca Falls covering the
property interests conveyed, current to the date of recording of the
deed and/or easement. The dedicator shall pay all recording fees.
B. The prospective dedicator shall provide a maintenance bond for the
value of the completed street construction in the amount fixed by
resolution of the Town Board. This bond shall be conditioned for the
faithful performance by the dedicator of any repairs needed to correct
or replace any and all damage to said street from the time of
acceptance by the Town Board to the time of completion of the last
building lot on said street, but in no case longer than three years.
C. For those streets which are partially completed and for which a
performance bond is furnished to assure completion as required in the
Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Seneca Falls, a maintenance
bond shall also be furnished for the value of the completed portion of
said street in the amount as fixed by resolution of the Town Board.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Subdivision of Land.
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Subdivision of Land.
§ 169-10 SENECA FALLS CODE § 169-12
1:88
§ 169-12. Drainage.
All grading and construction activities shall be conducted in a manner
to ensure satisfactory drainage of surface water at all times. All existing
culverts and drainage systems shall be maintained in satisfactory operating
condition throughout the course of the work. If it is necessary to interrupt
existing surface drainage, sewers or underdrainage, then temporary
drainage facilities shall be provided until the permanent drainage facilities
are complete and properly functioning.
§ 169-13. Access to existing properties.
Where new construction is being performed in areas of existing houses,
continuous access to and into driveways shall be provided, and the travel
way shall be adequately signed and barricaded to protect the traveling
public.
§ 169-14. Work within Town highway rights-of-way; permit required.
§ 169-15. Excavation and embankment work.
§ 169-16. Subgrade.
Prior to placement of the gravel subbase course, the roadway subgrade
and the ditch backslopes shall be brought to the true grade as indicated
A. No work requiring excavation, filling, cutting of pavement, drainage
improvements or the installation or maintenance of pipelines or utilities
will be permitted within the right-of-way of any Town highway without
the prior written consent of the Town Highway Superintendent and
Town Board through the issuance of a permit.
B. Individuals, corporations or municipal entities seeking such permit
approval shall make application, in triplicate, upon such form as
prescribed by the Town. The application shall include plans detailing
the proposed work. A performance bond may be required for the
satisfactory completion of the proposed work in an amount as
determined by the Town Board.
A. All soil, rock and other material shall be removed and utilized or
disposed of as required by the plans and specifications. All excavation
and embankment work shall be executed to the work and limit lines as
shown on the plans. Embankment construction operations shall not be
performed from November 1 to April 1 except with written permission
of the Town Engineer.
B. All excavation and embankment work shall be in accordance with
Section 203 of the New York State Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications. Both excavation and embankment subgrade
surfaces shall be proof-rolled and have deficiencies corrected prior to
placement of the granular subbase course.
§ 169-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-16
1:89
in the roadway cross section. After shaping, the roadway subgrade shall
be proof-rolled with a smooth steel-wheeled roller weighing not less than
10 tons. Any depression shall be filled with suitable gravel materials. Any
soft or unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced as directed by
the Town Engineer. The subgrade shall then be reshaped and rerolled until
there is no movement under the roller. The Town Highway Superintendent
or Town Engineer may, at his or her option, require the placement of a filter
fabric material upon the subgrade surface prior to placement of the gravel
subbase in areas of poor subgrade quality.
§ 169-17. Trenching.
All trenching shall be performed in accordance with Section 206 of the New
York State Department of Transportation Standard Specifications and shall
consist of the excavation of materials and backfill or disposal of excavated
materials required for culverts, pipelines and other minor structures,
including but not limited to leaching basins, catch basins, field inlets,
manholes and drop inlets.
§ 169-18. Underdrains.
Six-inch perforated corrugated metal pipe underdrains shall be installed
as shown in the Town standard roadway sections or as indicated on the
approved plans, using pipe and granular filter material furnished and
installed in accordance with Section 605 of the New York State Department
of Transportation Standard Specifications.
§ 169-19. Subbase course.
A. A subbase course of the type specified shall be furnished, placed and
compacted and fine-graded in conformity with the lines, grades and
thicknesses as shown in the Town standard roadway sections or as
indicated in the approved plans and in accordance with Section 304 of
the New York State Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications. The type, source, gradation, soundness and plasticity
index of the subbase material shall be approved by the Town Engineer
prior to placement of the material.
B. Placing and compaction. Prior to placing the subbase course, the
finished subgrade surface shall not extend above the design elevation at
any location. Subbase material shall be spread on the grade by a
procedure that minimizes particle segregation. Compaction of any
subbase course lift shall not lag spreading operations by more than 500
linear feet. The depth of loose spread lifts shall not exceed those
permitted by the type and classification of the compactor utilized, and
all compaction details shall be in accordance with Section 203-3.12.
The minimum loose lift thickness of subbase materials shall be 1.5
times the maximum particle size of the material being placed. The
minimum thickness of the upper course of a two-course subbase shall
be four inches.
§ 169-16 SENECA FALLS CODE § 169-19
1:90
§ 169-20. Base, surface and top courses.
C. Traffic and contamination. No highway or construction equipment
traffic shall be permitted over the final finished subbase course surface
except as necessary for the construction of the overlying course at that
location. Prior to final finishing of the course, however, traffic over the
course may be permitted at locations designated by and under such
restrictions as may be imposed by the Town. In locations where
permission is given to route construction equipment over the subbase
course, the contractor shall place the course to not less than two inches
above the design subbase course grade to form a temporary protective
layer. After traffic in these locations has been terminated, the protective
layer shall be removed and the surface of the course fine-graded to the
proper grade as specified in Section 304-3.04.
D. Contamination of the subbase course with any deleterious material,
such as silt, clay, mud or organic material, through any cause
whatsoever, shall be corrected by the contractor by excavation and
replacement of the subbase material in the affected areas.
E. Fine grade tolerance. The final surface of the subbase course shall be
fine-graded so that, after final compaction and just prior to placement
of base or pavement courses, the surface elevation shall not vary more
than 1/4 inch above or below the design line and grade at any location.
The surface shall be completed to the above tolerance and approved by
the Town Engineer prior to any work at a given location to place an
overlying course. If, after approval, the course becomes displaced or
disturbed in any way for any reason, the contractor shall repair and
regrade the damage to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer prior to
placing the overlying course.
A. Asphaltic concrete base and surface courses of the type specified shall
be furnished and placed in conformity with the lines, grades and
thicknesses as shown on the Town standard roadway section or as
indicated in the plans and in accordance with Section 400 of the New
York State Department of Transportation Standard Specifications.
(1) Asphalt concrete Type 3 binder.
(2) Asphalt concrete Type 6F top (high friction).
B. Asphalt concrete top course shall be placed only during the period of
May 1 to October 15.
C. The developer, after obtaining permission from the Planning Board,
may substitute for the item in Subsection A above the following
alternative construction:
(1) Three-inch surface course, after compaction, Item 405.0101, Type
2 - cold mix bituminous pavement (open graded), in accordance
with Section 400 of the NYSDOT Standard Specifications.
§ 169-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-20
1:91
§ 169-21. Concrete gutters.
§ 169-22. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 15 days, or both, for each violation.
Chapter 173
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Heritage Preservation Commission — See Ch.
13, Art. II.
§ 173-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the educational, cultural,
economic and general welfare of the public through the protection,
enhancement, perpetuation and preservation of the properties designated
as historic. The Town Board declares that it is a public purpose to ensure
that the distinctive and historical character of properties designated as
historic shall not be injuriously affected, that the value to the community
of those properties having architectural and historical worth shall not be
impaired and that said properties designated as historic be maintained and
preserved to promote their use for the education, pleasure and welfare of
the citizens of the Town of Seneca Falls, New York, and others.
(2) A seal coat in accordance with Section 405-3.07 of the NYSDOT
Standard Specifications.
(3) The subbase course shall conform with Figures 1, 2 and 3.10
A. At the discretion of the Planning Board, cast-in-place concrete gutters
of the type specified shall be furnished and placed in conformity with
the lines, grades and thicknesses as shown on the Town standard
roadway sections or as indicated in the plans and in accordance with
Section 624 of the New York State Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications.
B. Concrete for the gutters shall meet the requirements for Class A
concrete specified in Section 501, Portland cement concrete - general.
C. Wire mesh conforming to ASTM A185 specifications shall be embedded
in the gutter two inches to three inches from the bottom.
10.Editor's Note: Figures 1, 2 and 3 are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 169-20 SENECA FALLS CODE § 173-2
1:92
§ 173-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The official form issued by the
Town Heritage Preservation Commission stating that the proposed work on
a designated historic landmark is compatible with the historic character of
the property and thus in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
therefore:
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE — The architectural style and
general arrangement of such portion of the exterior of a designated
property as is designed to be open to view from the public way, including
kind, color and texture of building materials, type of all windows, doors,
lights, signs and other fixtures appurtenant to such portion.
HARDSHIP — Hardship exists when:
HISTORIC DISTRICT, LOCAL — An area designated as an historic district
by this historic preservation local law, and which contains within definable
geographic boundaries a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of
sites, buildings, structures, or objects united historically or aesthetically by
plan or physical development.
LANDMARK — Any building, structure, object, or site that has been
designated as a "landmark" by this historic preservation local law, pursuant
to procedures described in § 173-4 that is worthy of preservation,
restoration or rehabilitation because of its historic or architectural
significance.
§ 173-3. Scope; exceptions.
The proposed work may be completed as specified in the certificate;
and
A.
The Town's departments may issue any permits needed to do the work
specified in the certificate.
B.
The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of
whether that return represents the most profitable return possible.
A.
The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the
current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable
return.
B.
Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and
preserving it have failed.
C.
A. Scope. This chapter shall apply to all buildings, structures,
outbuildings, walls, fences, steps and signs. No changes in any exterior
architectural feature, including but not limited to construction,
reconstructions, alteration, restoration, removal, demolition, or
painting, shall be made except as hereinafter provided.
§ 173-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-3
1:93
§ 173-4. Designation of landmarks and historic districts.
B. Exception. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the
ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of
a designated property which does not involve a change in design,
material, color or the outward appearance thereof. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to prevent the construction, reconstruction,
alteration or demolition of any exterior architectural feature which the
Building Inspector shall certify is required by public safety because of
dangerous or unsafe conditions.
A. Landmarks.
(1) Upon recommendation by the Heritage Preservation Commission,
the Town Board may designate an individual property as a
landmark by resolution if it:
(a) Possesses special character or historic or aesthetic interest or
value as part of the cultural, political, economic or social
history of the locality, region, state or nation;
(b) Is identified with historic personages;
(c) Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural
style;
(d) Is the work of a designer whose work has significantly
influenced an age; or
(e) Because of a unique location or singular physical
characteristic, represents an established and familiar visual
feature of the neighborhood.
(2) The boundaries of each landmark shall be specified in detail with
reference to the Tax Map identification number and shall be filed,
in writing, in the Town Clerk's office and there made available for
review by the public.
B. Historic districts.
(1) Upon recommendation by the Heritage Preservation Commission,
the Town Board, by resolution, may designate a group of properties
as an historic district if the majority of properties therein:
(a) Contains properties which meet one or more of the criteria for
designation of a landmark and which may have within its
boundaries other properties or structures that, while not of
such historic and/or architectural significance to be designated
landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual
characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located within
the historic district; and
§ 173-3 SENECA FALLS CODE § 173-4
1:94
§ 173-5. Certificate of appropriateness required; application.
(b) By reason of possessing such qualities, constitutes a distinct
section of the Town.
(2) The boundaries of each historic district designated henceforth shall
be specified in detail and shall be filed, in writing, in the Town
Clerk's office for public inspection. The Commission shall forward
notice of each property designated as a landmark and of the
boundaries of each designated historic district to the office of the
Seneca County Clerk for recordation.
C. Notice of a proposed designation shall be sent by certified mail to the
owner of the property proposed for designation, describing the
property proposed and announcing a public hearing by the Commission
to consider designation. Where the proposed designation involves so
many owners that individual notice is infeasible, notice may instead be
published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation at least 10
days prior to the date of the public hearing. Once the Commission has
issued notice of a proposed designation, no zoning, demolition or
building permits shall be issued except through the certificate of
appropriateness process outlined in this chapter, until the Commission
has made its decision.
D. The Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to designation of any
landmark or historic district. The Commission, owners and any
interested parties may present testimony or documentary evidence at
the hearing which will become part of a record regarding the historic,
architectural or cultural importance of the proposed landmark or
historic district. The record may also contain staff reports, public
comments, or other evidence offered outside of the hearing.
A. Notwithstanding any inconsistent ordinance, local law, code, rule or
regulation concerning the issuance of zoning, demolition or building
permits, no change in any exterior architectural feature of a designated
property shall be commenced without a certificate of appropriateness
from the Seneca Falls Heritage Preservation Commission, nor shall any
zoning, demolition or building permits for such change be issued
without such a certificate of appropriateness having first been issued.
The certificate of appropriateness required by this section shall be in
addition to, and not in lieu of, any zoning permit that may be required
by any ordinance, local law, code, rule or regulation of the Town of
Seneca Falls, New York.
B. Application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made, in
writing, upon forms prescribed by the Seneca Falls Heritage
Preservation Commission, to the Seneca Falls Heritage Preservation
Commission and, depending on the scope of the project, shall contain
the following:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
§ 173-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-5
1:95
§ 173-6. Issuance of certificate of appropriateness; consideration.
(2) The location of the designated property the exterior architectural
features of which are proposed to be changed.
(3) Plans and elevations of the proposed change.
(4) Perspective drawing.
(5) Samples of color or materials to be used for the proposed change.
(6) Where a proposed change includes signs or lettering, a scale
drawing showing type of lettering, all dimensions and colors; a
description of materials to be used and method of illumination, if
any; and a plan showing location on the building or property.
A. An application for a certificate of appropriateness will be considered by
the Seneca Falls Heritage Preservation Commission at the meeting
immediately following the filing of a completed application or within
such time as the applicant may allow in writing, but in all events within
30 business days after regularly scheduled monthly meetings; provided
that the application is filed at least five business days in advance of the
scheduled Seneca Falls Heritage Preservation Commission meeting,
thus providing sufficient opportunity for the Seneca Falls Heritage
Preservation Commission to perform a site review of the property. After
completing a site review of the property, the Seneca Falls Heritage
Preservation Commission shall determine whether the proposed
construction, reconstruction or alteration of the external property
feature involved will be appropriate to the preservation of the
designated properties for the purposes of this chapter. Said site review
may be performed by individual members of the Seneca Falls Heritage
Preservation Commission or by a site review committee designated by
the Seneca Falls Heritage Preservation Commission. In passing upon
appropriateness, the Seneca Falls Heritage Preservation Commission
shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical
and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general
design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the exterior feature
involved and the relationship thereof to the exterior features involved
and the relationship thereof to the exterior features of other properties
in the immediate neighborhood. In denying or modifying a certificate of
appropriateness, the Commission shall state the reasons for such denial
or modification.
B. All decisions of the Commission are to be based on the provision
contained in the Guidelines and Standards Manual adopted and
amended, from time to time, by resolution of the Town Board, in
addition to the provisions contained in this chapter.
C. In the event that the Commission fails to take some action on the
application within 30 business days of its submission in proper form,
§ 173-5 SENECA FALLS CODE § 173-6
1:96
§ 173-7. Hardship process and procedures; alteration.
§ 173-8. Demolition, removal or relocation of landmark buildings.
except when agreed upon by both parties, the applicant may proceed
with approval.
A. An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed
demolition or alteration has been denied may apply for relief on the
grounds of hardship, as defined previously in this chapter, provided a
hardship exists based on these grounds.
B. Hardship application procedure.
(1) After receiving written notification from the Commission of the
denial of a certificate of appropriateness, an applicant may
commence the hardship process. No zoning, building or demolition
permit shall be issued unless the Commission makes a finding that
a hardship exists.
(2) The Commission may hold a public hearing on the hardship
application at which an opportunity will be provided for proponents
and opponents of the application to present their views.
(3) The applicant shall consult in good faith with the Commission, local
preservation groups and interested parties in a diligent effort to
seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the property.
(4) All decisions of the Commission shall be in writing. A copy shall be
sent to the applicant by certified mail and a copy of the minutes
shall be filed with the Town Clerk's office for public inspection. The
Commission's decision shall state the reasons for granting or
denying the hardship application.
A. Demolition of an individual landmark or of a structure located in and
contributing to the significance of a historic district shall be allowed
only in case of economic hardship, unless the Building Department,
upon due deliberation, has made an express written finding that the
structure presents an imminent threat to the public health, safety and
welfare.
B. Any person desiring to demolish a designated historic building shall
first file an application for an historic building demolition permit with
the Building Department and an application for such certificate with the
Commission. An applicant must submit the following terms:
(1) Current level of economic return;
(2) Amount paid for the property, date of purchase, party from whom
purchased, and relationship between the owner of record, the
applicant, and person from whom property was purchased;
§ 173-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-8
1:97
(3) Annual gross and net income from the property for the previous
three years; itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the
previous three years; and depreciation, deduction and annual cash
flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period;
(4) Remaining balance on the mortgage or other financing secured by
the property and annual debt-service, if any, during the prior three
years;
(5) Real estate taxes for the previous four years and assessed value of
the property according to the two most recent assessed valuations;
(6) All appraisals obtained within the last two years by the owner or
applicant in connection with the purchase, financing, or ownership
of the property;
(7) Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole
proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited
partnership, joint venture, or other;
(8) Any state or federal income tax returns relating to the property for
the last two years;
(9) Any listing of property for sale or rent, price asked, and offers
received, if any, within the previous two years, including testimony
and relevant documents regarding:
(a) Any real estate broker or firm engaged to sell or lease the
property;
(b) Reasonableness of price or rent sought by the applicant; or
(c) Any advertisements placed for the sale or rent of the property;
(10) Feasibility of alternative uses for the property that could earn a
reasonable economic return;
(11) Report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in
rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any buildings on the
property and their suitability for rehabilitation;
(12) Cost estimated for the proposed construction, alteration,
demolition, or removal, and an estimate of any additional cost that
would be incurred to comply with the requirements for a certificate
of appropriateness;
(13) Estimated market value of the property:
(a) In its current condition;
(b) After completion of the proposed alteration or demolition; and
(c) After renovation of the existing property for continued use;
§ 173-8 SENECA FALLS CODE § 173-8
1:98
§ 173-9. Demolition, removal or relocation hardship procedures.
(14) Expert testimony or opinion on the feasibility of rehabilitation or
reuse of the existing structure by an architect, developer, real
estate consultant, appraiser, and/or other real estate professional
experienced in historic properties and rehabilitation;
(15) Any evidence of self-created hardship through deliberate neglect or
inadequate maintenance of the property; and
(16) Economic incentives and/or funding available to the applicant
through federal, state, city, or private programs.
C. Demolition of any such building may be approved only in connection
with approval of a replacement project.
D. The Commission shall hold a public hearing and shall take one of the
following actions:
(1) Approve the demolition permit in conformance with the provisions
of § 173-9 of this chapter;
(2) Approve the demolition hardship permit subject to a waiting period
of up to 120 days to consider relocation/documentation;
(3) Deny the permit.
E. During the continuance period, the Commission may investigate
relocation of the building (on site) or modification of the building for
future uses in a way which preserves the architectural and historical
integrity of the building.
A. Certificate of appropriateness for the demolition, removal or relocation.
An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a property
demolition, removal or relocation of a landmark, resource or property
has been denied may apply for relief on the ground of economic
hardship. In order to prove the existence of economic hardship
sufficient to justify demolition, removal, or relocation, the applicant
shall establish that the denial of a certificate of appropriateness will
prevent the property owner from earning a reasonable return on
investment, regardless of whether that return represents the most
profitable return possible.
B. Certificate of appropriateness for demolition.
(1) The applicant for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition
must establish, to the Commission's satisfaction, an imminent plan
for reuse or redevelopment of the affected property. The applicant
for an income-producing property shall establish that:
(a) The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return,
regardless of whether that return represents the most
profitable return possible; and
§ 173-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-9
1:99
§ 173-10. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Seneca Falls Heritage
Preservation Commission relating to a certificate of economic hardship or
a certificate of appropriateness may, within 15 days of the decision, file a
written appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals for review of the decision.
Appellate review shall be based on the same record that was before the
Commission and using the same criteria in this chapter. Appeals of decisions
of the Zoning Board of Appeals as aforesaid will be made pursuant to Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 173-11. Demolition by neglect.
(b) The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by
the current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a
reasonable return; and
(c) Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property
and preserving it have failed.
(2) In deciding upon such application for removal, relocation or
demolition, the Commission may consider whether the owner has
created his or her own hardship through waste or neglect, thereby
permitting the property to fall into a serious state of disrepair.
C. Before making a determination regarding the removal, relocation or
demolition of an individual landmark or structure within an historic
district, the Commission may suspend the application for up to 180 days
to allow the applicant to consult in good faith with the Commission,
local preservation groups, and the public in a diligent effort to seek a
less intrusive alternative to demolition.
A. In its review to determine that demolition by neglect is occurring and
upon consultation with the Town Zoning/Code Enforcement Officer, the
Commission shall consider all of the data represented and the Heritage
Preservation Commission's guidelines and shall also attempt to confer
with the owner or person in charge of the real property concerned. It
shall also review any communication it shall receive which indicates
that demolition by neglect is or may be occurring in any landmark or
historic district. In the event that the Commission finds that such
demolition is or may be taking place, it shall direct a letter to the
Zoning/Code Enforcement Office to notify the owner or person in
charge of this finding, stating the reasons therefor and requesting that
the owner or person in charge immediately take appropriate steps to
cause such demolition to cease, and to confer with the Commission in
connection therewith. Should the owner or person in charge fail to
satisfy the Commission that all necessary steps are or will be promptly
taken, the Commission shall request the Zoning/Code Enforcement
Officer to notify the Town Attorney and request the consideration of the
proceedings pursuant to § 173-13 hereof.
§ 173-9 SENECA FALLS CODE § 173-11
1:100
§ 173-12. Enforcement.
All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness issued
under this chapter shall conform to any requirements included therein. In
the event that work is found that is not being performed in accordance
with the certificate appropriateness or upon notification of such fact by
the Seneca Falls Heritage Preservation Commission, the Zoning/Code
Enforcement Officer shall enforce the requirements of the certificate of
appropriateness.
§ 173-13. Penalties for offenses.
Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
a violation, and the violator shall be liable to a fine of not more than $500
or imprisonment of not more than 15 days, or both. Each day such violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as a
landmark or included within an historic district shall permit the
property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the
deterioration of any exterior architectural feature which would, in the
judgment of the Heritage Preservation Commission, produce a
detrimental effect upon the character of the property itself.
(1) Examples of such deterioration include:
(a) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports.
(b) Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members.
(c) Deterioration of exterior chimneys.
(d) Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar.
(e) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs or
foundations, including broken windows or doors.
(f) Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous
condition which could lead to the claim that demolition is
necessary for the public safety.
(2) Interior structural members shall be protected and maintained to
resist and prevent deterioration.
(3) Unheated attics, spaces below flat roofs and crawl spaces shall be
ventilated to minimize deterioration.
(4) Interior and exterior chimneys and flues shall be maintained safe,
sound and smoke-tight.
(5) Interior ceilings, walls, floors and stairways shall be maintained in
a safe and sound condition.
§ 173-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 173-13
1:101
Chapter 185
LANDFILLS
§ 185-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASHES — The residue of the combustion of solid fuel, such as wood, coal,
coke, charcoal or like substances.
GARBAGE — Includes all putrescible wastes, except sewage, body wastes
and recognized industrial by-products, and generally shall consist of wastes,
animal, fish or fowl, fruit or vegetable, made and produced from or resulting
from the growth, processing, use or storage of food for human consumption
and includes spoiled food and dead animals found within the municipal
limits.
LANDFILL — Any land or a disposal facility or part thereof where ashes,
garbage or refuse or its residue after treatment is intentionally placed, not
including a surface impoundment or injection well.
PERSON — Includes an individual, partnership, corporation,
unincorporated association, firm, club or society of persons; and the
singular designation shall hereby include the plural, and the masculine and
feminine shall include the neuter.
REFUSE — Includes all nonputrescible wastes, except recognized industrial
by-products, and generally shall consist of miscellaneous materials
comprising wood, paper, rags, excelsior, straw, cardboard, leather, rubber,
soil, sweepings from buildings, mill screenings, tree trimmings, shrubbery,
leaves, grass, trees and other discarded articles of similar nature, including
tin cans, tin ware, glass, metal products, pipes, bottles, pottery, tile,
earthenware and like substances.
§ 185-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the Town of
Seneca Falls, New York, including those premises lawfully designated as a
landfill by the Town Board.
§ 185-3. Use of lands and water for landfills.
No person shall use as a landfill any of the lands, streams, waterways
or bodies of water in the Town of Seneca Falls, New York, except those
premises lawfully designated as a landfill by the Town Board and after
compliance with the sections of this chapter and the statutes, rules and
regulations of the State of New York or its duly authorized agencies
pertaining to the operation of a landfill.
§ 173-13 SENECA FALLS CODE § 185-4
1:102
§ 185-4. Landfills for dangerous materials.
It shall be unlawful to establish anywhere in the Town of Seneca Falls,
New York, a private landfill for the disposal or treatment of any dangerous
chemical or radioactive material.
§ 185-5. Landfill permit requirements.
A. No person shall hereinafter construct or operate a sanitary landfill in
the Town of Seneca Falls, New York, until a permit to construct and
operate said sanitary landfill has first been obtained from the Town
Board, Town of Seneca Falls, New York. All applications made pursuant
to this section shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name and address of the owner and operator.
(2) A description of the property and a map thereof drawn to scale.
(3) A detailed description of the proposed operation of said landfill.
(4) A detailed description of soil content, water tables and plans for
trenching and cover.
(5) A proposed date for submission of all required documents to the
Health Department and the Department of Environmental
Conservation and/or any other agency of the State of New York
charged with the administration, supervision and control of
sanitary landfill operations.
B. No permit shall be finally issued under this section until all
requirements of the State of New York and its agencies, boards or
commissions have been complied with and permission has been granted
by and received from the Town Board.
C. The Town Board reserves the right, prior to the issuance of a permit, to
require the applicant to file with the Town Clerk an easement giving the
Town of Seneca Falls, New York, the right to have officers or employees
of the Town enter on the premises to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
D. The applicant for a permit pursuant to this section shall not commence
construction or operation of said landfill until he or she has been
authorized by the Town Board to do so and issued a permit by the Town
Clerk. The permit to construct will be issued for term to cover the
period of construction, but not to exceed five years. The Town Board
may renew a permit to construct for an additional five-year period. A
permit to operate shall be granted for a period of one year with a
renewal option by the Board. Such applicant shall pay a fee as set from
time to time by resolution of the Town Board for each application and
each renewal thereof at the office of the Town Clerk on or before
January 1 of each year.
E. Conditions.
§ 185-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-5
1:103
(1) The Town Board may impose conditions on the construction and
operation of any landfill as may be necessary to protect public
health, safety, welfare or the environment. Such conditions may
address the environmental and economic impacts, including but
not limited to odor, dust, noise, community character, litter, vermin,
traffic, surface water and groundwater quality, air quality, property
values, tourism and economic development, financial security for
closure and post-closure monitoring and remediation, aesthetics,
land use and environmental monitoring.
(2) It is the Town's policy to promote reuse and recycling. This section
shall be administered in a manner not inconsistent with state
regulation and comply with minimal requirements promulgated by
the State of New York. The Town Board of the Town of Seneca Falls
may impose conditions which are more stringent than those
promulgated by the State of New York.
F. All permits issued by the Town pursuant to this chapter are transferable
only upon prior written approval of the Town and a demonstration that
the prospective transferee will be able to comply with applicable laws
and regulations, permit conditions, and other applicable requirements.
Any transfer made without the approval of the Town is void, and the
responsibilities for compliance with the permit remain the liability of
the transferor. The authority of the facility to operate and receive solid
waste will terminate immediately upon notice by the Town Board in the
event a transfer is made in violation of this section.
(1) Sixty days prior to a proposed sale, lease, or other transfer of
ownership or control of the facility or upon application to the
Department of Environmental Conservation, whichever is earlier,
the proposed transferor shall file a written notice with the Town
Board detailing the proposed transfer. The notice must include the
following written documents:
(a) Proof that the proposed transferee has written notice of and
acknowledges the host community agreement between the
Town of Seneca Falls and the proposed transferor and the
duties and obligations thereunder.
(b) Demonstration that the prospective transferee will be capable
of complying with applicable laws and regulations, permit
conditions and other requirements to which the prospective
transferee is subject.
(c) Such a demonstration must be delivered to the Town Board and
will include documentation not limited to the following:
[1] The proposed transferee must submit information
documenting that it has the financial capability to continue
landfill operations;
§ 185-5 SENECA FALLS CODE § 185-5
1:104
[2] The proposed transferee must submit information
documenting that it has the operational experience
necessary to maintain and operate the landfill;
[3] The proposed transferee must submit information
documenting that it has a favorable environmental
compliance history in other landfill operations; and
[4] Any other information which the Town Board determines
reasonable to make a determination regarding the
proposed transfer.
(2) No permit shall be transferred under this section until all
requirements of the State of New York and its agencies, boards or
commissions have been complied with.
(3) The Town acknowledges that the Department of Environmental
Conservation shall have primary jurisdiction to determine whether
the proposed transferee is qualified to operate the facility and to
discharge the obligations of a permittee. If the Town has any
objections to the proposed transfer, the Town must exhaust its
administrative remedies in the Department's proceeding conducted
to review the proposed transfer. If the Town fails to intervene in the
Department's proceedings and exhaust its administrative remedies
and the Department approves the proposed transfer of state
permits, the transfer of permits issued under this section shall be
deemed approved.
(4) In the event that no state permits are to be transferred, or the Town
exhausts its administrative remedies in accordance with
Subsection F(3) above, then within 60 days after the Town Board
has received the required notice materials or 30 days after the
Department of Environmental Conservation issues a final decision,
whichever is later, the Town Board will issue its decision on the
proposed transfer.
G. The Town Board may prohibit and/or impose special conditions on
landfill operations regarding the receipt, handling, treatment or
disposal of special wastes which will cause or are likely to cause a
significant adverse impact within the Town. Permittees are required to
provide the same notice to the Town Board that is provided to the
Department of Environmental Conservation for the receipt of additional
special wastes or a specific special waste not authorized by the Town or
Department permits.
(1) The Town acknowledges that the Department of Environmental
Conservation shall have primary jurisdiction over waste stream
approval. If the Town objects to the receipt of a special waste, the
Town must give written notice of its objections and the reasons
therefor to the Department and the permittee.
§ 185-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-5
1:105
§ 185-6. Designation of sites.
The Town Board of Seneca Falls, New York, may, by resolution, establish or
designate a landfill site at such place or places as it shall from time to time
determine. A resolution establishing such landfill shall be filed immediately
with the Town Clerk of the Town of Seneca Falls, New York, for inspection by
the residents of the Town of Seneca Falls, New York, or owners or occupants
of real property in the Town of Seneca Falls, New York.
§ 185-7. Filling and grading.
(2) If neither the Department nor the permittee prohibit and/or restrict
the special waste to the satisfaction of the Town, the Town may
initiate a proceeding before the Town Board to restrict or limit the
receipt, treatment or disposal of the special waste or specific
special waste in question. In either event, the Town shall have the
burden of proof to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence
that the waste stream will cause significant adverse environmental
impacts.
A. Approval required. The dumping or depositing of materials for filling
and grading purposes upon lands in the Town of Seneca Falls, New
York, shall be permitted only upon approval of the Town Board of the
Town of Seneca Falls, New York. In such cases, garbage and refuse
materials may not be used for fill purposes.
B. Permit required. Before any person shall deposit materials for filling or
grading purposes, the owner of the premises to be filled and graded
shall obtain a permit therefor from the Town Board and shall show
compliance with any and all statutes, rules and/or regulations of the
State of New York and/or its agencies pertinent to said application.
C. Application for permit. In all cases, the application for each permit shall
be in writing and signed by the owner of the premises and shall state:
(1) The name and address of each owner of the premises.
(2) A description of the premises sufficient to readily identify the same,
together with a statement as to the condition of the surface of the
land to be achieved upon completion.
(3) A plan for weekly fill and daily cover acceptable to the Town Board.
D. Extent of fill. The Town Board will request a three-dimensional extent of
the proposed fill and the condition of the surface of the premises before
work is commenced and after work is completed.
E. Nuisances prohibited. When depositing of materials is authorized by
the Town Board for filling and grading purposes, said depositing of
material shall not despoil other properties or emit offensive odors or
fumes.
§ 185-5 SENECA FALLS CODE § 185-7
1:106
§ 185-8. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter may be punishable by a fine of not more than
$500 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 185-9. Records containing trade secrets.
F. Conditions. The Town Board reserves the right, prior to issuance of a
permit, to require the applicant to file with the Town Clerk an easement
giving the Town of Seneca Falls, New York, the right to have officers or
employees of the Town enter on the premises to enforce the provisions
of this chapter and to require such work to be done as may be necessary
to meet the conditions of the permit imposed by the Town Board. The
Town Board further reserves the right to impose such conditions in the
permit in order to further the health, safety and welfare of the Town of
Seneca Falls, New York.
A. Submission of records containing secrets. A person acting pursuant to
law or regulation who submits any information to the Town may, at the
time of submission, request that the Town except such information from
disclosure under Paragraph (d) of Subdivision 2 of § 87 of the Public
Officers Law. That section provides that an agency may deny access to
records or portions thereof that are trade secrets or are maintained for
the regulation of a commercial enterprise or derived from information
obtained from a commercial enterprise which, if disclosed, would cause
substantial injury to the competitive position of the subject enterprise.
Where the request itself contains information which if disclosed would
defeat the purpose for which the exception is sought, such information
shall also be excepted from disclosure.
(1) The request for an exception shall be in writing and state the
reasons why the information should be excepted from disclosure.
(2) The person submitting the information shall clearly identify those
records or portions of records for which the exception is requested.
This may be accomplished by separating and attaching to such
records a cover sheet or other suitable form of notice, using such
language as "trade secret" or "proprietary information."
(3) In all cases, the person must show the reasons why the information
should be considered a trade secret or to be information
maintained for the regulation of commercial enterprise which, if
disclosed, would cause substantial injury to the competitive
position of the person's commercial enterprise.
(4) The person submitting the information may request an exception
from disclosure for a limited period of time. If so, the person shall
indicate that period of time when submitting the information.
B. Safeguarding against unauthorized access to records containing trade
secrets.
§ 185-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-9
1:107
(1) Information submitted as provided in Subsection A of this section
shall be excepted from disclosure and be maintained apart by the
Town from all other records until 15 days after the entitlement to
such exception has been finally determined by the Town or such
further time as ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) The Town Clerk shall be responsible for the custody of such
records.
(3) Each Town employee who has custody of the records containing
trade secrets shall take appropriate measures to safeguard such
records and to protect against their unauthorized disclosure.
(4) Simple and effective devices to identify and maintain repositories
for records containing trade secrets shall be used so that their
security is maintained.
C. Determination to grant or continue exception from disclosure.
(1) On the initiative of the Town at any time, or upon the request of any
person for a record excepted from disclosure as provided herein,
the Town shall:
(a) Inform the person who requested the exception of the Town's
intention to determine whether such exception should be
granted or continued;
(b) Permit the person who requested the exception, within 10 days
of receipt of the notification from the Town, to submit a written
statement of the necessity for the granting or continuation of
such exception; and
(c) Within seven business days of receipt of such written
statement, or within seven business days of the expiration of
the period prescribed for submission of such statement, issue a
written determination granting, continuing, or terminating
such exception and the reasons therefor. Copies of such
determination shall be served upon the person, if any,
requesting the record, the person who requested the
exception, and the Committee on Open Government.
(2) The following factors are among those that the Town may consider
in making a determination to grant or continue an exception from
disclosure under Paragraph (d) of Subdivision 2 of § 87 of the
Public Officers Law:
(a) Any provisions of the Code of the Town of Seneca Falls, New
York, or other statute which authorize or restrict access to the
records;
(b) Whether or not the records are trade secrets or are maintained
for the regulation of commercial enterprise which, if disclosed,
§ 185-9 SENECA FALLS CODE § 185-9
1:108
would cause substantial injury to the competitive position of
the commercial enterprise;
(c) The written request for an exception from disclosure and the
reasons stated therein;
(d) The written statement, if any, of the necessity for the granting
or continuation of the exception from disclosure;
(e) The factors pertaining to determining whether or not a trade
secret exists:
[1] The extent to which the information is known outside of
the business of the person submitting the information;
[2] The extent to which it is known by the person's employees
and others involved in his or her business;
[3] The extent of measures taken by the person to guard the
secrecy of the information;
[4] The value of the information to the person and his or her
competitors;
[5] The amount of effort or money expended by the person in
developing the information; and
[6] The ease or difficulty with which the information could be
acquired or duplicated by others.
D. Appeal of action.
(1) A denial of an exception from disclosure under this section may be
appealed by the person requesting the exception, and a denial of
access to the record may be appealed by the person requesting the
record in accordance with this section.
(2) Within seven business days of receipt of written notice denying the
request, the person may file a written appeal from the
determination of the Town with the Town Board or its designee.
(3) The appeal shall be determined within 10 business days of the
receipt of the appeal. Written notice of the determination shall be
served upon the person, if any, requesting the record, the person
who requested the exception and the Committee on Open
Government. The notice shall contain a statement of the reasons
for the determination.
E. Trade secrets may consist of, but shall not necessarily be limited to, any
formula, pattern, process, procedure, plan, compound, device,
customer lists, cost records or compilation of information that is not
published or divulged and which gives an advantage over competitors
who do not know, use or have access to such data or information.
§ 185-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-9
1:109
Chapter 193
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 102.
Noise — See Ch. 201.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 210.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 213.
§ 193-1. Findings and intent.
The Town Board of the Town of Seneca Falls hereby finds and declares that
loitering for the purpose of conducting certain illegal activity is harmful to
the well-being of Town residents and negatively affects the quality of life
for Town residents. The sale, use or possession of illegal drugs; possession
of illegal weapons; trespassing; noises; violation of Chapter 102, Alcoholic
Beverages; illegal gambling; illegal harassment; or obstruction of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic all interfere with the public interest in the
quality of life and total community environment. The Town Board further
finds and declares that loitering for the purpose of conducting certain illegal
activity is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the
Town of Seneca Falls and of the businesses therein and visitors thereto.
The Town Board further finds and declares a public interest in protecting
citizens against unlawful, arbitrary, discriminatory or otherwise improper
enforcement of loitering prohibitions. It is the purpose of the Town Board
to hereby create a procedure for securing legal and equitable remedies
relating to loitering for certain illegal purposes, without prejudice to the use
of procedures available under existing and subsequently enacted laws or
ordinances, and to supplement the application by law enforcement officials
of existing laws prohibiting loitering.
§ 193-2. Prohibited conduct.
It shall not be lawful for any person to loiter or remain in any place for the
specific illegal purpose of:
A. Selling, using or possessing illegal drugs.
B. Possessing illegal weapons.
C. Trespassing.
D. Violating Chapter 201, Noise.
E. Violating Chapter 102, Alcoholic Beverages.
F. Illegal gambling.
G. Illegal harassment.
§ 185-9 SENECA FALLS CODE § 193-2
1:110
§ 193-3. Enforcement guidelines.
§ 193-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished,
upon conviction, by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for
not more than 15 days, or both. Each day that a violation of or failure to
comply with any provision of this chapter or any regulations promulgated
hereunder by the Town Board occurs, it shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
Chapter 207
PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES
H. Obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
A. Probable cause. Probable cause to charge or arrest any person for a
violation of this chapter shall arise only when the law enforcement
officer personally has observed the commission by such person of some
definable impermissible or illegal act as set forth hereinabove.
B. Failure to explain presence. The failure of any person to offer an
explanation of his or her purpose in being at a particular place shall not,
in and of itself, constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 193-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-4
1:111

ARTICLE I
Sex Offender Restrictions
§ 207-1. Findings and intent.
§ 207-2. Definitions.
A. The highest priority of government is the safety and protection of its
residents, especially its children. The Town of Seneca Falls has had
placed within its borders a number of sex offenders required to be
registered with the State of New York, some of whom have committed
criminal sexual offenses against minors. A number of these sex
offenders have been categorized as Level II sex offenders who have
been determined to pose a moderate risk of committing another sexual
crime under the Correction Law of the State of New York. A number of
these sex offenders have been categorized as Level III sex offenders
who have been determined to pose a high risk of repeat offense and a
threat to the public safety under the Correction Law of the State of New
York.
B. The Town of Seneca Falls has developed an active Recreation
Department that oversees the Town's parks and recreation facilities.
The Department also facilitates numerous recreation programs for
Town residents. The majority of the recreation facilities and programs
are designed and promoted for use and participation by the children of
the Town.
C. The Town Board finds and determines that it is essential to assure
residents of the Town of Seneca Falls that Town government continues
to make every effort to protect children from such sex offenders.
D. This Town Board further finds and determines that it is in the best
interests of the Town of Seneca Falls to prohibit sex offenders who have
committed sexual offenses against minors from entering into the Town's
parks and recreation facilities.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHILD or CHILDREN — Persons less than 18 years of age.
SEX OFFENDER — Any person who is convicted of any of the offenses
set forth in Subdivision 2, 3 or 7 of § 168-a of the New York State
Correction Law, as hereinafter amended, and has received a Level II or
Level III designation as defined under Article 6-C of the New York State
Correction Law, as hereinafter amended.
TOWN PARK — Active and passive public land designated for
recreational or athletic use by the Town of Seneca Falls that is owned
or leased by the Town of Seneca Falls. At the time of passage of
this article, Town parks include Kid's Territory on West Bayard Street,
Vince's Park on Old State Road and the Town playground on Lake Road.
§ 207-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-2
1:113
§ 207-3. Entry upon Town parks and recreation facilities restricted;
notice.
§ 207-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be an
offense and any person adjudged guilty of a violation of this article shall
be liable for such violation and penalty therefor and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500
per offense, together with a sentence of imprisonment of up to 15 days
per offense. Each day, or part thereof, such violation continues following
TOWN RECREATION FACILITIES — All land and improvements
thereon designated for recreational or athletic purposes by the Town of
Seneca Falls that are owned or leased by the Town of Seneca Falls. At
the time of passage of this article, Town recreation facilities include the
Community Center at 35 Water Street and the pool house and pavilions
at Vince's Park on Old State Road.
B. The examples given for Town recreation facilities and Town parks in the
definitions of "Town park" and "Town recreation facilities" above are
not exclusive lists. Any lands currently fitting within the given
definitions and lands so designated in the future shall also be subject to
this article.
A. No sex offender shall enter or remain in or upon any Town park or Town
recreation facility, as such terms are defined herein.
B. Within 30 days of the passage of this article, all Town parks and Town
recreation facilities shall be posted with signs not less than eight inches
by 11 inches, bearing a conspicuous statement described in this
section. Such signs shall be posted not more than 660 feet apart, close
to and along the boundaries of the Town park and Town recreation
facility. At least one sign shall be posted on each side of the protected
area and on each side of each corner of the protected area, provided the
corner can be reasonably ascertained. Illegible or torn down signs shall
be replaced at least once a year. Signs shall state the following: "Notice:
Pursuant to local law, it is illegal for any Level II or Level III sex
offender to enter or remain in or upon this park or recreational facility.
Your violation of this local law may subject you to prosecution and
punishment, up to and including a fine and imprisonment."
C. Upon such posting, no further notice shall be given or required to prove
a violation of this article.
D. In the absence of such posting, no sex offender shall enter or remain in
or upon any Town park or Town recreation facility, as such terms are
defined herein, following a personally communicated or written request
from any Town employee, peace officer or police officer advising him or
her of the relevant portion of this article.
§ 207-2 SENECA FALLS CODE § 207-4
1:114
notification under this article shall constitute a separate offense, punishable
in a like manner.
§ 207-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-4
1:115

ARTICLE II
Use of Town Parks and Recreation Facilities
[Added 10-5-2015 by L.L. No. 4-2015]
§ 207-5. Fees for use; use restrictions.
The use of Town parks and Town recreation facilities may be subject to fees
for use and other restrictions that will be set from time to time by resolution
of the Town Board.
§ 207-6. Penalties for offenses.
Failure or refusal to comply with any restrictions or fees for use set
pursuant to this article shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 207-4.
§ 207-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-6
1:117
Chapter 210
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 207-6 SENECA FALLS CODE § 207-6
1:118
ARTICLE I
Injury to or Destruction of Public Property
§ 210-1. Prohibitions.
§ 210-2. Penalties for offenses.
An offense against the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine
of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or
both.
A. No person shall willfully deface, injure, break or destroy any lamp,
lamppost, lamp supporter or part thereof; or any globe, wire, fixture or
protection of such lamp, lamppost or lamp supporter or part thereof; or
willfully meddle with or light any lamp; or obstruct or extinguish the
light thereof on any public street, sidewalk or in any public place in the
Town of Seneca Falls.
B. No person shall willfully and unlawfully cut, injure, mark, break, deface,
remove or destroy any building, structure, bridge, fence, tree,
shrubbery or other property or part thereof; or willfully and unlawfully
break any window or window glass in any building or structure; or tear
down or remove any notice posted in the Town of Seneca Falls.
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2
1:119
Chapter 213
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 210-2 SENECA FALLS CODE § 210-2
1:120
ARTICLE I
Vending from Stationary Vehicles
§ 213-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to encourage the establishment of permanent
retail establishments within the Town of Seneca Falls, recognizing that such
establishments require both a substantial initial investment as well as a
substantial continuing maintenance expense, and to protect entrepreneurs
willing to make such investments in the community from the jeopardy
represented by competitive entrepreneurs operating in a transient,
temporary, low-overhead manner within the areas in which the Town seeks
to encourage permanent establishment of retail businesses, without unduly
restricting commerce elsewhere within the Town. The further purpose of
this article is to prevent congestion and unsafe conditions on the streets
within the Town.
§ 213-2. Conflict with other provisions.
In the event that the provisions of this article are found to be in conflict with
any other related provisions of the Code of the Town of Seneca Falls, the
provisions of this article shall prevail as fully as if the prior provisions were
repealed herein.
§ 213-3. Vending in certain places restricted.
A. No peddler, vendor, hawker or huckster or other person shall permit
any cart, wagon or vehicle owned, operated, driven or controlled by him
or her to stand or remain stationary upon or within any of the following
public places in the Town of Seneca Falls or any portions thereof, as are
hereinafter set forth, for the purpose of selling or offering for sale
therefrom, or from any pack or container, any goods, wares or
merchandise of any kind to any person who, by reason of any violation
of the foregoing prohibitions, shall stand or remain stationary within
any such public place, whether on foot, or in a vehicle or otherwise,
unless a permit is issued in accordance with § 213-5 of this article.
B. The public places or portions thereof to which the foregoing provisions
shall apply are as follows: any parts or portions of the following streets
or on any streets intersecting said designated streets within a distance
of 500 feet:
Bayard Street
Bridge Street
Cayuga Street
Clinton Street (between Fall and Daniels)
Fall Street
Mynderse Street (between Fall and Daniels)
Oak Street
§ 213-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-3
1:121
§ 213-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
§ 213-5. Permit required; fees; term.
§ 213-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The continuation of an offense against the provisions of this
Ovid Street
Rumsey Street
State Street
Walnut Street
And the parking areas adjacent thereto and any public or private offstreet
parking areas on or abutting said designated streets.
C. The Town Board may, by resolution, suspend the issuance of the permits
provided for by this article for a period not to exceed three days to any
vendor not under the aegis of an organized group whose activities, in
the Board's judgment, contribute to the promotion and betterment of
the Town.
A. Any vendor selling vegetables, fruits or other retail farm produce, ice
cream, soft drinks, or sandwiches or to individuals selling Christmas
trees.
B. Vendors participating in a farmer's market or other special event
previously approved by the Town Board.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall pursue or exercise any of the
trades or occupations restricted by § 213-3A without first having
obtained a permit therefor from the Town Clerk as set forth in § 213-10
of this chapter, and having paid the permit fee therefor, as set from time
to time by resolution of the Town Board.
B. There shall be no fee for solicitation of donations for religious groups
and other tax-exempt organizations, but registration of such solicitors
with the Town Clerk is mandatory.
C. Any solicitor or peddler permit issued in accordance with this article for
the period of one year shall expire on December 31 of each and every
year. All present permit fees shall be prorated, and when present
permits are renewed on December 31, the licensee shall be given credit
for any payments in advance of said date.
§ 213-3 SENECA FALLS CODE § 213-6
1:122
article shall constitute, for each day the offense is continued, a separate and
distinct offense hereunder.
§ 213-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-6
1:123

ARTICLE II
General Regulations
§ 213-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to:
§ 213-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS — Includes a building or store in
which or where a person transacts business and deals in goods, wares
and merchandise he or she hawks, peddles or solicits for during regular
business hours on a daily basis.
HAWKER and PEDDLER — Includes, except as hereinafter expressly
provided, any person, either principal or agent, who from any public street
or public place or by going from house to house or place of business to place
of business, on foot or on or from any vehicle, sells or barters, offers for
sale or barter or carries or exposes for sale or barter any goods, wares or
merchandise, books, magazines, periodicals or any other item or items of
value, except milk, newspapers and food distributed on regular customer
routes.
SOLICITOR — Includes any person who goes from place to place or house
to house or by telephone or stands in any street or public place taking or
offering to take orders for goods, wares or merchandise, books, magazines,
periodicals or any other item or items of value (except newspapers or milk)
or for services to be performed in the future or for making, manufacturing
or repairing any article or thing whatsoever for future delivery. The term
"solicitor" shall, however, also mean and include any person taking or
offering to take orders for goods, wares or merchandise, books, magazines,
periodicals or any other item or items of value (except newspapers or milk)
or for services to be performed in the future or for making, manufacturing
or repairing any article or thing whatsoever for future delivery at the
home or residence of any person who has been solicited prior thereto by
telephone or has responded to any type of advertising media requiring an
appointment or consultation or sales presentation in the home or place of
residence of such person.
§ 213-9. Exemptions.
A. Protect the peace of citizens within their homes; and
B. To protect consumers against fraud.
A. Generally. Nothing in this article shall be held to apply to:
(1) Any sales conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court.
§ 213-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-9
1:125
§ 213-10. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the Town to act as
a hawker, peddler or solicitor as herein defined or assist the same without
first having obtained and paid for and having in force and effect a permit
therefor.
§ 213-11. Application for permit.
(2) Any sales by any person selling personal property at wholesale to
dealers in such articles.
(3) Any sales by persons under the age of 18 years.
(4) Peddling of meats, fish, fruit and farm produce by farmers and
persons who produce such commodities.
(5) Vendors participating in a farmer's market or other special event
previously approved by the Town Board.
B. Exempt organizations. Nonprofit organizations and persons working for
such organizations shall also be exempt. However, such organizations
shall register annually with the Town Clerk in the event that they plan
to engage in vending, hawking, peddling or soliciting and shall indicate
the type of activities to be undertaken and the time when they will be
performed. It shall be the responsibility of such organizations to furnish
identification for their representatives, which must be exhibited upon
demand.
C. Interstate commerce. This article shall not apply so as to unlawfully
interfere with interstate commerce.
A. Any person desiring to procure a permit as herein provided shall file
with the Town Clerk a written application upon a form furnished by the
Town Clerk. Such application shall give:
(1) The number and kind of vehicles to be used by the applicant in
carrying on the business for which the permit is desired and a copy
of a valid driver's license.
(2) The kind of goods, wares and merchandise he or she desires to sell
or the kind of service he or she desires to perform.
(3) The method of distribution.
(4) The name, address and age of applicant.
(5) Authorization for a criminal background check.
(6) The name and address of the person, firm or corporation he or she
represents.
(7) The length of time the applicant desires the permit.
§ 213-9 SENECA FALLS CODE § 213-11
1:126
§ 213-12. Bond.
An application for a permit as a solicitor who demands, accepts or receives
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery shall also be
accompanied by a cash deposit of $10,000 or a surety company bond of
$10,000 or other bond secured by sufficient collateral; said bond to be
approved by the Town Attorney as to form and surety, conditioned for
making a final delivery of the goods, wares or merchandise ordered or
services to be performed in accordance with the terms of such order or,
failing therein, that the advance payment on such order be funded. Any
person aggrieved by the action of any permitted solicitor shall have the
right, by action on the bond, for the recovery of money or damages, or both.
Such bond shall remain in full force and effect and, in case of a cash deposit,
such deposit shall be retained by the Town for a period of 90 days after the
expiration of any such permit, unless sooner released by the Town Board.
§ 213-13. Issuance of permit.
(8) Such other information as may be required by the Town Board to
substantiate the above items.
B. If applicable, such application shall be accompanied by a certificate of
the Sealer of Weights and Measures, certifying that all weighing and
measuring devices to be used by the applicant have been examined and
approved.
A. Town Clerk to issue or deny. Upon the filing of the complete application,
bond and certificate as provided in the preceding sections, the Town
Clerk shall, upon approval of such application, issue to the applicant a
permit as provided in § 213-10.
(1) Before obtaining a criminal history background check, the
following will result in an automatic refusal of a permit:
(a) Applicant provides inaccurate information on his or her
application.
(b) Applicant refuses to sign criminal background check search
authorization.
(2) Using information gathered from the criminal history background
check, if an applicant is found to have been convicted of any of the
following offenses, he or she will be refused a permit:
(a) Sex offenses and misconduct;
(b) Violent felonies;
(c) Felonies (other than sex or violence related) within the past 10
years;
(d) Any child abuse or domestic violence convictions;
§ 213-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-13
1:127
§ 213-14. Permit not assignable.
A permit shall not be assignable. Any holder of any permit who permits it to
be used by any other person and any person who uses such permit granted
to any other person shall each be guilty of a violation.
§ 213-15. Duplicate permits.
Whenever a permit shall be lost or destroyed on the part of the holder or
his or her agent or employee, a duplicate in lieu thereof, under the original
application and bond, may be issued by the Town Clerk upon the filing with
him or her by the permittee of an affidavit setting forth the circumstances
of the loss and what, if any, search has been made for its recovery.
§ 213-16. Contents and form of permit.
All permits shall be issued from a properly bound book with proper
reference stubs kept for that purpose, numbered in the order in which they
are issued, and shall state clearly the kind of vehicle to be used, the kind
of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold or service to be rendered, the
number of each permit, the date of issuance and expiration of the permit,
the fee paid and the name and address of the permittee.
§ 213-17. Term of permit.
Such permit shall be for such term as requested by the applicant but not
longer than six months and in any event shall expire not later than the first
day of January next succeeding.
§ 213-18. Display of permit.
Every permittee, while exercising his or her permit, shall carry the permit
with him or her and shall exhibit the same upon demand.
§ 213-19. Permit fees.
The permit fee for each person permitted as a hawker, peddler or solicitor
for a period of one day, one week or six months shall be set from time to
time by resolution of the Town Board. There shall be no fee for solicitation
of donations from religious groups and other tax-exempt organizations, but
registration of such solicitors with the Town Clerk is mandatory.
(e) Misdemeanors within the past five years.
B. Appeal to Town Board. Any applicant who has been refused a permit by
the Town Clerk may apply to the Town Board therefor, and the same
may be granted or refused by the Town Board, except as prohibited by
Town Law § 137.
§ 213-13 SENECA FALLS CODE § 213-20
1:128
§ 213-20. Revocation of permit.
A permit issued pursuant to this article may be revoked after a public
hearing as provided in Article 9 of the Town Law.
§ 213-21. Do-not-knock registry.
§ 213-22. Prohibited acts.
A. Any owner or occupant of property located in the Town who wishes to
prohibit hawkers, peddlers or solicitors on the premises shall complete
a form available in the Town Clerk's office. The completion of the form
will allow the owner's/occupant's premises to be included on a list of
properties that do not permit solicitation (hereinafter referred to as the
"do-not-knock registry" or "registry").
B. In order to be removed from the registry, the owner and/or occupant
must complete a form indicating that he or she does not want the
property to be included in the registry.
C. Any owner or occupant who has requested enlistment on the do-notknock
registry shall be able to purchase from the Town Clerk's office,
for a nominal fee, a sticker for display indicating enlistment on the donot-
knock registry.
D. All hawkers, peddlers and solicitors shall obtain the current do-notknock
registry at the time of issuance of a license or at the time of
registration pursuant to the provisions of Article II of this chapter.
E. The Town Clerk shall update the do-not-knock registry on January 1,
April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year, which updated registry shall
constitute the current do-not-knock registry. Copies of the current donot-
knock registry shall be available at the office of the Town Clerk.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon private property for
the purpose of peddling or soliciting before the hour of 9:00 a.m. of any
day or after the hour of 9:00 p.m. of any day except upon the invitation
of the householder or occupant.
B. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor in plying his or her trade
to ring the bell or knock upon or enter any building whereon there is
painted or otherwise affixed or displayed to public view any sign
containing any or all of the following words: "No Peddlers," "No
Solicitors," "No Agents" or other wording, the purpose of which
purports to prohibit peddling or soliciting on the premises.
C. Hawkers, peddlers and solicitors shall not engage as such at any
premises identified on the current do-not-knock registry.
D. No peddler or solicitor shall peddle, vend or sell his or her goods or
wares within 200 feet of any place occupied exclusively as a public or
private school or for school purposes, nor shall he or she permit his or
§ 213-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-22
1:129
§ 213-23. Orders taken by solicitors.
All orders taken by permitted solicitors who demand, accept or receive
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery shall be in writing,
made in duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the amount paid in
advance, and one copy shall be given to the purchaser at the time the
deposit is paid to the solicitor.
§ 213-24. Records to be maintained.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep a record of all applications
and of all permits granted under the provisions of this article, giving the
number and date of each permit, the fee paid and the date of revocation of
all permits revoked.
§ 213-25. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of any provision of this article is hereby declared to be a violation
and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for
not more than 15 days, or both.
her cart, wagon or vehicle to stand on any public highway within said
distance of such school property.
E. No peddler or solicitor shall falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the
quantity, character or quality of any article offered for sale. No person
shall, by any trick or device or by any false representation, obtain or
attempt to obtain admission to the house or garage of any person or
corporation in the Town.
F. No peddler or solicitor shall blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other
noisy device to attract public attention to his or her wares or shout or
cry out his or her wares.
G. It shall be unlawful to create or maintain any booth or stand or place
any barrels, boxes, crates or other obstructions upon any street or
public place for the purpose of selling or exposing for sale any goods,
wares or merchandise.
H. No peddler or solicitor shall represent or state or otherwise indicate
that he or she is not intending to sell or otherwise enter into a contract
with any person in the household.
§ 213-22 SENECA FALLS CODE § 213-25
1:130
Chapter 230
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Backflow prevention devices — See Ch. 111.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 255.
Water — See Ch. 285.
Wells, cisterns and cesspools — See Ch. 290.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 213-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-25
1:131

Part 1
High-Volume Users
ARTICLE I
Discount for High-Volume Users
[Amended 10-5-2015 by L.L. No. 6-2015]
§ 230-1. Findings and purpose.
§ 230-2. Discount established.
A discount of 50% on their applicable sewer rates will apply to all users
of the Town of Seneca Falls sewer system who use in excess of 100,000
cubic feet of water per month. This discount does not apply to significant
industrial users, as defined in § 230-5 of this Code.
A. The Town Board of the Town of Seneca Falls, in an effort to ensure that
the Town remains an attractive place for industrial and other economic
development, adopts the following policy of a discounted sewer rate for
high-volume water users.
B. This recommendation is based upon the following:
(1) Such bulk users may be eligible to apply for a permit to discharge
into the canal system and more favorable rates would deter
consideration of such an alternative.
(2) Experience in processing wastewater has indicated that, once
processing costs are met at certain volume of treatment, treatment
in excess of such volume involves negligible further cost.
(3) The existence of a discounted sewer rate for high-volume users,
which would be industrial users, would be an attractive incentive
for industry and other economic development to locate or remain in
this area.
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-2
1:133

Part 2
Sewer Use And Regulations
ARTICLE II
Short Title and Purpose
§ 230-3. Title.
This Part 2 may be cited as the "Town of Seneca Falls Sewer Use Law."
§ 230-4. Purpose.
The general purpose of this Part 2 is to provide for efficient, economic,
environmentally safe and legal operation of the Town of Seneca Falls
publicly owned treatment works (POTW). The specific purposes of this Part
2 are the following:
A. To prevent the introduction of substances into the POTW that will:
(1) Interfere with the POTW in any way.
(2) Pass through the POTW to the state's waters and cause
contravention of standards for those waters or cause violation of
the POTW's SPDES permit.
(3) Increase the cost or otherwise hamper the disposal of POTW sludge
and/or residuals.
(4) Endanger municipal employees.
(5) Cause air pollution or groundwater pollution, directly or indirectly.
(6) Cause, directly or indirectly, any public nuisance condition.
B. To prevent new sources of infiltration and inflow and, as much as
possible, eliminate existing sources of infiltration and inflow.
C. To assure that new sewers and connections are properly constructed.
D. To provide for equitable distribution to all users of the POTW of all costs
associated with sewage transmission, treatment and residuals disposal
and to provide for the collection of such costs.
§ 230-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-4
1:135

ARTICLE III
Terminology
§ 230-5. Definitions; word usage.
Unless otherwise stated in the section where the term is used in this Part
2, the meaning of terms used in this Part 2 shall be as stated below. When
not inconsistent with the context, the present tense shall include the future,
and words used in the plural shall include the singular and vice versa.
Furthermore, a masculine pronoun shall include the feminine. "Shall" is
mandatory; "may" is permissive.
ABNORMAL SEWAGE — Sewage in which the concentration of one or more
characteristics of normal sewage exceeds the maximum concentrations of
the characteristics of normal sewage. See "normal sewage."
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., as may be
amended.
ADMINISTRATOR — The Regional Administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), Region 2.
AMMONIA — The result obtained, using an approved laboratory procedure,
to determine the quantity of ammonia in a sample, expressed as milligrams
of nitrogen per liter.
APPLICANT — That person who makes application for any permit. The
applicant may be an owner, new or old, or his or her agent.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The USEPA, or the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC), in the event that the NYSDEC is
delegated approval authority responsibility by the USEPA.
APPROVED LABORATORY PROCEDURE — The procedures defined as
standard methods in this Part 2, or other procedures approved by the
Superintendent, for flow measurement or determination of the
concentration of pollutants or their surrogates in waters, wastewaters and/
or sludges.
ASTM or AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS — The
latest edition of any ASTM specification, when stipulated in this Part 2.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER — May be:
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the
industrial user is a corporation.
A.
A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively.
B.
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above,
if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
C.
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:137
BOD or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND — The result obtained when
using an approved laboratory procedure to determine the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the aerobic biochemical oxidation of organic matter or in
a sample, expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDER — Any person who undertakes to construct a building or any part
of a building, either under contract or for resale.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the building walls and conveys it to the building
lateral, which begins five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The result obtained when using an approved
laboratory procedure to determine the difference between the amount of
chlorine added to a sample and the amount of chlorine remaining in the
sample at the end of a specified contact time at room temperature,
expressed in milligrams per liter.
COD or CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND — The result obtained when using
an approved laboratory procedure to measure the oxygen requirement of
that portion of matter, in a sample, that is susceptible to oxidation, by a
specific chemical oxidant, expressed in milligrams per liter.
COLOR — The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum
absorption, relative to distilled water. One-hundred-percent transmittance
is equivalent to zero optical density.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample resulting from the combination of
individual samples of wastewater taken at selected intervals, for a specified
time period. The individual samples may have equal volumes or the
individual volumes may be proportioned to the flow at the time of sampling.
CONNECTION — Attachment of one user to a sewer. (See "extension.")
CONNECTION CHARGE (TAP FEE) — The one-time application fee to offset
Town of Seneca Falls expenses to process an application for a connection of
a building/street lateral to the public sewer. The fee also covers plan review,
permit issuance, street repair cost and inspection costs. The fee may be
scaled to the amount of work involved or to the size of the public sewer
involved.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The approval authority or the Superintendent
when the Town of Seneca Falls has an approved pretreatment program
under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
CONTROL MANHOLE — A manhole accessible to the control authority in or
upstream of the street lateral, such that samples collected from the manhole
represent the discharge to the POTW.
CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANT — A pollutant that the POTW treatment
plant was designed to treat, defined in accordance with the Act.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any system of
condensation, air conditioning, refrigeration or other sources. It shall
contain no polluting substances which would produce COD or suspended
§ 230-5 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-5
1:138
solids in excess of five milligrams per liter or toxic substances as limited
elsewhere in this Part 2.
COUNTY — Seneca County, New York.
DEVELOPER — Any person who subdivides land for the purpose of
constructing, or causing to be constructed, buildings for which wastewater
disposal facilities are required.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the State of New York. (For reference, see "indirect
discharge.")
DOMESTIC WASTES — See "sewage, domestic."
DRY SEWER — The sanitary sewer installed in anticipation of future
connection to a POTW but which is not used, in the meantime, for transport
of storm or sanitary sewage.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
END OF PIPE — For the purpose of determining compliance with limitations
prescribed by Article X, the control manhole, provided that the samples
collected from the control manhole are representative of the discharge to
the POTW.
END-OF-PIPE CONCENTRATION — The concentration of a substance in a
sample of wastewater at the end of pipe.
END-OF-PROCESS CONCENTRATION — See "national categorical
pretreatment standard."
EPA, USEPA or U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY — The
agency of the federal government charged with the administration and
enforcement of federal environmental laws, rules and regulations. Also may
be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized
official of this agency.
EXTENSION — Attachment of a sewer line, with more than one user, to an
existing sewer line.
FACILITY — Any buildings, other structure, grounds and contiguous
property at any locations related to or connected with a user at the user's
location.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, grease or fat in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a wastewater
treatment facility.
FLOW RATE — The quantity of liquid or waste that flows in a certain period
of time.
GARBAGE — The solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing
of food, from the handling, storage and sale of produce and from the
packaging and canning of food.
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:139
GRAB SAMPLE — A single sample of wastewater representing the physical,
chemical and biological characteristics of the wastewater at one point and
time.
ICS FORM — The form used by the NYSDEC to survey industries to perform
and update the Industrial Chemical Survey.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The introduction of wastewater into a POTW
for treatment and ultimate discharge of the treated effluent to the state's
waters. (For reference, see "direct discharge.")
INDUSTRIAL — Meaning or pertaining to industry, manufacturing,
commerce, trade, business or institution and is distinguished from domestic
or residential.
INDUSTRIAL CHEMICAL SURVEY (ICS) — The survey of industries in New
York State, initiated by the NYSDEC, to determine chemical usage and
storage by those industries.
INDUSTRIAL USER — See "user, industrial."
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid or liquid-carried solid, liquid and/or
gaseous wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, service,
utility or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INFILTRATION — Water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer system
(excluding building drains) from the ground through such means as
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manholes. Infiltration does not
include, and is distinguished from, inflow. Infiltration is inadvertent, that is,
not purposely designed or built into the sewer or drain.
INFLOW — Water, other than wastewater, that enters a sewer system
(including building drains) from sources such as but not limited to roof
leaders, cellar drains, area drains, drains from springs and swampy areas,
manhole covers, cross connections between storm sewers and sanitary
sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, stormwaters, foundation drains,
swimming pools, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage. Inflow
does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration. Inflow is purposely
designed and/or built into the sewer or drain.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
discharges by other sources:
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or
its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
A.
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Town
of Seneca Falls POTW's SPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage
sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with the following
statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or
more stringent state or local regulations):
(1) Section 405 of the Clean Water Act;
B.
§ 230-5 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-5
1:140
LATERAL, BUILDING — The sewer extension from the building drain to the
street lateral or other place of wastewater disposal.
LATERAL, STREET — The sewer extension from the public sewer to the
property line.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
CATEGORICAL STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(B)
and (C) of the Act (22 U.S.C. § 1347), which applies to a specific category of
industrial users. These standards apply at the end of the categorical process
("end of process").
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the authority
of Section 307(B) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, to the state's waters.
NEW OWNER — That individual or entity who or which purchased property
within the service area of the Town of Seneca Falls after the effective date
of this Part 2.
NEW SOURCE — Any source, the construction of which is commenced after
the publication of the proposed regulation prescribing a Section 307(C) (33
U.S.C. § 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable
to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated.
NEW USER — A discharger to the POTW who commences discharge after
the effective date of this Part 2.
NORMAL SEWAGE — See "sewage, normal."
NUISANCE — The use or lack of use of the POTW in such a manner so as to
endanger life or health, give offense to the senses or obstruct or otherwise
interfere with the reasonable use or maintenance of the POTW.
OIL AND GREASE — The result obtained when using an approved
laboratory procedure to determine the quantity of fats, wax, grease and oil,
in a sample, expressed in milligrams per liter.
The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) [including Title 11, more
commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA)," and including state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D or the
SWDA];
(2)
(3) The Clean Air Act;
(4) The Toxic Substance Control Act; and
(5) The Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act.
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:141
OLD OWNER — That individual or entity who or which owns or owned
a property, within the service area of the POTW, purchased prior to the
effective date of this Part 2, or who inherited the property at any time and
intends to sell the property or has sold the property to a new owner; also
the agent of the old owner.
OTHER WASTES — Garbage (shredded or unshredded), refuse, wood, egg
shells, coffee grounds, sawdust, shavings, bark, sand, lime, ashes and all
other discarded matter not normally present in sewage or industrial wastes.
PASS THROUGH — The discharge which exits the Town of Seneca Falls
POTW into waters of the state in quantities which, alone or in conjunction
with discharges from other sources, are a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW's SPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERMIT — A temporary, revocable written document allowing use of the
POTW for specified wastes over a limited period of time, containing
sampling locations and reporting frequencies and requiring other actions as
authorized by this Part 2.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, political
subdivision, federal, state or local agency or entity, association, trust, estate
or any other legal entity whatsoever.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions, in gram moles per liter of solution. A pH value of 7.0, the pH scale
midpoint, represents neutrality. Values above 7.0 represent alkaline
conditions. Values below 7.0 represent acid conditions.
PHOSPHORUS, TOTAL — See "total phosphorus."
POLLUTANT — Any material placed into or onto the state's waters, lands
and/or air which interferes with the beneficial use of that water, land and/or
air by any living thing at any time.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and/or radiological integrity of the state's waters, lands
and/or air resulting from the introduction of a pollutant into these media.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater and to treat sludge and residuals derived
from such treatment.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment
standard imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD or NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
— Any categorical standard or prohibitive discharge standard.
PRETREATMENT (TREATMENT) — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu
of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be achieved by a physical, chemical or biological
§ 230-5 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-5
1:142
process, process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40
CFR 403.6(D).
PRIORITY POLLUTANTS — The most recently revised or updated list
developed by the EPA in accordance with the Act.
PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD — See "national prohibitive
discharge standard."
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, and with no particle having a dimension greater
than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works, as
defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned, in this
instance, by the Town of Seneca Falls. This definition includes any sewers
and appurtenances that transport wastewater to the POTW treatment plant
but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected
directly or indirectly to a facility providing treatment.
RECEIVING WATERS — A natural watercourse or body of water (usually
waters of the state) into which treated or untreated sewage is discharged.
RECORDS — Includes but is not limited to any printed, typewritten,
handwritten or otherwise recorded matter of whatever character (including
paper or electronic media), including but not limited to letters, files,
memoranda, directives, notes and notebooks, correspondence, descriptions,
telephone call slips, photographs, permits, applications, reports,
compilations, films, graphs and inspection reports. For the purposes of this
Part 2, "records" shall mean records of and relating to waste generation,
reuse and disposal and shall include records of usage of raw materials.
ROOF DRAIN — A drain installed to receive water collecting on the surface
of a roof for disposal.
SEPTAGE — All liquids and solids in and removed from septic tanks, holding
tanks, cesspools or approved types of chemical toilets, including but not
limited to those serving private residences, commercial establishments,
institutions and industries. Also sludge from small sewage treatment plants.
Septage shall not have been contaminated with substances of concern or
priority pollutants.
SEPTIC TANK — A private domestic sewage treatment system consisting
of an underground tank (with suitable baffling), constructed in accordance
with any and/or all local and state requirements.
SERVICE AREA OF THE POTW — The legally defined bounds of real
property from which wastewater may be discharged into the POTW. The
bounds shall be established, altered, changed, modified, reduced, enlarged,
combined or consolidated by action of the Town of Seneca Falls.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments and such
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:143
groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be inadvertently
present. The admixture of sewage, as defined above, with industrial wastes
and other wastes shall also be considered "sewage" within the meaning of
this definition.
SEWAGE, DOMESTIC (DOMESTIC WASTES) — Liquid wastes from the
noncommercial preparation, cooking and handling of food, liquid wastes
containing human excrement and similar matter from the sanitary
conveniences in dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial buildings and
institutions, or liquid wastes from clothes washing and/or floor/wall
washing. Therefore, domestic sewage includes both black water and gray
water. (See "sewage, sanitary.")
SEWAGE, NORMAL —
SEWAGE, SANITARY — Liquid wastes from the sanitary conveniences of
dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings,
factories or institutions and free from stormwater, surface water, industrial
and other wastes. (See "domestic wastes.")
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT (WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT) —
See "POTW treatment plant."
Sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes which show, by analysis, the
following characteristics:
BOD (five-day): 2,090 pounds per million gallons (250 milligrams
per liter), or less.
(1)
Suspended solids: 2,085 pounds per million gallons (250 milligrams
per liter), or less.
(2)
Phosphorus: 42 pounds per million gallons (five milligrams per
liter), or less.
(3)
Ammonia: 167 pounds per million gallons (20 milligrams per liter),
or less.
(4)
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen: 167 pounds per million (20 milligrams per
liter), or less.
(5)
Chlorine demand: 42 pounds per million gallons (five milligrams
per liter), or less.
(6)
Chemical oxygen demand: 2,920 pounds per million gallons (350
milligrams per liter), or less
(7)
Oil and grease: 167 pounds per million gallons (20 milligrams per
liter), or less.
(8)
A.
In spite of satisfying one or more of these characteristics, if the sewage
also contains substances of concern, it may not be considered "normal
sewage."
B.
§ 230-5 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-5
1:144
SEWAGE OF UNUSUAL STRENGTH OR CHARACTER — Sewage which has
characteristics greater than those of normal sewage and/or which contains
substances of concern.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying or transporting sewage.
SEWERAGE SURCHARGE — The demand payment for the use of a public
sewer and/or sewage treatment plant for the handling of any sewage,
industrial wastes or other wastes accepted for admission thereto in which
the characteristics thereof exceed the maximum values of such
characteristics in normal sewage. (See "volume charge.")
SEWERAGE SYSTEM (also POTW) — All facilities for collecting, regulating,
pumping and transporting wastewater to and away from the POTW
treatment plant.
SEWER, COMBINED — A sewer designed to receive and transport both
surface runoff and sewage.
SEWER, PUBLIC — A sewer in which all abutting property owners have
equal rights, and the use of which is controlled by the Town of Seneca Falls.
SEWER, SANITARY — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWER, STORM (STORM DRAIN) — A sewer which carries stormwater
and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial
wastewaters, other than cooling waters and other unpolluted waters.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — See "user, significant industrial."
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC) — A user is in significant
noncompliance if its violation(s) meet(s) one or more of the following
criteria:
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
which, in 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a sixmonth
period, exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or
average limit for the same pollutant parameter.
A.
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product
of the daily maximum limits multiplied by the applicable TRC. [TRC
equals 1.4 for BOD, total suspended solids (TSS), fats, oil and grease;
TRC equals 1.2 for all other pollutants.]
B.
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or long-term average) that the Superintendent determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public).
C.
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the
D.
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:145
SLUG — A substantial deviation from normal rates of discharge or
constituent concentration (see "normal sewage") sufficient to cause
interference. In any event, a discharge which, in concentration of any
constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period of duration
longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average twenty-four-hour
concentration or flow during normal user operations shall constitute a slug.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972,
and subsequent revisions.
STANDARD METHODS — Procedures contained in the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published
by the American Public Health Association, procedures established by the
Administrator, pursuant to Section 304(G) of the Act and contained in
40 CFR 136, and amendments thereto (If 40 CFR 136 does not include
a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, then
procedures set forth in the EPA publication Sampling and Analysis
Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants,
April 1977, and amendments thereto, shall be used.), any other procedure
approved by the Administrator or any other procedure approved by the
Superintendent, whichever is the most conservative.
STATE — The State of New York.
STATE'S WATERS — See "waters of the state."
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation; also the flow resulting therefrom.
SUBSTANCES OF CONCERN — Those compounds which the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation has determined may be
harmful to man or the environment.
Superintendent's exercise of its emergency authority under Article XII
of this Part 2.
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction
or attaining final compliance.
E.
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports
such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules.
F.
G. Failure to report accurately any noncompliance.
Any other violation which the Superintendent determines will adversely
affect the implementation or operation of the local pretreatment
program.
H.
§ 230-5 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-5
1:146
SUMP PUMP — A mechanism used for removing water from a sump or wet
well.
SUPERINTENDENT — That individual appointed by the Town Board as
the head of the Water and Sewer Department. Such an individual shall be
qualified to oversee water treatment, distribution and POTW operations.
This definition shall also include his or her authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The result obtained, using an approved laboratory
procedure, to determine the dry weight of solids, in a sample, that either
float on the surface of or are in suspension or are settleable and can be
removed from the sample by filtration, expressed in milligrams per liter.
TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN) — The result obtained, using an
approved laboratory procedure, to determine the quantity of ammonia in
a sample and released during the acid digestion of organic nitrogen
compounds, expressed as milligrams of nitrogen per liter.
TOTAL PHOSPHORUS — The result obtained, using an approved laboratory
procedure, to determine the total quantity of phosphate, in a sample of
wastewater, following the hydrolysis of phosphorus compounds, expressed
as milligrams of phosphorus per liter of sample.
TOWN — The Town of Seneca Falls.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Any substance, whether gaseous, liquid or solid,
that when discharged to a public sewer in sufficient quantities may be
hazardous to POTW operation and maintenance personnel, tend to interfere
with any biological sewage treatment process or to constitute a hazard
to recreation in the receiving waters, due to the effluent from a sewage
treatment plant or overflow point; any pollutant or combination of
pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under
provisions of Section 307(A) of the Act or other acts.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the POTW.
USER, EXISTING — A discharger to the POTW who is discharging on or
before the effective date of this Part 2.
USER, INDUSTRIAL — A discharger to the POTW who discharges
nondomestic wastewaters.
USER, NEW — A discharger to the POTW who initiates discharge after the
effective date of this Part 2.
USER, SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL (SIU) — An industrial user of the Town
of Seneca Falls POTW who is:
Subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards promulgated
by the EPA;
A.
Having substantial impact, either singly or in combination with other
industries, on the operation of the treatment works;
B.
§ 230-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:147
VOLUME CHARGE (USER CHARGE) — The demand sewer use charge
which is based, in part or wholly, on the volume of normal sewage
discharged into the POTW (there may be surcharges, as provided for in
Article XIII). The volume charge shall be based on a specific cost per 100
cubic feet or per 1,000 gallons. The specific charge shall be subject to
approval by the Town Board. The moneys so obtained shall be used for
current operation and maintenance, for retirement of bonded indebtedness
and for finding of capital projects of the POTW. The basis of volume charge
calculations shall be made available to the public, on demand, as provided
in Article XIV. The volume charge shall be recalculated annually, as well as
the surcharge rates.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastewaters from dwellings, commercial establishments, industrial
facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and
stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is
contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit as set forth in Article XI
of this Part 2.
WASTEWATER OF UNUSUAL STRENGTH OR CHARACTER — See "sewage
of unusual strength or character."
WATERS OF THE STATE (STATE'S WATERS) — All streams, lakes, ponds,
marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations
of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any
portion thereof.
§ 230-6. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
ANSI American National Standards Institute
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
AWWA American Water Works Association
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
Using, on an annual basis, more than 10,000 pounds or 1,000 gallons
of raw material containing priority pollutants and/or substances of
concern and discharging a measurable quantity of these pollutants to
the sewer system; or
C.
Discharging more than 5% of the flow or load of conventional pollutants
received by the POTW treatment plant.
[NOTE: A user discharging a measurable quantity of a pollutant may
be classified as nonsignificant if, at the influent to the POTW treatment
plant, the pollutant is not detectable.]
D.
§ 230-5 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-6
1:148
CPLR Code of Public Law and Rules
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
l Liter
mg Milligram
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NCPI National Clay Pipe Institute
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NYSDEC New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
NYSDOH New York State Department of Health
NYSDOT New York State Department of Transportation
P Total phosphorus
PSI Pounds per square inch
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
ppm Parts per million, weight basis
SIC Standard industrial classification
SPDES State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 690(L) et seq.
U.S.C. United States Code
USEPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
TSS Total suspended solids
§ 230-7. Undefined terms.
Terms not defined in this article, or terms found to be ambiguous or
improperly defined in this article, shall be defined by the Act or regulations
pursuant thereto.
§ 230-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-7
1:149

ARTICLE IV
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 230-8. Prohibited discharges and connections.
§ 230-9. Zoning permit allowed only when approved wastewater
disposal available.
No property owner, builder or developer shall be issued a zoning permit for
a new dwelling or structure requiring sanitary facilities unless a suitable
and approved method of wastewater disposal, conforming to this Part 2,
is available. All housing construction or building development which takes
place after this Part 2 is enacted shall provide for an approved system of
sanitary sewers.
§ 230-10. Private wastewater disposal unlawful.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or other facility intended or used
for disposal of wastewater.
§ 230-11. Connection to public sewer required.
The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the
Town of Seneca Falls, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in
which there is now located or may, in the future, be located a public sewer,
is hereby required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable sanitary
facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer, in accordance with the provisions of this Part 2, within 90 days
A. Waste disposal unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to place,
deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner, on public or
private property, within the Town of Seneca Falls or in any area under
the jurisdiction of said municipality, any human or animal excrement,
garbage or objectionable waste. In addition, no person shall discharge
domestic sewage onto the surface of the ground or discharge it in a way
that permits it to come to the surface of the ground.
B. Connecting private sewage system to storm sewer unlawful. No person
shall connect a private sewage system so that sewage flows into a storm
sewer or into a drain intended exclusively for stormwater.
C. Discharge of sewage into well prohibited. No person shall discharge
sewage into a well.
D. Wastewater discharge unlawful. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any
natural outlet, within the Town of Seneca Falls or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the municipality, any wastewater or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this Part 2.
§ 230-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-11
1:151
after official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100
feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.
§ 230-12. Limitation on use of public sewers.
The use of the Town of Seneca Falls public sewers shall be strictly limited
and restricted, except as provided in § 230-11, to receive and accept the
discharge of sewage and other wastes, including industrial wastes
generated on or discharged from real property within the bounds of the
service area of the POTW.
§ 230-13. Wastewater from outside POTW service area;
intermunicipal agreements.
The Town of Seneca Falls, on the recommendation of the Superintendent,
shall have the authority to enter into agreements to accept sewage and
other wastes, including industrial wastes, generated by or discharged from
persons outside the service area of the POTW.
§ 230-14. Moratorium on new connections.
At the recommendation of the Superintendent, who determines that one
or more segments of the POTW is exceeding its hydraulic capacity at any
time or any specific purpose of this Part 2 is being violated, the Town of
Seneca Falls shall have the authority to limit or deny new connections to the
POTW until the conditions leading to the moratorium are corrected. Such
correction may be by:
§ 230-15. Regulatory authority.
All requirements, directives and orders calling for mandatory use of the
sewers, within the service area of the POTW, for the proper discharge of
sewage and other wastes, including industrial wastes, shall be established
and given by the Town of Seneca Falls, NYSDEC, USEPA and/or other such
state or federal agencies which have enforcement powers.
A. If the person is a municipality, that municipality shall have enacted a
sewer use law as restrictive on the discharge of sewage and other
wastes as the restrictions contained in this Part 2.
B. If the person is not a municipality, the acceptance shall be made only
with the expressed written consent of the Superintendent (the issuance
of a permit) setting forth the terms and conditions of such acceptance.
A. Construction of new facilities.
B. Enlarging existing facilities.
C. Correction of inflow and infiltration.
D. Cleaning and repairing of existing facilities.
§ 230-11 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-15
1:152
ARTICLE V
Private Wastewater Disposal
§ 230-16. Permitted use.
Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of § 230-11, the
building lateral shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system
complying with the provisions of the rules and regulations of the NYSDOH,
to be enforced by the Superintendent and/or the Seneca County Health
Department.
§ 230-17. Multiple connections to septic tank prohibited.
No two separate permanent buildings, where the intended use for either is
for a distinct and separate business or a dwelling place for a private family
or families, shall be connected to the same individual septic tank and tile
absorption field.
§ 230-18. Application for construction permit; design requirements.
A completed application form, containing results of percolation tests,
computations and a plot plan, including the design and cross section of the
wastewater disposal system, in relation to lot lines, adjacent and on-site
well or water supply and buildings, shall be submitted to the Town of Seneca
Falls. A fee, established by Article XIII, shall accompany the application. The
wastewater disposal system shall be designed by a professional engineer,
licensed surveyor or architect and shall be in accordance with the NYSDOH
Standards for Waste Treatment Works or NYSDEC Standards for
Commercial and Institutional Facilities, as appropriate.
§ 230-19. Construction permit required; inspections.
A written construction permit shall be obtained from the Superintendent
before construction commences. The Superintendent, or his or her
designated representative, shall be permitted to inspect the construction
work at any stage, without prior notice.
§ 230-20. Repair, rebuilding or relocation of nuisance-causing
systems.
When the liquid or liquid-borne effluent from a private wastewater disposal
system enters any watercourse, ditch, storm sewer or water supply system
located in the Town of Seneca Falls in such a manner, volume and
concentration as to create a hazardous, offensive or objectionable condition,
in the opinion of the Superintendent, the Seneca County Health Department
or the NYSDOH, the owner of the premises upon which such wastewater
disposal system is located, upon receiving written notice from the
Superintendent to do so, shall, within 90 days after receipt of such notice,
repair, rebuild, or relocate such wastewater disposal system for the purpose
of eliminating such hazardous, offensive or objectionable conditions. The
repair, rebuilding or relocation of the system shall be accomplished in
§ 230-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-20
1:153
accordance with the rules and regulations of the NYSDOH and the Seneca
County Health Department, at the owner's expense.
§ 230-21. Operation and maintenance.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
system in a satisfactory manner at all times, at the owner's expense.
§ 230-22. Septage removal.
Where a private wastewater disposal system utilizes a cesspool or a septic
tank, septage shall be removed from the cesspool or septic tank by a
licensed hauler of trucked and hauled wastes at three-year intervals or
more frequently.
§ 230-23. Connection to available public sewer required.
At such time that a public sewer becomes available to a property, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer, in compliance with this Part
2, and any cesspool, septic tank and similar wastewater disposal facilities
shall be cleaned of septage by a licensed septage hauler and finally either
filled with clean sand, bank-run gravel or dirt or removed and properly
disposed. When the connection is made to the public sewer, the connection
to the private wastewater disposal facility shall be broken and both ends
of the break shall be plugged, as appropriate. Alternatively, the septic tank
effluent may be piped or pumped to the sewer; the owner shall provide an
easement to the septic tank for septage removal.
§ 230-24. Additional requirements.
No statement in this Part 2 shall be construed to prevent or interfere
with any additional requirements that may be deemed necessary by the
Superintendent to protect public health and welfare.
§ 230-20 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-24
1:154
ARTICLE VI
New Sewers or Sewer Extensions
§ 230-25. Design requirements; approval required.
New sanitary sewers and all extensions to sanitary sewers owned and
operated by the Town of Seneca Falls shall be designed by a professional
licensed to practice sewer design in the State of New York in accordance
with the Recommended Standards for Sewage Works, as adopted by the
Great Lakes - Upper Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers
(Ten State Standards), and in strict conformance with all requirements of
the NYSDEC and the development regulations of the Town of Seneca Falls.
Plans and specifications shall be submitted to and written approval shall be
obtained from the Superintendent, the Seneca County Health Department
and the NYSDEC before initiating any construction. The design shall
anticipate and allow for flows from all possible future extensions or
developments within the immediate drainage area. If, however, there is
inadequate capacity in any sewer which would convey the wastewater or
if there is insufficient capacity in the POTW treatment plant to treat the
wastewater properly, the application shall be denied. Sewer line and POTW
treatment plant current use shall be defined as the present use and the
unutilized use which has been committed, by resolution, to other users by
the Town Board.
§ 230-26. Approval; cost of on-premises facilities; installation;
inspections.
When a property owner, builder or developer proposes to construct sanitary
sewers or extensions to sanitary sewers in an area proposed for subdivision,
the plans, specifications and method of installation shall be subject to the
approval of the Superintendent and the Seneca County Health Department,
in accordance with § 230-25. Said property owner, builder or developer
shall pay for the entire installation, including a proportionate share of
the treatment plant, intercepting or trunk sewers, pumping stations, force
mains and all other Town of Seneca Falls expenses incidental thereto.
Each street lateral shall be installed and inspected pursuant to Article
VII, and inspection fees shall be paid by the applicant prior to initiating
construction. Design and installation of sewers shall be as specified in
§§ 230-28 through 230-31, and in conformance with Paragraphs 3 through
6 of ASTM Specification C-12. The installation of the sewer shall be subject
to periodic inspection by the Superintendent, without prior notice. The
Superintendent shall determine whether the work is proceeding in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications and whether the
completed work will conform with the approved plans and specifications.
The sewer, as constructed, must pass the infiltration test (or the exfiltration
test, with prior approval) required in § 230-33 before any building lateral is
connected thereto. The Superintendent shall be notified 30 days in advance
of the start of any construction actions so that such inspection frequencies
and procedures as may be necessary or required may be established. No
new sanitary sewers will be accepted by the Town of Seneca Falls until
§ 230-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-26
1:155
such construction inspections have been made so as to assure the Town of
compliance with this Part 2 and any amendments or additions thereto. The
Superintendent has the authority to require such excavation as necessary
to inspect any installed facilities if the facilities were covered or otherwise
backfilled before they were inspected so as to permit inspection of the
construction. The Superintendent shall report all findings of inspections and
tests to the Town Board.
§ 230-27. Plans, specification and methods of installation to
conform to requirements.
Plans, specifications and methods of installation shall conform to the
requirements of this Part 2. Components and materials of wastewater
facilities not covered in this Part 2, such as pumping stations, lift stations
or force mains, shall be designed in accordance with § 230-25 and shall
be clearly shown and detailed on the plans and specifications submitted
for approval. Force main details are covered in § 230-34. When requested,
the applicant shall submit to the Superintendent and to the Seneca County
Health Department all design calculations and other pertinent data to
supplement review of the plans and specifications. Results of
manufacturer's tests on each lot of pipe delivered to the job site shall also
be furnished, upon request.
§ 230-28. Sewer pipe materials and size.
A. Sewer pipe material shall be:
(1) Reinforced concrete pipe (Note that nonreinforced concrete pipe
shall not be used.)
(a) Portland cement shall conform to ASTM C-150 Type II.
(b) The pipe and specials shall conform to ASTM Specification
C-76.
(c) The reinforcing wire cage shall conform to ASTM Specification
A-15, A-82 or A-185, as appropriate.
(d) Entrained air shall be 5.0% to 9.0% by ASTM C-890.
(e) Water absorption and three-edge bearing tests shall conform to
ASTM Specification C-497.
(f) Gaskets shall conform to Sections 3.3 and 3.4 of AWWA
Specification C-302.
(2) Cast-iron pipe, extra-heavy.
(a) Pipe, fittings and specials shall conform to the requirements of
ASTM Specification A-74 or ANSI A-21.11.
(b) Gaskets shall conform to ASTM Specification C-564.
§ 230-26 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-28
1:156
§ 230-29. Safety and load factors.
(3) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe, heavy wall.
(a) Pipe shall be made from Class 12454-B materials or better in
accordance with ANSI/ASTM Specification D-1784.
(b) Pipe and accessories shall conform to the requirements of the
following, with a minimum pipe stiffness of 46 PSI at a
maximum deflection of 5%:
[1] ANSI/ASTM D-3034, four inches to 15 inches.
[2] ASTM F-679 Type I, 18 inches to 27 inches.
(4) Ductile iron pipe.
(a) Pipe, fittings and specials shall be manufactured in accordance
with ASTM Specification A-746. Pipe shall have a minimum
thickness of Class 50. Fittings shall conform to ANSI
Specification A-21.11 and have a minimum pressure class
rating of 150 PSI.
(b) All pipe and fittings shall be cement mortar lined in accordance
with ANSI Specification A-21.4 at twice the specified thickness,
and have an internal and external bituminous seal coating.
(c) Closure pieces shall be jointed by means of a mechanical
coupling of the cast-sleeve type.
(5) Other pipe materials. Other pipe materials require prior written
approval of the Superintendent before being installed.
B. The minimum internal pipe diameter shall be eight inches for gravity
sewers and three inches for low-pressure sewers.
C. Joints for the selected pipe shall be designed and manufactured such
that O-ring gaskets of the snap-on type are used.
D. Gaskets shall be continuous, solid, natural or synthetic rubber and shall
provide a positive compression seal in the assembled joint, such that
the requirements of § 230-33 are met.
E. Joint preparation and assembly shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations.
F. Wye branch fittings, as approved by the Superintendent, shall be
installed, for connection of street laterals, in accordance with §§ 230-46
through 230-48.
A. Selection of pipe class shall be predicated on the following criteria:
(1) Safety factor: 1.5.
(2) Load factor: 1.7.
§ 230-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-29
1:157
§ 230-30. Sewer pipe installation.
(3) Weight of soil: 120 pounds per cubic foot.
(4) Wheel loading: 16,000 pounds.
B. Utilizing the foregoing information, design shall be made as outlined in
Chapter IX of the Water Pollution Control Federation11 Manual of
Practice No. 9, latest edition, Design and Construction of Sanitary and
Storm Sewers, and the pipe shall have sufficient structural strength to
support all loads to be placed on the pipe, with a safety factor as
specified above.
C. PVC pipe shall not be encased in concrete due to their different
coefficients of linear thermal expansion.
A. Local utilities shall be contacted to verify construction plans and to
make arrangements to disconnect all utility services, where required to
undertake the construction work. The utility services shall later be
reconnected. The work shall be scheduled so that there is minimum
inconvenience to local residents. Residents shall be provided with
proper and timely notice regarding disconnection of utilities.
B. The construction right-of-way shall be cleared only to the extent needed
for construction. Clearing consists of removal of trees which interfere
with construction, removal of underbrush, logs and stumps and other
organic matter, removal of refuse, garbage and trash, removal of ice
and snow and removal of telephone and power poles and posts. Any tree
which will not hinder construction shall not be removed and shall be
protected from damage by any construction equipment. Debris shall not
be burned but hauled for disposal in an approved manner.
C. The public shall be protected from personal and property damage as a
result of the construction work.
D. Traffic shall be maintained at all times in accordance with applicable
highway permits. Where no highway permits are required, at least 1/2
of a street shall be kept open for traffic flow.
E. Erosion control shall be performed throughout the project to minimize
the erosion of soils onto lands or into waters adjacent to or affected by
the work. Erosion control can be effected by limiting the amount of
clearing and grubbing prior to trenching, proper scheduling of the pipe
installation work, minimizing time of open trench, prompt grading and
seeding and filtration of drainage.
F. The trench shall be excavated only wide enough for proper installation
of the sewer pipe, manhole and appurtenances. Allowances may be
made for sheeting, dewatering and other similar actions to complete
the work. Roads, sidewalks and curbs shall be cut, by sawing or by
11.Editor's Note: Now "Water Environment Federation."
§ 230-29 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-30
1:158
other methods as approved by the Superintendent, before trench
excavation is initiated.
G. Under ordinary conditions, excavation shall be by open cut from the
ground surface. However, tunneling or boring under structures other
than buildings may be permitted. Such structures include crosswalks,
curbs, gutters, pavements, trees, driveways and railroad tracks.
H. Open trenches shall be protected at all hours of the day with
barricades, as required.
I. Trenches shall not be open for more than 30 feet in advance of pipe
installation nor left unfilled for more than 30 feet in the rear of the
installed pipe, when the work is in progress, without permission of the
Superintendent. When work is not in progress, including overnight,
weekends and holidays, the trench shall be backfilled to ground
surface.
J. The trench shall be excavated approximately six inches deeper than the
final pipe grade. When unsuitable soils are encountered, these shall be
excavated to a maximum depth of 2 1/2 feet below the final pipe invert
grade and replaced with select materials.
K. Ledge rock, boulders and large stones shall be removed from the trench
sides and bottom. The trench shall be over-excavated at least 12 inches
for five feet, at the transition from rock bottom to earth bottom,
centered on the transition.
L. Maintenance of grade, elevation and alignment shall be done by some
suitable method or combination of methods.
M. No structure shall be undercut unless specifically approved by the
Superintendent.
N. Proper devices shall be provided and maintained operational at all
times to remove all water from the trench as it enters. At no time shall
the sewer line be used for removal of water from the trench.
O. To protect workers and to prevent caving, shoring and sheeting shall be
used, as needed. Caving shall not be used to backfill the trench.
Sheeting shall not be removed but cut off no lower than one foot above
the pipe crown and no higher than one foot below final grade, and left in
the trench during backfill operations.
P. The pipe barrel shall be supported, along its entire length, on a
minimum of six inches of crusher-run maximum one-half-inch stone free
of organic material. This foundation shall be firmly tamped in the
excavation.
Q. Bell holes shall be hand excavated, as appropriate.
R. Pipe shall be laid from low elevation to high elevation. The pipe bell
shall be up-gradient; the pipe spigot shall be down-gradient.
§ 230-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-30
1:159
§ 230-31. Cleanout installation.
§ 230-32. Manholes and manhole installation.
S. Joint preparation and assembly shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's written instructions.
T. The grade and alignment shall be checked and made correct. The pipe
shall be in straight alignment. Any negotiation of curves shall be at
manholes, except when site conditions require alternative pipe laying
procedures. These alternative procedures, including bending the pipe
barrel, deflecting the joint and using special fittings, shall require prior
written approval of the plans and also written confirmation approval of
need by the Superintendent after examination of the site conditions.
U. When a smaller sewer joins a larger one, the invert of the larger sewer
shall be lowered sufficiently to maintain the same hydraulic gradient.
An approximate method which may be used for securing this result is to
place the zero and 0.8 depth of both sewers at the same elevation.
V. Pipe shall be bedded and covered by No. 1 stone, sand or stone dust and
shall be placed over the laid pipe to a depth of at least six inches. The
embedment of thermoplastic pipe shall be in accordance with ASTM
D-2321, using Class 1A or 1B backfill materials. Care shall be exercised
so that stone is packed under the pipe haunches. Care shall be
exercised so that the pipe is not moved during placement of the crushed
stone.
W. The migration of fines from surrounding backfill or native soils shall be
restricted by gradation of embedment materials or by use of suitable
filter fabric.
X. The remaining portion of the trench above the pipe embedment shall be
backfilled in foot lifts which shall be firmly compacted. Compaction
near/under roadways, driveways, sidewalks and other structures shall
be to 95% of the maximum moisture-density relationship, as
determined by ASTM Specification D-698, Method D. Ice, snow or
frozen material shall not be used for backfill.
A. Cleanouts for low-pressure sewers shall be placed at intervals of
approximately 400 feet to 500 feet, at major changes of direction,
where one collection main joins another main and at the upstream end
of each main branch.
B. The design of the cleanouts shall be as approved by the Superintendent.
A. Design of all manholes shall be submitted to the Superintendent and
shall receive approval prior to placement.
B. Manholes shall be placed where there is a change in slope or alignment
and at intervals not exceeding 400 linear feet and at all dead ends,
except as authorized by the Superintendent.
§ 230-30 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-32
1:160
C. Manhole bases shall be constructed or placed on a minimum of six
inches of crusher-run maximum one-half-inch stone free of organic
materials.
D. Manhole bases shall be constructed of four-thousand-pounds-persquare-
inch (twenty-eight-day) concrete eight inches thick or shall be
precast bases properly bedded in the excavation. Field-constructed
bases shall be monolithic, properly reinforced and extend at least six
inches beyond the outside walls of lower manhole sections. Precast
manhole bases shall extend at least six inches beyond the outside walls
of lower manhole sections.
E. Manhole walls.
(1) Manholes shall be constructed using precast minimum four-footdiameter
concrete manhole barrel sections, and an eccentric top
section, conforming to ASTM Specification C-478, with the
following exceptions on wall thickness:
Manhole Diameter
(feet)
Wall Thickness
(inches)
4 5
5 6
6 7
6 1/2 7 1/2
7 8
8 9
(2) All sections shall be cast solid, without lifting holes.
(3) Flat-top slabs shall be a minimum of eight inches thick and shall be
capable of supporting a H-20 loading.
F. All joints between sections shall be sealed with an O-ring rubber
gasket, meeting the same specifications as pipe joint gaskets, or butyl
joint sealant completely filling the joint.
G. All joints shall be sealed against infiltration. All metal parts shall be
thickly coated with bitumastic or elastomeric compound to prevent
corrosion.
H. No steps or ladder rungs shall be installed in the inside or outside
manhole walls at any time.
I. No holes shall be cut into the manhole sections closer than six inches to
joint surfaces.
J. Manholes which extend above grade shall not have an eccentric top
section. The top plate shall be large enough to accommodate the coverlifting
device and the cover.
§ 230-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-32
1:161
K. The elevation of the top section shall be such that the cover frame top
elevation is 0.5 foot above the one-hundred-year flood elevation (in a
field), 0.5 foot above a lawn elevation, or at finished road or sidewalk
grade.
L. When located in a traveled area (road or sidewalk), the manhole frame
and cover shall be heavy-duty cast iron. When located in a lawn or in a
field, the manhole frame and cover may be light-duty cast iron. The
cover shall be a minimum of 36 inches in diameter. The minimum
combined weight of the heavy-duty frame and thirty-six-inch cover shall
be 735 pounds, plus or minus 5%. The minimum combined weight of the
light-duty frame and thirty-six-inch cover shall be 420 pounds, plus or
minus 5%. The mating surfaces shall be machined and painted with tar
pitch varnish. The cover shall not rock in the frame. Infiltration between
the cover and frame shall be prevented by proper design and painting.
Covers shall have "sanitary sewer" cast into them. Covers shall have
lifting holes suitable for any lifting/jacking device. The lifting holes shall
be designed so that infiltration is prevented.
M. A drop of at least 0.10 foot shall be provided between incoming and
outgoing sewers on all junction manholes and on manholes with bends
greater than 45°.
N. Inverts and shelves/benches shall be placed after testing the manholes
and sewers.
O. Benches shall be level and slope to the flow channel at about one inch
per foot.
P. The minimum depth of the flow channel shall be the nominal diameter
of the smaller pipe. The channel shall have a steel-trowel finish. The
flow channel shall have a smooth curvature from inlet to outlet.
Q. Manhole frames, installed at grade, shall be set in a full bed of mortar
with no fewer than two courses nor more than four courses of brick
underneath to allow for later elevation adjustment. In lieu of brick,
grade rings may be used for elevation adjustment. Grade rings shall not
exceed six inches in depth. The total number of grade rings shall not
exceed 12 inches in height; however, in no event shall more than three
grade rings be used.
R. Manholes which extend above grade shall have the frames cast into the
manhole top plate. The top plate shall be securely anchored to the
manhole barrel, by a minimum of six one-half-inch corrosion-resistant
anchor bolts, to prevent overturning when the cover is removed. The
anchor bolts shall be electrically isolated from the manhole frame and
cover.
S. Internal drop pipes and fittings shall be PVC plastic sewer pipe in
compliance with ASTM D-2241. Corrosion-resistant anchors shall be
used to attach the drop pipe to the inside surface of the manhole barrel.
§ 230-32 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-33
1:162
§ 230-33. Testing.
A. Infiltration/Exfiltration testing.
(1) All sanitary sewers or extensions to sanitary sewers, including
manholes, shall satisfy requirements of a final infiltration test
before they will be approved and wastewater flow permitted by the
Town of Seneca Falls. The infiltration rate shall not exceed 25
gallons per 24 hours per mile per nominal diameter in inches. An
exfiltration test may be substituted for the infiltration test; the
same rate shall not be exceeded. The exfiltration test shall be
performed by the applicant, under the supervision of the
Superintendent, who shall have the responsibility for making
proper and accurate measurements required. The exfiltration test
consists of filling the pipe with water to provide a head of at least
five feet above the top of the pipe or five feet above groundwater,
whichever is higher, at the highest point under test, and then
measuring the loss of water, from the pipe section under test, by
the amount of water which must be added to maintain the original
level. However, under no circumstances shall the head at the
downstream manhole exceed 10 feet or fill to within six inches of
the top of the downstream manhole. Should this condition prevail,
the testing methods in Subsections C and/or D shall be utilized. In
this test, the test section must remain filled with water for at least
24 hours prior to taking any measurements. Exfiltration shall be
measured by the drop of water level in a standpipe with a closed
bottom end or in one of the sewer manholes serving the test
section. When a standpipe and plug arrangement is used in the
upper manhole in the test section, there shall be some positive
method for releasing entrapped air prior to taking any
measurements.
(2) Test section. The test section shall be as ordered or as approved,
but in no event longer than 1,000 feet. In the case of sewers laid on
steep grades, the test length may be limited by the maximum
allowable internal pressure on the pipe and joints at the lower end
of the test section. For purposes of determining the leakage rate of
the test section, manholes shall be considered as sections of fortyeight-
inch-diameter pipe, five feet long. The maximum allowable
leakage rate for such a section is 1.1 gallons per 24 hours. If
leakage exceeds the allowable rate, then necessary repairs or
replacements shall be made and the section retested.
(3) Test period. The test period, during which the test measurements
are taken, shall not be less than two hours.
(4) Pipe lamping. Prior to testing, the section shall be lamped. Any
length of pipe out of straight alignment shall be realigned.
B. Deflection testing. Also prior to testing, all plastic pipe in the test
section shall be tested for deflection. Deflection testing shall involve the
§ 230-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-33
1:163
pulling of a rigid ball or mandrel, whose diameter is 95% of the pipe
inside diameter, through the pipe. Any length of pipe with a deflection
greater than 5% shall be replaced. The test section shall be flushed
just prior to deflection testing. The test shall not be performed with a
mechanical pulling device.
C. Low-pressure air testing alternative.
(1) In lieu of hydrostatic testing (exfiltration or infiltration), lowpressure
air testing may be employed. Low-pressure air tests shall
conform to ASTM Specification C-828. All sections to be tested
shall be cleaned and flushed and shall have been backfilled prior to
testing. Air shall be added until the internal pressure of the test
section is raised to approximately 4.0 PSIG. The air pressure test
shall be based on the time, measured in seconds, for the air
pressure to drop from 3.5 PSIG to 2.5 PSIG.
(2) Acceptance is based on limits tabulated in the Specification Time
Required for a 1.0 PSIG Pressure Drop in the Uni-Bell PVC Pipe
Association's Recommended Practice For Low-Pressure Air Testing
of Installed Sewer Pipe.
(3) Before pressure is applied to the line, all connections shall be firmly
plugged. Before the test period starts, the air shall be given
sufficient time to cool to ambient temperature in the test section.
(4) If the test section is below groundwater, the test pressure shall be
increased by an amount sufficient to compensate for groundwater
hydrostatic pressure; however, the test pressure shall not exceed
10 PSI or a lower pressure as required by the Superintendent.
(5) The pressure test gauge shall have been recently calibrated, and a
copy of the calibration results shall be made available to the
Superintendent prior to testing.
D. Vacuum testing alternative.
(1) In lieu of hydrostatic testing (exfiltration or infiltration), vacuum
testing may be employed for testing of sewer lines and manholes.
Sewer lines and manholes shall be tested separately. All sewer lines
to be tested shall be cleaned and flushed and shall have been
backfilled prior to testing. The vacuum test shall be based on the
time, measured in seconds, for the vacuum to decrease from 10
inches of mercury to nine inches of mercury for manholes and from
seven inches of mercury to six inches of mercury for sewers.
(2) Acceptance of manholes is based on the following:
§ 230-33 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-33
1:164
§ 230-34. Force mains.
Manhole Depth
(feet)
Manhole Diameter
(feet)
Time to Drop 1 inch
Hg
(10 inches to 9 inches)
(seconds)
10 or less 4 120
10 to 15 4 150
15 to 25 4 180
For five-foot-diameter manholes, add 30 seconds to the times
above.
For six-foot-diameter manholes, add 60 seconds to the times
above.
(3) If the test on the manhole fails (the time is less than that tabulated
above), necessary repairs shall be made and the vacuum test
repeated until the manhole passes the test.
(4) Acceptance of sewers (seven inches Hg to six inches Hg) is based
on the time tabulated in the Specification Time Required for a 0.5
PSIG Pressure Drop in the Uni-Bell PVC Pipe Association's
Recommended Practice For Low-Pressure Air Testing of Installed
Sewer Pipe.
(5) The vacuum test gauge shall have been recently calibrated, and a
copy of the calibration results shall be made available to the
Superintendent prior to testing.
A. Force mains serving sewage lifting devices, such as grinder pumps and
pump stations, shall be designed in accordance with § 230-25.
Additional design requirements are as follows:
(1) Force main pipe material shall be:
(a) Ductile iron pipe.
[1] Pipe shall conform to ANSI A21.51. The minimum wall
thickness shall be Class 52 (ANSI A21.50). The pipe shall
be clearly marked with either "D" or "DUCTILE."
[2] Fittings shall conform to ANSI A21.10.
[3] Pipe and fittings shall be furnished with push-on joints
conforming to ANSI A21.11.
[4] Pipe and fittings shall be cement-mortar-lined and have an
internal and external bituminous seal coating.
§ 230-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-34
1:165
(b) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe shall conform to ASTM
D-2241. Materials used in the manufacture of PVC pipe shall
meet ASTM C-1784. The minimum wall thickness shall be
SDR-2 1. Fittings shall conform to ASTM D-2241. Joints and
gaskets shall conform to ASTM D-2241, D-1869 and F-477.
(c) Other pipe materials. Other pipe materials require prior
written approval of the Superintendent before being installed.
(2) Trenching, bedding and backfilling shall be in accordance with
§ 230-30.
(3) Joint preparation and assembly shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's written instructions.
(4) Anchorages, concrete blocking and/or mechanical restraint shall be
provided when there is a change of direction of 7 1/2° or greater.
(5) Drain valves shall be placed at low points.
(6) Automatic air-relief valves shall be placed at high points and at
four-hundred-foot intervals on level force main runs.
(7) Air relief and drain valves shall be suitably protected from freezing.
(8) When the daily average design detention time in the force main
exceeds 20 minutes, the manhole and sewer line receiving the force
main discharge or the sewage shall be treated so that corrosion of
the manhole and the exiting line are prevented. The corrosion is
caused by sulfuric acid biochemically produced from hydrogen
sulfide anaerobically produced in the force main.
(9) The force main shall terminate, in the receiving manhole, at a PVC
plastic sewer pipe T. The vertical arms of the T shall be twice the
diameter of the force main. The upper arm shall be at least four feet
long; the lower arm shall terminate in a PVC plastic sewer pipe 90°
elbow in a flow channel directed to the manhole exit pipe. The T
and its arms shall be securely fastened to the inside surface of the
manhole wall using corrosion-resistant anchors.
B. Force main testing. All force mains shall be subjected to hydrostatic
pressure of 150% of the normal operating pressure. The duration of the
test, at pressure, shall be at least two hours. Before conducting the test,
the pipe shall be filled with water and all air shall be expelled. During
the test, water shall be added, as needed, to maintain the test pressure.
The amount of water added shall be recorded so as to calculate leakage.
Leakage shall not exceed 25 gallons per day per mile per inch of
nominal pipe diameter. During the test, the owner and the
Superintendent shall walk the route of the force main and examine the
exposed pipe and the ground covering any backfilled pipe to discover
leaks. Leakage in excess of that specified above shall be corrected with
new material at the owner's expense and the test repeated. Any
§ 230-34 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-34
1:166
§ 230-35. Final acceptance by Town; guaranty of materials and
workmanship.
All sanitary sewers and extensions to sanitary sewers constructed at the
applicant's expense, after final approval and acceptance by the
Superintendent and concurrence by the Town Board, shall become the
property of the Town of Seneca Falls and shall thereafter be operated
and maintained by the Town. No sanitary sewer shall be accepted by
the Town until four copies of as-built drawings have been so filed with
the Superintendent and the Superintendent has approved the submitted
drawings. Said sewers, after their acceptance by the Town, shall be
guaranteed against defects in materials or workmanship for one year by the
applicant. The guarantee shall be in such form and contain such provision
as deemed necessary by the Town Board, secured by a surety bond or such
other security as the Town of Seneca Falls may approve.
§ 230-36. Liability insurance coverage during construction period.
observed leaks shall be repaired at the owner's expense. Each test
section length shall be as approved by the Superintendent but in no
event longer than 1,000 feet.
A. All contractors engaged in connecting house laterals with sanitary
sewers who perform any work within the right-of-way of any highway
shall file a bond in the amount of $5,000 with the Town Clerk to
indemnify the Town against loss, cost, damage or expense sustained or
recovered on account of any negligence, omission or act of the
applicant for such a permit or any of his or her or their agents arising or
resulting directly or indirectly by reason of such permit or consent or of
any act, construction or excavation done, made or permitted under
authority of such permit or consent. All bonds shall contain a clause
that permits given by the Town of Seneca Falls may be revoked at any
time for just cause.
B. Before commencing work, the above contractor shall file insurance
certificates with the Town Clerk for the following:
(1) Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance as
required by the laws of the state covering the contractor.
(2) Personal injury liability having limits of not less than $1,000,000
each occurrence and $500,000 aggregate (completed operations/
products, personal injury).
(3) Property damage liability having limits of not less than $1,000,000
for all damages arising during the life of the contract; and shall
include, but not be limited to, the following designated hazards:
(a) Premises and operations;
(b) Independent contractors;
§ 230-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-36
1:167
(c) Completed operations and products;
(d) Property damage; and
(e) Explosions, collapse and underground.
(4) Comprehensive automobile liability (including nonowned and hired
automobiles) having limits of not less than:
(a) Bodily injury:
[1] Each person: $300,000.
[2] Each occurrence: $500,000.
(b) Property damage, each occurrence: $500,000.
(5) Business excess liability insurance in the amount of $2,000,000.
(6) All insurance policies must provide for five business days' notice to
the Town of Seneca Falls before cancellation and must cover all
liabilities of the Town and be in a form approved by the Town Board
and be in a satisfactory form approved by the Town Board.
C. Where it is necessary to enter upon or excavate any highway or cut any
pavement, sidewalk or curbing, permission must be obtained from the
Superintendent of Streets if a Town of Seneca Falls highway is involved,
from the County Department of Public Works if a county highway is
involved, and/or the New York State Department of Transportation if a
state highway is involved.
D. The minimum insurance limits above shall be as established by the
Town Board and shall be subject to periodic review and adjustment, as
appropriate, by the Town Board.
§ 230-36 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-36
1:168
ARTICLE VII
Building and Street Laterals
§ 230-37. Permit required for sewer connections.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
§ 230-38. Inflow/Infiltration prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm cooling
water or unpolluted industrial waters to any sanitary sewer. Swimming pool
drains shall not be connected to any sanitary sewer.
§ 230-39. Sewer lateral permits; application.
§ 230-40. Separate building laterals; laterals under buildings.
A. There shall be two classes of sewer lateral permits:
(1) For residential, commercial and institutional service.
(2) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
B. In either case, a permit application shall be submitted to the
Superintendent. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent, in the
judgment of the Superintendent. A fee for residential, commercial,
institutional and industrial users as established by the Town Board shall
accompany the application.
C. Connections to existing manholes shall be made as directed by the
Superintendent.
A. A separate and independent building lateral shall be provided for every
building requiring sanitary facilities. When, however, there is a building
behind a front building, the second building may use the front
building's building lateral, if there is no other way to provide sanitary
service to the back building.
B. New street laterals and/or building laterals shall not go under building
basements. In like fashion, a building shall not be constructed over an
existing lateral; the lateral shall be relocated after the Superintendent
has approved plans showing the relocation. If relocation is not
physically possible, then the lateral shall be exposed and totally
encapsulated in not less than three inches of concrete or exposed and
walled and the building rooms above positively ventilated outdoors. All
existing manholes in or under the basement shall be sealed airtight in a
manner acceptable to the Superintendent. No new manholes shall be
constructed on the portion of the lateral under the building.
§ 230-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-41
1:169
§ 230-41. Laterals serving several buildings.
When building laterals are to serve multiple dwelling structures, the
building lateral shall be sized in accordance with the metered water use and
with sound professional engineering judgment.
§ 230-42. Laterals serving complexes.
Where a lateral sewer is to serve a complex of industrial, commercial,
institutional or dwelling structures, special design of the building lateral
system shall be required. Such lateral sewer shall be connected to the
public sewer through a manhole. The Superintendent shall determine if
and where this connection to the public sewer is required. If required, a
new manhole shall be installed in the public sewer pursuant to §§ 230-31
and 230-94, and the lateral connection made and tested as directed by the
Superintendent. Plans and specifications shall be prepared and submitted
for approval pursuant to this Part 2.
§ 230-43. Dry sewers.
Dry sewers shall be designed and installed in accordance with this Part 2.
§ 230-44. Use of existing building laterals.
Existing building laterals may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination by the Superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this Part 2.
§ 230-45. Lateral pipe materials.
A. Building and street lateral pipe materials shall be one of the following:
(1) Tar-coated, service grade, cast-iron soil pipe conforming to ASTM
Specification A-74, Cast Iron Pipe and Fittings. All dimensions,
weight and markings of the pipe shall conform to the requirements
of ANSI, Designation A-112.5.1, except spigot ends shall be plain
end if gasket joints are used.
(2) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe and fittings conforming to ASTM
Specification D-3034.73, "SDR-35 or SDR-21 Polyvinyl Chloride
(PVC) Sewer Pipe and Fittings." All pipe shall be suitable for
gravity sewer service. Provisions shall be made for contraction and
expansion at each joint with a rubber ring. The bell shall consist of
an integral wall section stiffened with two PVC retainer rings which
securely lock the solid cross-section ring into position. Minimum
pipe stiffness (F/Y) at five-percent deflection shall be 46 pounds per
square inch when tested in accordance with ASTM Specification
D-2412.
(3) High-density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe shall be made from highdensity,
extra-high-molecular-weight compound equaling a PE3408
§ 230-41 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-45
1:170
§ 230-46. Street lateral to public sewer connection.
§ 230-47. Laterals for future use; as-built drawings.
The street lateral, including the wye and eighth-bend fittings, shall be
connected to the main sewer at the time of constructing the main sewer,
for each proposed lot for either immediate or future development. Laterals
installed for future development shall be fitted a standard plug approved
for use by the Superintendent. All sewer connections shall be via a properly
installed saddle on the main sewer pipe. No portion of the lateral pipe shall
protrude into the main sewer pipe. The location of all lateral connections
shall be field marked with a two-inch-by-six-inch corrosion- and rot-resistant
board. The marker board shall extend from the depth of the lateral to a
minimum of two feet above grade. The location of all lateral connections
shall be indicated on a drawing, with a minimum of three tie lines indicated.
Four copies of this drawing, showing the as-built location of these
connections, shall be furnished to the Superintendent. A refundable deposit
as set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board shall be placed with
designation and shall conform to ASTM 1248 and ASTM 3350; with
a cell classification of 345434 C.
B. Any part of the building or street lateral that is located within five feet
of a water main or water service shall be constructed of cast-iron soil
pipe. Cast-iron soil pipe may be required by the Superintendent where
the building or street lateral is likely to be damaged by tree roots. If
installed on fill or unstable ground, the building or street lateral shall be
of cast-iron soil pipe, although other pipe material may be permitted if
such pipe is uniformly supported on a poured concrete cradle approved
by the Superintendent. The distance between consecutive joints, as
measured along the center line of the installed pipe, shall not be less
than 10 feet, except under abnormal circumstances, in which case this
dimension may be diminished if approved by the Superintendent. The
size and slope of building and street laterals shall be subject to approval
by the Superintendent, but in no event shall the internal pipe diameter
be less than four inches, nor shall the pipe slope be less than 1/4 inch
per foot.
C. The street lateral may include a full port curb stop with flow-through
diameter equal to that of the lateral. A curb box shall be installed.
A. At the point of connection of a street lateral to a main sewer, a standard
wye fitting and sufficient 1/8 (45°) bend fittings shall be used. The wye
fittings shall be installed to enter main at two o'clock or eight o'clock
positions so that flow in the arm shall transition smoothly into the flow
in the public sewer. No lateral connection shall be made to the public
sewer which permits the flow into the public sewer from the lateral to
enter at right angles.
B. The inside diameter of the fittings shall be same diameter as the street
lateral inside diameter.
§ 230-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-47
1:171
Town of Seneca Falls to assure receipt of these as-builts. The deposit shall
be placed when application is made. No sanitary sewer shall be accepted by
the Town of Seneca Falls until four copies of this record drawing have been
so filed with the Superintendent and the Superintendent has approved the
submitted drawings.
§ 230-48. Special manhole requirements.
When any street lateral is to serve a school, hospital or similar institution or
public housing or is to serve a complex of industrial or commercial buildings
or which, in the opinion of the Superintendent, will receive wastewater or
industrial wastes of such volume or character that frequent maintenance of
said building or street lateral is anticipated, then such street lateral shall
be connected to the public sewer through a manhole. The Superintendent
shall determine if and where this type of connection to the public sewer is
required. Connections to existing manholes shall be made as directed by the
Superintendent. If required, a new manhole shall be installed in the public
sewer pursuant to §§ 230-32 and 230-94, and the lateral connection made
thereto as directed by the Superintendent.
§ 230-49. Laterals at and near buildings.
§ 230-50. Lifting of wastewater.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, wastewater carried by such drain shall be lifted by
mechanical means and discharged to the building lateral, on approval of the
Superintendent.
§ 230-51. Lateral pipe installation.
All excavations required for the installation of a building or street lateral
shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the
A. Building laterals laid parallel to a bearing wall shall not be installed
closer than three feet to such wall. The building lateral shall enter the
basement through the basement wall no less than 12 inches above the
basement floor. In no event shall any building lateral be placed below
the basement floor, except with the express written approval of the
Superintendent.
B. The building lateral shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight
alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only
with properly curved pipe and fittings. Changes of direction of 90° or
greater shall be made with a cleanout which extends to grade,
terminating in a terminal box set in concrete. In building laterals, said
cleanouts shall be provided so that the maximum distance between
cleanouts is 100 feet. The ends of all building or street laterals which
are not connected to the interior plumbing of the building, for any
reason, shall be sealed against infiltration by a suitable stopper, plug, or
by other approved means.
§ 230-47 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-51
1:172
Superintendent. Pipe laying and backfilling, regardless of pipe material
used, shall be performed in general accordance with Paragraphs 3 through
6 of ASTM Specification C-12, except that trench width, measured at the
top of the installed pipe, shall not exceed the outside pipe diameter plus
14 inches, and except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has
been inspected. The depth of cover over the pipe shall be sufficient to afford
protection from frost, but in no case shall such depth be less than four feet.
Where it is physically impossible to provide cover of four feet, the depth
may be reduced to a minimum of two feet and the pipe shall be insulated,
as approved by the Superintendent.
§ 230-52. Joints.
§ 230-53. Building lateral and street lateral connection.
A. Watertight joints. All joints and connections shall be made watertight.
B. Cast-iron pipe poured joints. Poured joints for cast-iron pipe shall be
firmly packed with oakum or hemp, and the annulus filled with an
approved compound not less than one inch deep. The compound shall
be run in with a single pouring and caulked tight, if appropriate for the
compound used. No paint, varnish, or other coatings shall be permitted
on the jointing material until after the joint has been tested and
approved. The transition joint between cast-iron pipe and other pipe
materials shall be made with special adapters and jointing materials
approved by the Superintendent. If such joints are hot-poured, the
material shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the
joint when subjected to a temperature of 160° F., nor be soluble in any
of the wastes carried by the lateral.
C. Cast-iron push joints. Premolded gaskets may be used for hub and
plain-end cast-iron pipe joints and joints with fittings, if approved by the
Superintendent. The gasket shall be a neoprene compression-type unit
which provides a positive seal in the assembled joint. The gasket shall
be a premolded, one-piece unit designed for joining the cast-iron hub
and plain-end soil pipe and fittings. The assembled joint shall be sealed
by compression of the gasket between the exterior surface of the spigot
and the interior surface of the hub. The joint shall be assembled
following the manufacturer's recommendations using acceptable
lubricant and special pipe-coupling tools designed for that purpose. The
plain spigot end shall be forced into the hub end of the pipe for the full
depth of the hub itself. The lubricant shall be a bland, flax-based,
nontoxic material and shall not chemically attack the gasket material.
D. PVC push joints. Joints for PVC sewer pipe shall follow the
manufacturer's recommendations, using properly designed couplings
and rubber gaskets pursuant to the published information relating
thereto and conforming to the applicable ASTM specification identified
in § 230-45.
§ 230-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-53
1:173
§ 230-54. Cleanout repair/replacement.
If, in the judgment of the Superintendent, it is determined that a building
lateral without a property line cleanout needs repair or replacement, the
Town may install a cleanout at the property line, at the property owner's
expense, such that the street lateral can be maintained independently of the
building lateral.
§ 230-55. Street lateral replacement; ownership.
Any existing street lateral which, upon examination by the Superintendent,
is determined to be in need of replacement will be replaced with a new
street lateral with a property line cleanout. The replacement street lateral
shall be constructed by a licensed plumber. The cost of constructing the
replacement street lateral and cleanout shall be at the property owner's
expense. Once the replacement street lateral and cleanout have been
constructed and approved by the Superintendent, the new street lateral
A. The connection of the building lateral to an existing street lateral shall
be made at the property line. Except as provided under §§ 230-26 and
230-27, if a street lateral has not previously been provided, the street
lateral will be constructed from the existing public sewer to the
property line by a licensed plumber at the owner's expense. The street
lateral shall be installed with a properly sealed and covered cleanout to
grade located at the property line. All laterals shall run perpendicular
from the main to the cleanout with no bends or FERNCO’s without prior
approval of the Superintendent. The cleanout shall terminate in a castiron
cover and be encased in concrete.
B. The cost of constructing the street lateral from the existing public
sewer to the property line shall be at the property owner's expense; all
subsequent costs and expense incidental to the installation and
connection of the building lateral shall also be borne by the owner.
C. The property owner shall indemnify the Town of Seneca Falls from any
loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building lateral.
D. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain, repair or
replace the building lateral, as needed.
E. The method of connection of the building lateral to the street lateral will
be dependent upon the type of sewer pipe material and, in all cases,
shall be approved by the Superintendent. After installation of the street
lateral has been approved by the Superintendent, the new street lateral
shall become the property of the Town of Seneca Falls. Any subsequent
repairs to the new street laterals shall be made by the Town of Seneca
Falls at the Town's expense.
F. Any connection of a sewer lateral to a manhole is prohibited without
prior approval of the Superintendent.
§ 230-53 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-55
1:174
shall become the property of the Town of Seneca Falls. Any repairs to new
street laterals shall be made by the Town at the Town's expense.
§ 230-56. Testing.
The street lateral, building lateral or the combined lateral shall be tested
for infiltration/exfiltration by:
§ 230-57. Inspection and supervision of connection.
§ 230-58. Trench inspections.
When trenches are excavated for the laying of building lateral pipes or
for laying of street lateral pipes, such trenches shall be inspected by the
Superintendent. Before the trenches are backfilled, the person performing
such work shall notify the Superintendent when the laying of the building
lateral is completed, and no backfilling of trenches shall begin until
approval is obtained from the Superintendent.
§ 230-59. Protection of excavations; restoration.
All excavations for constructing building laterals shall be adequately
protected with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
Superintendent. When installation requires disturbance of paved public
roads and shoulders, restoration shall involve backfilling to road grade.
Shortly thereafter, the Town of Seneca Falls Department of Public Works
(DPW) shall complete road and shoulder restoration to Town standards.
The cost for such final road and shoulder restoration by the DPW shall be
included with the fees paid with the application for the permit required in
§ 230-41.
§ 230-60. Interior cleanout.
A. Any full pipe method described in § 230-33; or
B. A suitable joint method, with the prior written approval of the
Superintendent.
A. The applicant for the building lateral permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the building lateral is ready for inspection and
connection is to be made to the street lateral. The connection shall be
made under the supervision of the Superintendent.
B. The applicant for the street lateral permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the street lateral is ready for inspection and
connection is to be made to the main sewer. The connection shall be
made under the supervision of the Superintendent.
A. An interior cleanout fitting shall be provided for each building lateral at
a readily accessible location, preferably just inside the basement wall.
§ 230-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-60
1:175
§ 230-61. Costs to be borne by owner.
All costs associated with the provisions of this Part 2 shall be borne by the
property owner unless specifically stated or agreed to be a cost borne by
the Town of Seneca Falls. The property owner shall indemnify the Town
from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by
the installation of the building and street laterals, and connections and
appurtenances.
The fitting shall contain a forty-five-degree branch with removable plug
or test tee and be so positioned that sewer cleaning equipment can be
inserted therein to clean the building lateral.
B. The cleanout diameter shall be no less than the building lateral
diameter.
§ 230-60 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-61
1:176
ARTICLE VIII
Inflow
§ 230-62. New connections for inflow prohibited.
No connections which are intended to discharge inflow shall be made to a
sanitary or to a combined sewer. Such prohibited connections include, but
are not limited to, footing drains, roof leaders, roof drains, cellar drains,
sump pumps, catch basins, uncontaminated cooling water discharges or
other sources of inflow.
§ 230-63. Disconnection of existing inflow connections.
For properties where separate storm sewers are available within 100 feet
of the property line or where, in the judgment of the Superintendent,
sufficient natural drainage is available, connections which contribute inflow
to the sanitary sewers must be disconnected in a fashion approved by the
Superintendent prior to the sale of the property.
§ 230-64. Inspections.
§ 230-65. Reconnection of disconnected inflow source prohibited.
It shall be a willful violation of this Part 2 for any person to reconnect any
inflow source which has been disconnected pursuant to this Part 2.
§ 230-66. Determination of amount of inflow; charges.
The Superintendent is enabled to take whatever action is necessary to
determine the amount of inflow, including the requirement for installation
of a control manhole. The property from which the inflow originated shall
be billed for inflow according to Article XIII; however, the Town Board may
A. Upon notice from the owner or authorized agent, the Superintendent
shall inspect any property prior to its sale for the purpose of
determining if storm sewers or natural drainage is available and, if so, if
all connections which contribute to inflow have been disconnected.
B. There shall be no charge to the property owner if said property owner
or his or her agent meets with the Water and Sewer Department at the
specified time and date for the infiltration/inflow inspection. However,
upon making arrangements for said infiltration/inflow inspection for the
purpose of selling the property, if the property owner or his or her agent
is unable to meet with the Water Department at the specified time and
date and without a reasonable cancellation time, a charge as set from
time to time by the Town Board shall be assessed against the property
owner for failure to keep the appointment to perform the inspection. If
the property owner or his or her agent fails to appear for each
subsequent inspection without a reasonable cancellation notice, a
charge as set from time to time by the Town Board will be assessed to
the property owner.
§ 230-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-66
1:177
impose a surcharge at a rate not to exceed five times that for normal sewage
volume charge.
§ 230-66 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-66
1:178
ARTICLE IX
Trucked or Hauled Waste
§ 230-67. License required; application; fees.
§ 230-68. Requirements; license term, suspension or revocation.
The applicant for a license to truck or haul wastes shall be the owner of the
vehicle or vehicles to be used for such discharge. Any false or misleading
statement in any license application shall be grounds for invalidating the
license. All licenses issued by the Superintendent for this purpose shall be
for one year. The licensee shall also be duly permitted by the NYSDEC under
6 NYCRR 364 (364 permit). If, for any reason, the 364 permit is revoked or
the 364 permit lapses or becomes invalid, then the license issued under this
Part 2 shall become invalid immediately. All acts performed in connection
with the license shall be subject to the inspection and regulations
established by the Superintendent, the terms and conditions of the license
and all local and general laws, ordinances and regulations which are now
or may come into effect, and such license may be suspended or revoked at
any time by the Superintendent for willful, continued, or persistent violation
thereof.
§ 230-69. Times and conditions of discharge.
The Superintendent may require discharging at only certain locations
within the POTW, and only at certain times, and on only certain days of the
week or seasons of the year as shall be stated on said license or as may
be revised by the Superintendent, after appropriate notice. The time and
conditions for permissible discharge shall be as set forth on the license or
as may be revised by the Superintendent, after appropriate notice.
§ 230-70. Approval of discharge required.
Each discharge of trucked or hauled wastes shall be made only with the
approval of the Superintendent. The Superintendent may require
A. The discharge of trucked or hauled wastes into the Town of Seneca Falls
sewer system and public sewers tributary thereto will be permitted only
with the written approval (license) of the Superintendent. Applicants
for such license shall apply on a form provided by the Superintendent.
These forms may require information such as vehicle specifications,
vehicle license number, vehicle color, NYSDEC permits issued under 6
NYCRR 364, approximate annual septage volume expected, service
area, and any other information that the Superintendent may require to
determine whether the trucked or hauled wastes could adversely
impact the POTW. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as set
from time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
B. The licensee of trucked or hauled wastes will also be charged a fee for
each dumping, in accordance with Article XIII. The dumping fee shall
be paid prior to dumping.
§ 230-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-70
1:179
inspection, sampling and analysis of each load prior to the discharge of a
load. Any extra costs associated with such inspection, sampling and analysis
shall be paid by the licensee.
§ 230-70 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-70
1:180
ARTICLE X
Discharge Restrictions
§ 230-71. Compliance with Act required.
All users of the Town of Seneca Falls POTW will comply with all standards
and requirements of the Act and standards and requirements promulgated
pursuant to the Act, including but not limited to 40 CFR 406 through 471.
§ 230-72. General prohibitions.
A. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, in any manner or
fashion, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will
interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general
prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW, whether or not the user
is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other
national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, a user may not
contribute the following substances to the POTW:
(1) Any solids, liquids or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction
with other substances, to cause a fire or an explosion or be
injurious, in any way, to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW.
At no time shall both of two successive readings on a flame-type
explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system
(or at any other point in the system), be more than 25% nor any
single reading be more than 40% of the lower explosive limit (LEL)
of the meter. Unless explicitly allowable by a written permit,
prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols,
carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substance which the
Town of Seneca Falls, the state or the EPA has determined to be a
fire hazard or hazard to the POTW.
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or otherwise interfere with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities. Unless explicitly allowable by a
written permit, such substances include, but are not limited to,
grease, garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any
dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair,
hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders,
sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste
paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar asphalt residues, residues from
refining or processing fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass or stone
grinding or polishing wastes.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.5,
unless the POTW was specifically designed to manage such
§ 230-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-72
1:181
wastewater, or wastewater having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/
or POTW personnel.
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants (including
heat), to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in
the receiving waters of the POTW or to exceed the limitation set
forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall
include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to
Section 307(A) of the Act.
(5) Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or a hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for their maintenance or repair.
(6) Oils and grease. Any commercial, institutional or industrial wastes
containing fats, waxes, grease or oils which become visible solids
when the wastes are cooled to 10° C. (50° F.); any petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in
excess of 20 milligrams per liter or in amounts that will cause
interference or pass through.
(7) Any wastewater which will cause interference or pass through.
(8) Any wastewater with objectionable color which is not removed in
the treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(9) Any solid, liquid, vapor or gas having a temperature higher than
65° C. (150° F.); however, such materials shall not cause the POTW
treatment plant influent temperature to be greater than 40° C.
(104° F.). The Superintendent reserves the right, in certain
instances, to prohibit or limit the discharge of wastes whose
maximum temperatures are lower than 65° C.
(10) Unusual flow rate or concentration of wastes, constituting slugs,
except by industrial wastewater permit.
(11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes, except as
approved by the Superintendent and in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations.
(12) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or which
creates a public nuisance, either by itself or in combination, in any
way, with other wastes.
(13) Any wastewater with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F.
(60° C.) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
§ 230-72 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-72
1:182
§ 230-73. Concentration-based limitations.
(14) Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
A. No person shall discharge, directly or indirectly, into the POTW
wastewater containing any of the following substances in
concentrations exceeding those specified by the EPA for allowable
effluent limits:
Arsenic
Cadmium
Chlorine
Chromium (hex)
Chromium (tot)
Copper
Cyanide (free)
Iron
Lead
Manganese
Mercury
Nickel
Phenols, total
Silver
Sulfides
Vanadium
Zinc
B. Other substances which may be limited are:
Alkanes, alkenes and alkynes
Aliphatic and aromatic alcohols and acids
Aliphatic and aromatic aldehydes and ketones
Aliphatic and aromatic esters
Aliphatic and aromatic halogenated compounds
Aliphatic and aromatic nitro, cyano and amino compounds
Antibiotics
Benzene derivatives
§ 230-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-73
1:183
§ 230-74. Mass discharge based limitations.
Chemical compounds which, upon acidification, alkalinization,
oxidation or reduction in the discharge or after admixture with
wastewater and its components in the POTW, produce toxic,
flammable or explosive compounds
Pesticides, including algicides, fungicides, herbicides, insecticides
and rodenticides
Phthalates
Polyaromatic and polynuclear hydrocarbons
Total toxic organics (TTO) as defined in 40 CFR 433.11
Toxic organic compounds regulated by federal pretreatment
standards
Unsaturated aliphatics, including those with an aldehyde, ketone or
nitrile functional group
Viable pathogenic organisms from industrial processes or hospital
procedures
A. At no time shall the influent to the POTW contain quantities in excess of
EPA acceptable limits for the following listed substances:
Arsenic
Cadmium
Chromium (total)
Copper
Iron
Lead
Manganese
Mercury
Nickel
Phenols (total)
Silver
Sulfide
Vanadium
Zinc
B. The Superintendent shall determine the total allowable influent load of
each substance from significant industrial users.
(1) In determining the total load of each substance that significant
industrial users shall be allowed to discharge, the Superintendent
shall consider the following:
§ 230-73 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-74
1:184
§ 230-75. Modification of limitations.
(a) The quantities of each substance that are uncontrollable
because they occur naturally in wastewater.
(b) The quantities of each substance that are anthropogenic but
are nonetheless uncontrollable.
(c) Historical discharge trends.
(d) Past pollution-control efforts of each significant industrial user
as compared to other significant industrial dischargers of the
same substance.
(e) Potential for growth in the POTW service area.
(f) Potential for more restrictive regulatory requirements to be
placed on the POTW discharge or sludge disposal or sludge
reuse method.
(g) Treatability of the substance.
(2) The Superintendent shall apply a minimum 15% safety factor to be
protective of the POTW.
C. To assure that the total loads so calculated for each substance are not
violated, the Superintendent shall issue permits to significant industrial
users limiting discharge loads.
D. Permits issued in accordance with this section may allow for discharges
in excess of limitations set forth under § 230-73.
A. Limitations on wastewater strength or mass discharge contained in this
Part 2 may be supplemented with more stringent limitations when, in
the opinion of the Superintendent:
(1) The limitations in this Part 2 are not sufficient to protect the POTW;
(2) The limitations in this Part 2 are not sufficient to enable the POTW
treatment plant to comply with applicable water quality standards
or the effluent limitations specified in the POTW's SPDES permit;
(3) The POTW sludge will be rendered unacceptable for disposal or
reuse, as the Town of Seneca Falls desires, as a result of discharge
of wastewaters at the above prescribed concentration limitations;
(4) Municipal employees or the public will be endangered; or
(5) Air pollution and/or groundwater pollution will be caused.
B. The limitations on wastewater strength or mass discharge shall be
recalculated not less frequently than once every three years. The
results of these calculations shall be reported to the Town Board. This
Part 2 shall then be amended appropriately. Any issued industrial
§ 230-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-75
1:185
§ 230-76. Access to user's records.
The Superintendent shall have the authority to copy any record related to
wastewater discharges to the POTW.
§ 230-77. Dilution.
§ 230-78. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease, flammable substances,
sand or other harmful substances; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or living units. All interceptors shall be
of type and capacity approved by the Superintendent and shall be so located
to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall
be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner at his
expense.
§ 230-79. Solid waste grinders.
Solid waste grinders at or serving commercial establishments, institutions
or industries shall not discharge into the Town of Seneca Falls POTW if
there is a combined sewer overflow (CSO) on the sewer lines conveying the
waste to the POTW treatment plant.
§ 230-80. Rejection of wastewater.
The Town Board may reject a user's wastewater, on recommendation of
the Superintendent, when it is has been determined that the wastewater
contains substances or possesses characteristics which have a deleterious
effect on the POTW and its processes or on the receiving water or which
constitute a public nuisance or hazard. See § 230-105.
wastewater discharge permits which have limitations based directly on
any limitations which were changed shall be revised and amended, as
appropriate.
A. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable
pretreatment standard, no user shall ever increase the use of process
water or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with
a pretreatment standard.
B. Dilution flow shall be considered to be inflow.
§ 230-75 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-80
1:186
ARTICLE XI
Discharge Permits and Pretreatment Requirements
§ 230-81. Wastewater discharge reports.
As a means of determining compliance with this Part 2, with applicable
SPDES permit conditions and with applicable state and federal law, each
industrial user shall be required to notify the Superintendent of any new
or existing discharges to the POTW by submitting a completed industrial
chemical survey (ICS) form and a completed industrial wastewater survey
(IWS) form to the Superintendent. The Superintendent may require any
user discharging wastewater into the POTW to file wastewater discharge
reports and to supplement such reports as the Superintendent deems
necessary. All information shall be furnished by the user in complete
cooperation with the Superintendent.
§ 230-82. Notification to industrial users.
The Superintendent shall, from time to time, notify each industrial user
of applicable pretreatment standards and of other applicable requirements
under Section 204(B) and Section 405 of the Clean Water Act and Subtitles
C and D of the RCRA.
§ 230-83. Wastewater discharge permit required.
§ 230-84. Application for wastewater discharge permit.
A. No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater to the POTW
without having a valid wastewater discharge permit issued by the
Superintendent. Significant industrial users shall comply fully with the
terms and conditions of their permits in addition to the provisions of
this Part 2. Violation of a permit term or condition is deemed a violation
of this Part 2.
B. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to discharge
to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before
connecting to or discharging to the POTW. Existing significant
industrial users shall make application for a wastewater discharge
permit within 30 days after the effective date of this Part 2, and shall
obtain such a permit within 90 days after making application.
C. The Superintendent may issue wastewater discharge permits to other
industrial users of the POTW.
D. The Town of Seneca Falls does not have the authority to issue permits
for the discharge of any wastewater to a storm sewer. This authority
rests with the NYSDEC.
A. Industrial users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
complete and file with the Superintendent an application in the form
prescribed by the Town of Seneca Falls; the application shall be
§ 230-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-84
1:187
accompanied by a fee, as set forth in § 230-131. In support of any
application, the industrial user shall submit, in units and terms
appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(1) Name, address and location (if different from the address).
(2) SIC code of both the industry and any categorical processes.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those mentioned in Article XI of this Part 2 and which are
limited in the appropriate categorical standard, as determined by a
reliable analytical laboratory approved by the NYSDOH. Sampling
and analysis shall be performed in accordance with standard
methods.
(4) Time and duration of the discharge.
(5) Average daily peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly
and seasonal variations, if any.
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances.
(7) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged
to the POTW.
(8) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production.
(9) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(10) Number and type of employees and hours of operation and
proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system.
(11) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by any county, state or federal standards, and a
statement as to whether or not the standards are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for
the user to meet all applicable standards.
(12) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
standards, then the industrial user shall provide the shortest
schedule to accomplish such additional treatment and/or O&M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be longer than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
(a) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of additional
§ 230-84 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-84
1:188
§ 230-85. Permit modifications.
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards. (Such events include hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, beginning operation
and beginning routine operation.)
(b) No increment referred to in Subsection A(12)(a) above shall
exceed nine months, nor shall the total compliance period
exceed 18 months.
(c) No later than 14 calendar days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall
submit a progress report to the Superintendent, including, as a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of
progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason
for delay and the steps being taken by the user to return to the
established schedule. In no event shall more than nine months
elapse between such progress reports to the Superintendent.
(13) Any other information as may deemed by the Superintendent to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
B. The Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial
user and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the Town of Seneca Falls may issue a
wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided
herein.
A. Wastewater discharge permits may be modified by the Superintendent,
upon 30 days' notice to the permittee, for just cause. Just cause shall
include but not be limited to:
(1) Promulgation of an applicable national categorical pretreatment
standard;
(2) Revision of or a grant of a variance from such categorical standards
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(3) Changes in general discharge prohibitions and local limits as per
§ 230-73 of this Part 2;
(4) Changes in processes used by the permittee or changes in
discharge volume or character;
(5) Changes in design or capability of any part of the POTW;
(6) Discovery that the permitted discharge causes or contributes to
pass through or interference; and
§ 230-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-85
1:189
§ 230-86. Permit conditions.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all the
provisions of this Part 2 and all other applicable regulations, user charges
and fees established by the Town of Seneca Falls. Permits may contain the
following:
(7) Changes in the nature and character of the sewage in the POTW as
a result of other permitted discharges.
B. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable
time schedule for compliance as set forth in § 230-84A(12)(a).
A. Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
B. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics, including concentration or mass discharge limits.
C. The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
D. Requirements for installation and maintenance (in safe condition) of
inspection and sampling facilities.
E. Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests
and reporting schedules.
F. Compliance schedules.
G. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports.
H. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge, as specified by the Town of Seneca Falls, and
affording the Superintendent access thereto.
I. Requirements for notification of the Town of Seneca Falls of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or of any substantial change in
the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being
introduced into the POTW.
J. Requirements for the notification of the Town of Seneca Falls of any
change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the
permittee.
K. Requirements for notification of excessive, accidental or slug
discharges.
L. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Town of Seneca Falls to
ensure compliance with this Part 2 and state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
§ 230-85 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-87
1:190
§ 230-87. Duration of permit.
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years.
A permit may be issued for a period less than five years.
§ 230-88. Permit reissuance.
The user shall apply for permit resistance a minimum of 180 days prior to
the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of
the permit may be subject to modification, by the Superintendent, during
the term of the permit, as limitations or requirements, as identified in
§ 230-85, or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any
proposed changes in his or her permit at least 30 days prior to the effective
date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in the reissued permit
shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance as established in
§ 230-84A(12)(a).
§ 230-89. Permits nontransferable.
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation or discharge at a specific location. A wastewater discharge permit
shall not be reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new user,
different premises or a new or changed operation.
§ 230-90. Revocation of permit.
Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following reasons:
falsifying self-monitoring reports, tampering with monitoring equipment,
refusing to allow the Superintendent timely access to the industrial
premises, failure to meet effluent limitations, failure to pay fines, failure to
pay user charges and failure to meet compliance schedules.
§ 230-91. Public notification.
The Town of Seneca Falls will publish in the Town of Seneca Falls official
daily newspaper(s) informal notice of intent to issue a wastewater discharge
permit at least 14 days prior to issuance.
§ 230-92. Reporting requirements for permittee.
A. The reports or documents required to be submitted or maintained
under this section shall be subject to:
(1) The provisions of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 relating to fraud and false
statements.
(2) The provisions of Section 309(c)(4) of the Act, as amended,
governing false statements, representation or certification.
(3) The provisions of Section 309(c)(6) of the Act, as amended,
regarding corporate officers.
§ 230-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-92
1:191
B. Required reports.
(1) Baseline monitoring report. Within 180 days after promulgation of
an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard, a user
subject to that standard shall submit to the Superintendent the
information required by § 230-84A(8) and (9).
(2) Ninety-day compliance report. Within 90 days following the date
for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards, or, in
the case of a new source, following commencement of the
introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to
pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Superintendent a report indicating the nature and concentration of
all pollutants in the discharge, from the regulated process, which
are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the
average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the
user's facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards
and requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or
pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with
the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This
statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional.
(3) Periodic compliance reports.
(a) Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the
compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case
of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the
POTW, shall submit to the Superintendent during the months of
June and December, unless required more frequently in the
pretreatment standard or by the Superintendent, a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In
addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows
which, during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily
flow reported in § 230-84. At the discretion of the
Superintendent and in consideration of such factors as local
high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the
Superintendent may agree to alter the months during which
the above reports are to be submitted; however, no fewer than
two reports shall be submitted per year.
(b) The Superintendent may impose mass limitations on users
which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements or in other cases where the
imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases,
the report required by Subsection B(3)(a) shall indicate the
mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the
effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of
§ 230-92 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-92
1:192
§ 230-93. Flow equalization.
No person shall cause the discharge of slugs to the POTW. Each person
discharging into the POTW greater than 100,000 gallons per day or greater
than 5% of the average daily flow in the POTW, whichever is less, shall
install and maintain, on his or her property and at his or her expense, a
suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow over
a twenty-four-hour period. The facility shall have a capacity for at least
50% of the daily discharge volume and shall be equipped with alarms and
a rate-of-discharge controller, the regulation of which shall be directed by
the Superintendent. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely
for flow equalization.
§ 230-94. Monitoring stations.
discharge sampling and analysis, including the flow, and the
nature and concentration or production and mass, where
requested by the Superintendent, of pollutants contained
therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment
standard. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with
standard methods by a laboratory certified by NYSDOH to
perform the analyses.
(4) Violation report. If sampling, performed by the user, indicates a
violation of this Part 2 and/or the user's discharge permit, the user
shall notify the Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware
of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the
Superintendent within 30 days after becoming aware of the
violation. The user is not required to resample if the POTW
performs monitoring of the user's discharge at least once a month
for the parameter which was violated, or, if the POTW performs
sampling, for the parameter which was violated, between the user's
initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this
sampling.
(5) Other reports. The Superintendent may impose reporting
requirements equivalent to the requirements imposed by
Subsection B(3) for users not subject to pretreatment standards.
A. All significant industrial users, and other industrial users whose
industrial waste discharge has caused or may cause interference or
pass-through, shall install and maintain a suitable monitoring station on
their premises, at their expense, to facilitate the observation, sampling
and measurement of their industrial wastewater discharge.
B. If there is more than one street lateral serving an industrial user, the
Superintendent may require the installation of a control manhole on
each lateral.
§ 230-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-94
1:193
§ 230-95. Design and maintenance of facilities and monitoring
stations.
Preliminary treatment, and flow equalization facilities or monitoring
stations, if provided for any wastewater, shall be constructed and
maintained continuously clean, safe and continuously operational by the
owner at his or her expense. Where an industrial user has such treatment,
equalization or monitoring facilities at the time this Part 2 is enacted, the
Superintendent may approve or disapprove the adequacy of such facilities.
Where the Superintendent disapproves such facilities and construction of
new or upgraded facilities for treatment, equalization or monitoring are
required, plans and specifications for such facilities shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer and submitted to the Superintendent.
Construction of new or upgraded facilities shall not commence until written
approval of the Superintendent has been obtained.
§ 230-96. Vandalism or tampering.
No unauthorized person shall negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, tamper with, prevent access to or render inaccurate or cause or
permit the negligent breaking, damaging, destroying, uncovering, defacing,
tampering with, preventing access to or rendering inaccurate of:
§ 230-97. Sampling and analysis.
C. The Superintendent may require that such monitoring station(s)
include equipment for the continuous measurement and recording of
wastewater flow rate and for the sampling of the wastewater. Such
station(s) shall be accessibly and safely located, and the industrial user
shall allow immediate access to the station, without prior notice, by the
Superintendent or his or her designated representative.
A. Any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the Town
of Seneca Falls POTW; or
B. Any measuring, sampling and/or testing device or mechanism installed
pursuant to any requirement under this Part 2 except as approved by
the Superintendent.
A. Sampling shall be performed so that a representative portion of the
wastewater is obtained for analysis.
B. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes required in any section of this Part 2 shall be carried out in
accordance with standard methods by a laboratory certified by
NYSDOH to perform the analyses. Such samples shall be taken at the
approved monitoring stations described in § 230-94, if such a station
exists. If an approved monitoring station is not required, then samples
shall be taken from another location on the industrial sewer lateral
before discharge to the public sewer. Unless specifically requested
otherwise, or unless specifically not allowed in federal regulation,
§ 230-94 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-97
1:194
§ 230-98. Accidental discharges; SPCC plan.
samples shall be gathered as flow-proportioned (where feasible)
composite samples made up of individual samples taken not less than
once per hour for a period of time equal to the duration of industrial
wastewater discharge during daily operations (including any cleanup
shift).
A. Each user shall provide for protection from accidental or slug
discharges of prohibited materials or discharges of materials in volume
or concentration exceeding limitations of this Part 2 or of an industrial
wastewater discharge permit. Users shall immediately notify the
Superintendent of the discharge of wastes in violation of this Part 2 or
any permit. Such discharges may result from:
(1) Breakdown of pretreatment equipment.
(2) Accidents caused by mechanical failure or negligence.
(3) Other causes.
B. Where possible, such immediate notification shall allow the
Superintendent to initiate appropriate countermeasure action at the
POTW. The user shall prepare a detailed written statement following
any accidental or slug discharge which describes the causes of the
discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrences
within five days of the occurrence, and the Superintendent shall receive
a copy of such report no later than the fifth calendar day following the
occurrence. Analytical results and their interpretation may be
appended to the report at a date not exceeding 45 calendar days after
the occurrence.
C. When required by the Superintendent, detailed plans and procedures to
prevent accidental or slug discharges shall be submitted to the
Superintendent for approval. These plans and procedures shall be
called a spill prevention, control and countermeasure (SPCC) plan. The
plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
(1) A description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges.
(2) A description of stored chemicals.
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental
or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any
discharge which would violate any provision of the permit and any
national prohibitive discharge standard.
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
§ 230-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-98
1:195
§ 230-99. Notices to be posted by user.
In order that the industrial user's employees be informed of Town of Seneca
Falls requirements, a notice shall be permanently posted on appropriate
bulletin boards within the user's facility advising employees of the Town
of Seneca Falls requirements and whom to call in case of an accidental
discharge in violation of this Part 2.
§ 230-100. Sample splitting.
When so requested in advance by an industrial user and when taking a
sample of industrial wastewater, the Town of Seneca Falls representative(s)
shall gather sufficient volume of sample so that the sample can be split
into two nearly equal volumes, each of a size adequate for the anticipated
analytical protocols, including any quality control (QC) procedures. One of
the portions shall be given to the representative of the industrial user whose
wastewater was sampled, and the other portion shall be retained by the
Town for its own analysis.
§ 230-101. Public access to information.
§ 230-102. Access to property and records.
The Superintendent and other authorized representatives of the Town of
Seneca Falls, representatives of the EPA, NYSDEC, NYSDOH and/or Seneca
County Health Department, bearing proper credentials and identification,
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants
(including solvents) and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
A. When requested, the Superintendent shall make available to the public
for inspection and/or copying information and data on industrial users
obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permit and
monitoring programs and inspections, unless the industrial user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Superintendent that such information, if made public, would
divulge processes or methods of production entitled to protection as
trade secrets of the user. Wastewater constituents and characteristics
and reports of accidental discharges shall not be recognized as
confidential.
B. Confidential information shall not be made available for inspection and/
or copying by the public but shall be disclosed, upon written request, to
governmental agencies for uses related to this Part 2 or the SPDES
permit, provided that the governmental agency making the request
agrees to hold the information confidential, in accordance with state or
federal laws, rules and regulations. The Superintendent shall provide
written notice to the industrial user of any disclosure of confidential
information to another governmental agency.
§ 230-98 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-102
1:196
shall be permitted to enter upon all nonresidential properties at all times
for the purpose of inspection, observation, sampling, flow measurement
and testing to ascertain a user's compliance with applicable provisions of
federal and state law governing use of the Town of Seneca Falls POTW
and with the provisions of this Part 2. Inspections of residential properties
shall be performed in proper observance of the resident's civil rights. Such
representative(s) shall have the right to set up on the user's property or
property rented/leased by the user such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling or flow measurement. Guard dogs shall be under proper control
of the user while the representatives are on the user's property or property
rented/leased by the user. Such representative(s) shall, additionally, have
access to and may copy any records the user is required to maintain under
this Part 2. Where a user has security measures in force which would
require proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, inspecting personnel will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.
§ 230-103. Access to easements.
The Superintendent, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall
be permitted to enter all private premises through which the Town of
Seneca Falls holds an easement for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the Town
of Seneca Falls public sewer system lying within the easement. All entry
and subsequent work on the easement shall be done in accordance with the
terms of the easement pertaining to the private premises involved.
§ 230-104. Liability of property owner; safe conditions to be
maintained.
During the performance, on private premises, of inspections, sampling
or other similar operations referred to in § 230-102, the inspectors shall
observe all applicable safety rules established by the owner or occupant
of the premises. The owner and/or occupant shall be held harmless for
personal injury or death of the inspector and the loss of or damage to the
inspector's supplies and/or equipment; and the inspector shall indemnify
the owner and/or occupant against loss or damage to property of the owner
or occupant by the inspector and against liability claims asserted against
the owner or occupant for personal injury or death of the inspector or for
loss of or damage to the inspector's supplies or equipment arising from
inspection and sampling operations, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the owner or occupant to maintain safe conditions.
§ 230-105. Special agreements.
A. Nothing in this Part 2 shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the Town of Seneca Falls and any
user of the POTW whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character
is accepted into the POTW and specially treated, subject to any
§ 230-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-105
1:197
payments or user charges, as may be applicable. In entering into such
a special agreement, the Town Board shall consider whether the
wastewater will:
(1) Pass through or cause interference.
(2) Endanger the public municipal employees.
(3) Cause violation of the SPDES permit.
(4) Interfere with any purpose stated in § 230-4.
(5) Prevent the equitable compensation to the Town of Seneca Falls for
wastewater conveyance and treatment and sludge management
and disposal.
B. No discharge which violates the federal pretreatment standards will be
allowed under the terms of such special agreements.
C. No agreement shall be entered into without the user having been issued
and presently having a permit to discharge wastes into the POTW for
treatment and disposal. Additionally, the user shall be in compliance
with all conditions in the permit and shall not be in arrears in any
charges due to the Town of Seneca Falls before the agreement is
entered into. The Town Board may condition the agreement.
§ 230-105 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-105
1:198
ARTICLE XII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 230-106. Enforcement response plan.
A. The Superintendent shall prepare an enforcement response plan. The
enforcement response plan, in a step-by-step fashion, shall outline the
procedures to be followed to identify, document and respond to
violations by users of the POTW. All violations by users of the POTW
shall be met with some type of enforcement response. The response
shall be comprehensive and effective.
B. The enforcement response plan shall:
(1) Describe how the Superintendent will investigate instances of
noncompliance.
(2) Describe the types of escalated enforcement actions that the
Superintendent will take in response to all anticipated types of user
violations and the time periods within which to initiate and follow
up these actions.
(3) Adequately reflect the Town Board's responsibility to enforce all
applicable standards and requirements.
C. The enforcement response plan shall contain:
(1) Criteria for scheduling periodic inspection and/or sampling visits to
POTW users.
(2) Forms and guidelines for documenting compliance data in a
manner which will enable the information to be used as evidence.
(3) Systems to track due dates, compliance schedule milestones and
pending enforcement actions.
(4) Criteria, responsible personnel and procedures to select and
initiate an enforcement action.
D. The range of appropriate enforcement actions shall be based on the
nature and severity of the violation and other relevant factors, such as
the magnitude of the violation, duration of the violation, effect of the
violation on the receiving water, effect of the violation on the POTW,
effect of the violation on the health and safety of the POTW employees,
compliance history of the user and good faith of the user and shall
promote consistent and timely use of enforcement remedies.
E. The Town Board shall approve the enforcement response plan. The
enforcement response plan shall be reviewed at least every five years.
§ 230-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-107
1:199
§ 230-107. Notification of violation.
Whenever the Superintendent finds that any user has violated or is violating
this Part 2, or any wastewater discharge permit, order, prohibition,
limitation or requirement permitted by this Part 2, the Superintendent may
serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation.
Within 10 calendar days of the date the Superintendent mails the notice,
an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction
and prevention thereof shall be submitted to the Superintendent by the
user. The correction and prevention plan shall include specific actions.
Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any
violations caused by the user before or after receipt of the notice of
violation.
§ 230-108. Consent orders.
The Superintendent is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing
an agreement with the user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders
shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the
noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent
orders shall have the same force and effect as an administrative order.
§ 230-109. Administrative or compliance orders.
§ 230-110. Administrative fines.
A. When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to
violate this Part 2 or a permit or administrative order issued
thereunder, he may issue an administrative order to the user
responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time
period, sewer service shall be discontinued, severed and abated unless
the violation is corrected and that there is no reoccurrence of the
violation. Administrative orders may also contain such other
requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to
address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment
technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices.
B. The user may, within 15 calendar days of receipt of such order, petition
the Superintendent to modify or suspend the order. Such petition shall
be in written form and shall be transmitted to the Superintendent by
registered mail. The Superintendent shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Modify or suspend the order; or
(3) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 230-114
and may, as part of the show-cause notice, request the user to
supply additional information.
§ 230-107 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-110
1:200
§ 230-111. Cease-and-desist orders.
§ 230-112. Termination of permit.
A. Notwithstanding any other section of this Part 2, any user who is found
to have violated any provision of this Part 2, or a wastewater discharge
permit or administrative order issued thereunder, shall be fined in an
amount not to exceed $1,000 per violation. Each day on which
noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and
distinct violation.
B. The user may, within 15 calendar days of notification of the
Superintendent's notice of such fine, petition the Superintendent to
modify or suspend the order. Such petition shall be in written form and
shall be transmitted to the Superintendent by registered mail. The
Superintendent shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Modify or suspend the fine; or
(3) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 230-114
and may, as part of the show-cause notice, request the user to
supply additional information.
A. When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to
violate this Part 2 or any permit or administrative order issued
thereunder, the Superintendent may issue an administrative order to
cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in
noncompliance to:
(1) Comply forthwith.
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations or terminating the discharge.
B. The user may, within 15 calendar days of the date the Superintendent
mails notification of such order, petition the Superintendent to modify
or suspend the order. Such petition shall be in written form and shall be
transmitted to the Superintendent by registered mail. The
Superintendent shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Modify or suspend the order; or
(3) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 230-114
and may, as part of the show-cause notice, request the user to
supply additional information.
§ 230-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-112
1:201
§ 230-113. Water supply severance.
§ 230-114. Show-cause hearing.
A. Any user who violates the following conditions of this Part 2 or a
wastewater discharge permit or administrative order, or any applicable
or state and federal law, is subject to permit termination:
(1) Violation of permit conditions or conditions of an administrative
order;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
constituents and characteristics;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
(5) Failure to pay administrative fines, fees or user charges.
B. Noncompliant industrial users will be notified, by registered mail, of the
proposed termination of their wastewater permit.
C. The user may, within 15 calendar days of the date the Superintendent
mails such notification, petition the Superintendent to permit continued
use of the POTW by the user. Such petition shall be in written form and
shall be transmitted to the Superintendent by registered mail. The
Superintendent shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions; or
(2) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 230-114
and may, as part of the show-cause notice, request the user to
supply additional information.
A. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of
this Part 2 or an order or permit issued thereunder, water service to the
user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's
expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
B. The user may, within 15 calendar days of severance, petition the
Superintendent to reconnect water supply service. Such petition shall
be in written form and shall be transmitted to the Superintendent by
registered mail. The Superintendent shall then:
(1) Reject any frivolous petitions;
(2) Reconnect the water supply; or
(3) Order the petitioner to show cause in accordance with § 230-114
and may, as part of the show-cause notice, request the user to
supply additional information.
§ 230-112 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-114
1:202
§ 230-115. Failure of user to petition Superintendent.
In the event that the Superintendent issues any administrative order,
terminates the user's permit or imposes any fine as set forth in this article,
and the user fails, within the designated period of time set forth, to petition
the Superintendent, as provided in appropriate sections of this article, the
user shall be deemed in default and its rights to contest the administrative
order or fine shall be deemed waived.
§ 230-116. Written notices; mailing procedures.
The notices, orders, petitions or other notification which the user or
Superintendent shall desire or be required to give pursuant to any sections
of this Part 2 shall be in writing and shall be served personally or sent by
certified mail or registered mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid,
A. The Superintendent may order any user appealing administrative
remedies for violations of this Part 2 to show cause, before the Town
Board, why an enforcement action initiated by the Superintendent
should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the
time and place of a hearing to be held by the Town Board regarding the
violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken and the proposed
enforcement action and directing the user to show cause before the
Town Board why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
The notice of the hearing shall be served at least 10 calendar days
before the hearing in accordance with § 230-116 of this Part 2. Service
shall be made on any principal or executive officer of a user's
establishment or to any partner in a user's establishment. The notice of
the hearing shall be served at least 10 calendar days before the
hearing, in accordance with § 230-116.
B. The Town Board may itself conduct the hearing or may designate any of
its members or any officer or employee of the Town of Seneca Falls to
conduct the hearing and:
(1) Issue, in the name of the Town Board, notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such
hearings.
(2) Take the evidence.
(3) Take sworn testimony.
(4) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to
the Town Board for action thereon.
C. After the Town Board has reviewed the evidence and testimony, it may
order the user to comply with the Superintendent's order or fine,
modify the Superintendent's order or fine or vacate the
Superintendent's order or fine.
§ 230-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-116
1:203
and the notice, order, petition, or other communication shall be deemed
given upon its mailing as provided herein. Any notice, administrative order
or communication mailed to the user pursuant to the sections of this Part
2 shall be mailed to the user where the user's effluent is discharged into
transmission lines to the Town of Seneca Fall's POTW. Any notice, petition
or other communication mailed to the Superintendent shall be addressed
and mailed to the Town of Seneca Falls, Town Hall, Seneca Falls, New York.
§ 230-117. Right to choose multiple remedies.
The Superintendent shall have the right, within the Superintendent's sole
discretion, to utilize any one or more appropriate administrative remedies
set forth in this Part 2. The Superintendent may utilize more than one
administrative remedy established pursuant to this article, and the
Superintendent may hold one show-cause hearing combining more than one
enforcement action.
§ 230-118. Civil penalties.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of or who fails to perform
any duty imposed by this Part 2, or any administrative order or
determination of the Superintendent promulgated under this Part 2, or
the terms of any permit issued thereunder shall be liable to the Town of
Seneca Falls for a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each such
violation, to be assessed after a hearing (unless the user waives the
right to a hearing) held in conformance with the procedures set forth in
this Part 2. Each violation shall be a separate and distinct violation, and,
in the case of continuing violation, each day's continuance thereof shall
be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such penalty may be
recovered in an action brought by the Town Attorney, or his designated
attorney, at the request of the Superintendent in the name of the Town
of Seneca Falls, in any court of competent jurisdiction giving preference
to courts local to the Town of Seneca Falls. In addition to the abovedescribed
penalty, the Superintendent may recover all damages
incurred by the Town of Seneca Falls from any persons or users who
violate any provisions of this Part 2 or who fail to perform any duties
imposed by this Part 2 or any administrative order or determination of
the Superintendent promulgated under this Part, or the terms of any
permit issued thereunder. In addition to the above-described damages,
the Superintendent may recover all reasonable attorney's fees incurred
by the Town of Seneca Falls in enforcing the provisions of this Part 2,
including reasonable attorney's fees incurred in any action to recover
penalties and damages, and the Superintendent may also recover court
costs and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses.
B. In determining the amount of civil penalty, the court shall take into
account all relative circumstances, including but not limited to the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions
§ 230-116 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-118
1:204
§ 230-119. Court orders.
§ 230-120. Criminal penalties.
by the user, the compliance history of the user and any other relative
factors as justice may require.
C. Such civil penalty may be released or compromised by the
Superintendent before the matter has been referred to the Town
Attorney, and where such matter has been referred to the Town
Attorney, any such penalty may be released or compromised and any
action commenced to recover the same may be settled and discontinued
by the Town Attorney, with the consent of the Superintendent.
A. In addition to the power to assess penalties as set forth in this Part 2,
the Superintendent shall have the power, following the hearing held in
conformance with the procedures set forth in this Part 2, to seek an
order:
(1) Suspending, revoking or modifying the violator's wastewater
discharge permit; or
(2) Enjoining the violator from continuing the violation.
B. Any such court order shall be sought in an action brought by the Town
Attorney, at the request of the Superintendent, in the name of the Town
of Seneca Falls, in any court of competent jurisdiction, giving
precedence to courts local to the Town of Seneca Falls.
C. The Town Attorney, at the request of the Superintendent, shall petition
the court to impose, assess and recover such sums imposed according
to this Part 2. In determining the amount of liability, the court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration,
any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user and any other
factors as justice requires.
A. Any person who willfully violates any provision of this Part 2 or any final
determination or administrative order of the Superintendent made in
accordance with this Part 2 shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment not to exceed one year, or
both. Each offense shall be a separate and distinct offense, and, in the
case of a continuing offense, each day's continuance thereof shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense.
B. Any user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations
or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other
document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this Part 2 or
wastewater permit or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this Part 2
§ 230-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-120
1:205
§ 230-121. Additional injunctive relief.
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
Part 2 or a permit or order issued thereunder, the Superintendent, through
counsel, may petition the court, in the name of the Town of Seneca Falls, for
the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction, or both (as may be
appropriate), which restrains the violation of or compels compliance with
any order or determination thereunder by the Superintendent.
§ 230-122. Summary abatement.
§ 230-123. Delinquent payments.
shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 per violation per day or
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
C. No prosecution under this section shall be instituted until after final
disposition of a show-cause hearing, if any was instituted.
A. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this Part 2, whenever
the Superintendent finds, after investigation, that any user is causing,
engaging in or maintaining a condition or activity which, in the
judgment of the Superintendent, presents an imminent danger to the
public health, safety or welfare or to the environment or is likely to
result in severe damage to the POTW or the environment, and it
therefore appears to be prejudicial to the public interest to allow the
condition or activity to go unabated until notice and an opportunity for
a hearing can be provided, the Superintendent may, without prior
hearing, order such user by notice, in writing wherever practicable or
in such other form as practices are intended to be proscribed, to
discontinue, abate or alleviate such condition or activity, and thereupon
such person shall immediately discontinue, abate or alleviate such
condition or activity; or, where the giving of notice is impracticable or in
the event of a user's failure to comply voluntarily with an emergency
order, the Superintendent may take all appropriate action to abate the
violating condition. As promptly as possible thereafter, not to exceed 15
calendar days, the Superintendent shall provide the user an opportunity
to be heard, in accordance with the provisions of this Part 2.
B. If the user is not within the geographic boundaries of the Town of
Seneca Falls, the right of summary abatement to discontinue, abate or
alleviate conditions or activities shall be those prescribed in the
intermunicipal agreement.
C. The Superintendent, acting upon the belief that an emergency exists,
shall be indemnified against any personal liability that may arise in the
performance of his or her duties to protect the public health, safety or
welfare or to preserve the POTW or the environment.
§ 230-120 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-123
1:206
§ 230-124. Performance bonds.
The Superintendent may decline to reissue a permit to any user which has
failed to comply with the provisions of this Part 2 or any order or previous
permit issued thereunder unless such user first files with him or her a
satisfactory bond, payable to the POTW, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the Superintendent to be necessary to achieve consistent
compliance.
§ 230-125. Liability insurance.
The Superintendent may decline to reissue a permit to any user which has
failed to comply with the provisions of this Part 2 or any order or previous
permit issued thereunder, unless the user first submits proof that it has
obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW damage
caused by its discharge.
A. If there shall be any payments which are due to the Town of Seneca
Falls, or any department thereof, pursuant to any article or section of
this Part 2 which shall remain due and unpaid, in whole or in part, for a
period of 20 calendar days from the date of billing by the Town of
Seneca Falls, the same shall constitute a default, and there shall be
added to the entire amount of the original bill a penalty equal to 20% of
the original bill. Interest shall accrue on the unpaid balance at the rate
of 2% per month, retroactive to the date of the original billing.
B. In the event that there are any sewer taxes, assessments or other
service charges which shall have been delinquent for a period of at least
60 calendar days as of December 15 of any year, the Superintendent
shall report the names of the defaulting persons to the Town Clerk, the
Town Assessor and the Town Treasurer on or before December 15 of the
same year. The Town Assessor is hereby directed to add the entire
amount of the sewer tax, assessment or other service charge which
shall be in default, plus penalty and interest as provided for in this Part
2, to the real property taxes due and owing to Town of Seneca Falls in
the next succeeding year, and the Town Assessor is directed to collect
the same in the same manner as real property taxes due and owing to
the Town of Seneca Falls are collected.
C. Where charges are delinquent and the violator is not a resident of the
Town of Seneca Falls or is located outside the geographical boundaries
of the Town, then the Town Attorney is authorized to seek recovery of
charges, including punitive damages, in a court of competent
jurisdiction or make arrangements with the appropriate county where
the user is located to add the amount of the sewer assessment or other
charges which shall be in default, plus penalty and interest as provided
for in the law, to the real property taxes due to the county in the next
ensuing year.
§ 230-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-126
1:207
§ 230-126. Informant rewards.
The Superintendent is authorized to pay up to $100 for information leading
to the discovery of noncompliance by a user. In the event that the
information provided results in an administrative fine or civil penalty levied
against the user, the Superintendent is authorized to disperse up to 5% of
the collected fine or penalty to the informant. However, a single reward
payment may not exceed $1,000, including the discovery reward.
§ 230-127. Public notification of noncompliance.
The Superintendent shall provide public notification, in the daily newspaper
with the largest circulation in the Town of Seneca Falls, of users which were
in significant noncompliance with local or federal pretreatment standards
or requirements since the last such notice. The frequency of such notices
shall be at least once per year.
§ 230-128. Contractor listings.
A. Users which have not achieved consistent compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a
contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the Town of
Seneca Falls.
B. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the Town of
Seneca Falls held by a user found to be in significant violation of
pretreatment standards may be terminated at the discretion of the
Town Board.
§ 230-126 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-128
1:208
ARTICLE XIII
Charges
§ 230-129. Normal sewage service charges.
All nonresidential persons discharging or depositing wastes into the public
sewers shall pay a sewer service charge proportional to the liquid volume
of waste so deposited, which charge shall be collected as a sewer rent.
Residential sewer service charges are determined by the Town of Seneca
Falls (Board) and are based upon metered water consumption.
§ 230-130. Surcharge for abnormal sewage.
All persons discharging or depositing wastes with concentrations in excess
of the pollutant concentrations in normal sewage shall pay a surcharge.
§ 230-131. Total sewer service charge.
The total sewer service charge (which shall be called the "user charge") is
comprised of two parts, as follows:
UC(t) = UC(n) + UC(an)
Where:
UC(t) = Total user charge for POTW operation and maintenance
UC(n) = User charge associated with normal sewage
UC(an) = User charge associated with abnormal sewage
UC(n) = OM X (OQ/100) X (QIA/QA)
UC(an) = OM {[OB/100 X (BIA-Bn)/BA] + [OS/100 X (SIA-Sn)/SA] +
[OP/100 X (PIA-Pn)/PA] + [ONH/100 X (NHIA-NHn)/NHA]
+ [OTK/100 X (TKIA-TKn)/TKn)/TKA]}
OM = Total annual POTW operation and maintenance costs
Q = Percentage of OM attributable to flow (Q)
B = Percentage of OM attributable to BOD5
S = Percentage of OM attributable to suspended solids
P = Percentage of OM attributable to total phosphorus
H = Percentage of OM attributable to ammonia
K = Percentage of OM attributable to total Kjeldahl nitrogen
IA = Average daily flow rate (mgd) from discharger
BIA = Average daily BOD5 loading (lb/day) from discharger
SIA = Average daily suspended solids loading (lb/day) from
discharger
PIA = Average daily total phosphorus loading (lb/day) from
discharger
§ 230-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-131
1:209
NHIA = Average daily ammonia loading (lb n/day) from
discharger
TKIA = Average daily total Kjeldahl nitrogen loading (lb n/day)
from discharger
QA = Average daily flow rate (mgd) at the POTW treatment
plant
BA = Average daily BOD5 loading (lb/day) at the POTW
treatment plant
SA = Average daily suspended solids loading (lb/day) at the
POTW treatment plant
PA = Average daily total phosphorus loading (lb/day) at the
POTW treatment plant
NHA = Average daily total ammonia loading (lb n/day) at the
POTW treatment plant
TKA = Average daily total Kjeldahl nitrogen loading (lb n/day) at
the POTW treatment plant
Bn = BOD5 loading (lb/day) in discharge if it were normal
sewage
Sn = Suspended solids loading (lb/day) in discharge if it were
normal sewage
Pn = Total phosphorus loading (lb/day) in discharge if it were
normal sewage
NHn = Ammonia loading (lb n/day) in discharge if it were normal
sewage
TKn = Total Kjeldahl nitrogen loading (lb n/day) in discharge if
it were normal sewage
NOTES:
1. If any difference term in the equation above is negative, then that
portion of the equation shall not be used; that is, the difference
shall be set to zero when it is negative.
2. All averages are arithmetic averages determined from available
data during the billing period.
§ 230-132. Segmenting POTW service areas.
The service area of the POTW may be segmented to assist in a fair
distribution of user charges, especially if there is a pump station serving a
segment.
§ 230-133. Measurement of flow.
The volume of flow to be used in computing sewer service charges and
abnormal sewage surcharges shall be based upon metered water
consumption as shown on the records of meter readings maintained by
§ 230-131 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-133
1:210
the Town of Seneca Falls Water Department. In the event that a person
discharging wastes into the POTW produces evidence to the Superintendent
demonstrating that a substantial portion of the total amount of metered
water does not reach the POTW, then the Superintendent shall either
establish a percentage of the total metered water to be used as a basis for
such computations or direct the installation of appropriate flow-measuring
(and totalizing) devices to measure and record the actual amount of flow
into the POTW. In the event that a person discharging wastes into the
POTW procures all or part of his water supply from unmetered sources,
the Superintendent shall either direct the installation of water meters on
the other sources of water supply or direct the installation of appropriate
flow-measuring devices to measure and record the actual amount of flow
into the POTW. Any water meters and/or flow-measuring devices installed
pursuant to this section shall be of a type and design acceptable to the
Superintendent and shall be installed, maintained and periodically tested
as required by the Superintendent, at the owner's expense. All such meters
and/or flow-measuring devices shall be subject to periodic inspection,
testing and reading by the Superintendent. Any person discharging wastes
into the POTW may install a flow-measuring device at his or her option,
of the type, design, installation and maintenance standards of the
Superintendent, at the owner's expense.
§ 230-134. Billing period.
The billing period shall be monthly for industrial users and bimonthly for
nonindustrial users.
§ 230-135. Pretreatment program costs.
The additional charges and fees associated with the operation of the
pretreatment program shall be assessed to the user and include:
A. Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment
program.
B. Issuing permits.
C. Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
D. Costs of equipment and supplies.
E. Reviewing accidental discharge procedures.
F. Construction inspections.
G. Filing appeals.
H. Application for consistent removal status as outlined in 40 CFR 403.
I. Other reasonable expenses to carry out the program to satisfy the
requirements of this Part 2, the NYSDEC and the federal government.
§ 230-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-136
1:211
§ 230-136. Charges for trucked and hauled wastes.
The charge for treatment and disposal of trucked or hauled waste which has
been introduced into the POTW shall be as established by the Town Board.
The manner of determining the volume dumped shall be at the discretion of
the Superintendent.
§ 230-137. Costs of capital improvements.
The Town of Seneca Falls may institute an equitable procedure for
recovering the costs of any capital improvements of those parts of the
POTW which collect, pump, treat and dispose of industrial wastewaters
from those persons discharging such wastewaters into the POTW.
§ 230-138. Collection of charges.
Provisions of Article XII of this Part 2 relating to the collection of penalties
shall apply to the collection of sewer service charges and abnormal sewage
service surcharges, unless where otherwise provided by application of the
Sewer Rent Law by the Town of Seneca Falls.
§ 230-139. Fiscal year.
The POTW shall be operated on the basis of a fiscal year commencing on
the first day of January and ending on the 31st day of December.
§ 230-140. Impact fees.
The Town of Seneca Falls (Board) shall have the authority to impose impact
fees on new development, which development may:
§ 230-141. Use of revenues.
Revenues derived from user charges and associated penalties and impact
fees shall be credited to a special fund. Moneys in this fund shall be used
exclusively for the following functions:
A. Cause enlargement of the service area of the POTW.
B. Cause increased hydraulic and/or treatment demands on the POTW.
A. For the payment of the operation and maintenance, including repair
and replacement costs, of the Town of Seneca Falls POTW.
B. For the discovery and correction of inflow and infiltration.
C. For the payment of interest on and the amortization of or payment of
indebtedness which has been or shall be incurred for the construction
or extension of the Town of Seneca Falls POTW.
D. For the extension, enlargement, replacement of and/or additions to the
Town of Seneca Falls POTW, including any necessary appurtenances.
§ 230-136 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-142
1:212
§ 230-142. Records and accounts; insurance.
A. The Town of Seneca Falls shall maintain and keep proper books of
records and accounts for the POTW, separate from all other records and
accounts, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all
transactions relating to the POTW. The Town of Seneca Falls will cause
an annual audit of such books of record and account for the preceding
fiscal year to be made by a recognized independent certified public
accountant and will supply such audit report to authorized officials and
the public on request.
B. In conjunction with the audit, there shall be an annual review of the
sewer charge system to determine if it is adequate to meet
expenditures for all programs for the coming year.
C. Classification of old and new industrial users should also be reviewed
annually.
D. The Town of Seneca Falls shall maintain and carry insurance on all
physical properties of the POTW, of the kinds and in the amounts
normally carried by public utility companies and municipalities
engaged in the operation of sewage disposal systems. All moneys
received for losses under any such insurance policies shall be applied
solely to the replacement and restoration of the property damaged or
destroyed.
§ 230-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-142
1:213

ARTICLE XIV
Public Disclosure of POTW Operations
§ 230-143. Policy.
It shall be the policy of the Town of Seneca Falls (Board) to conduct all
business with full disclosure to the public.
§ 230-144. Availability of procedural requirements.
The nature and requirements of all formal procedures for applying for a
permit and for requesting a permit under this Part 2 and for requesting
a hearing shall be formulated by the Town of Seneca Falls and be made
available to any resident of the Town upon request.
§ 230-145. Validity through public inspection.
The Town of Seneca Falls shall formulate procedures to make available
to the public for inspection such orders, statements of policy and
interpretations used by the Town in the administration of this Part 2. No
rule, regulation or civil order shall be valid until it has been available for
public inspection.
§ 230-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-145
1:215

ARTICLE XV
Applicability
§ 230-146. Applicability of regulations.
Articles II, III, V, IX, XII, XIII, XIV and XV shall apply in all incorporated
areas of the Town of Seneca Falls. Articles IV, VI, VII, VIII, IX and XI shall
apply only in incorporated areas of the Town of Seneca Falls which are also
within the service area of the POTW.
§ 230-146 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-146
1:217

Part 3
Sewers
ARTICLE XVI
Terminology
§ 230-147. Definitions; word usage.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of
terms used in this Part 3 shall be as follows:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.,
as may be amended.
ASTM — The American Society for Testing and Materials.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20º C. expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, terminating three feet (0.9 meter) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal; also called "house connection."
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer designed and intended to receive both
sewage and surface water runoff.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land
owned by others.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable
fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere
with the collection system.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any industrial or commercial establishment with
a classification as designated in the Standard Industrial Classification,
latest edition, as published by the Executive Office of the President, and
who utilizes the services of the Town's sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The wastewater from industrial processes,
trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastewater.
INSPECTOR — The Inspector of Sewerage Facilities of the Town of
Seneca Falls or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
§ 230-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-147
1:219
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface or groundwater.
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation or a duly authorized official of said Department.
O&M — The operation and maintenance of the sewerage works.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in
grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value
of seven and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10-7.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the municipal system
which is designed to provide treatment, including recycling and
reclamation, of wastes received by the municipal system shall be the
treatment facilities of the Town of Seneca Falls.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu
of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW.
The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, process changes or by other means, except as
prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6, General Pretreatment Regulations for
Existing and New Sources of Pollution, and any amendments thereto.
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A privately owned system
for the treatment and ultimate disposal of wastewater, such as a septic
tank and/or other subsurface disposal system serving one or more
structures.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292); includes
any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW but does not include
pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing
treatment.
PUBLIC SEWER — A common sewer controlled by a governmental
agency or public utility.
RESIDENTIAL USER — All premises used only for human residency and
which is connected to the wastewater facilities.
§ 230-147 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-147
1:220
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater
and surface water that are not admitted intentionally.
SANITARY WASTEWATER — Domestic wastewater with stormwater
and surface water excluded and includes wastewater discharging from
the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses
and hotels), office buildings, industrial plants or institutions.
SEWAGE — The spent water of a community. The preferred term is
"wastewater" (defined below).
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SEWERAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating
and disposing of sewage.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Any user who:
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal operation and
shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the
wastewater treatment works. The following shall be considered average
concentrations for normal operations:
Parameter
Concentration
(milligrams per liter)
BOD 60
Suspended solids 70
Chlorine demand 15
SPDES DISCHARGE PERMIT — The State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System discharge permit issued by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation.
Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work
day;
(1)
Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow in the municipality's
wastewater system;
(2)
Has in his or her waste toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to
Section 307 of the Act;
(3)
Has been identified as one of the 21 industrial categories pursuant
to Section 307 of the Act; or
(4)
Is found by the county to have significant impact, either singly or
in combination with other contributing industries, on the treatment
or collection system.
(5)
§ 230-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-147
1:221
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A drain or sewer
for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted
water from any source.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Public Works of the Town
of Seneca Falls or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that either floats
on the surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other
liquids and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in the
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and
referred to as "nonfilterable residue."
TOWN — The Town of Seneca Falls, Seneca County, New York.
TOWN BOARD — The duly elected Town Board of the Town of Seneca
Falls or its authorized deputy, agent or representative.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of quality equal to or better than
the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation
of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities
provided.
USC — The user charge system of the sewerage works.
USEPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency or a duly
authorized official of said Agency.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with any groundwater, source water and
stormwater that may be present.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of
water, either continuously or intermittently.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 230-147 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-147
1:222
ARTICLE XVII
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 230-148. Prohibited acts.
§ 230-149. Residential facilities.
§ 230-150. Commercial, institutional, industrial, recreational,
public or educational facilities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the Town of Seneca Falls or in any area under the jurisdiction of
said Town any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town of
Seneca Falls or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town any
wastewater or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
Part 3.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
A. The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy situated within the Town and abutting on any street, alley or
right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be
located a public sanitary sewer is hereby required at his or her or their
expense to install facilities connecting directly with the proper public
sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Part 3 within one year
after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer
is within 300 feet (91.5 meters) of such house or building.
B. The owner(s) of new houses or buildings used for human occupancy
shall be required at his or her or their expense to install suitable
sanitary facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
Part 3 prior to occupancy of the house or building, provided that said
public sanitary sewer is located within 300 feet (91.5 meters) of the
structure to be served.
A. The owner(s) of a commercial, institutional, industrial, recreational,
public and educational building(s) situated within the Town and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may be located in the future a public sanitary sewer is hereby
required at his or her or their own expense to install facilities
connecting directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this Part 3 within one year after the official notices to do
§ 230-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-150
1:223
§ 230-151. Abandonment of septic tanks.
After the owner(s) of properties within any sewer district has connected his
or her or their facilities to the public sewer system, abandoned septic tanks
shall be cleaned and either filled in with suitable material or removed from
the site.
so, provided that said public sewer is within 600 feet (183 meters) of
such building(s).
B. The owner(s) of a new commercial, institutional, industrial,
recreational, public and educational building(s) shall be required at his
or her or their expense to install suitable sanitary facilities therein and
to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sanitary sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this Part 3 prior to occupancy of
the building(s), provided that said public sanitary sewer is located
within 600 feet (183 meters) of the structure to be served.
§ 230-150 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-151
1:224
ARTICLE XVIII
Sewer Permits; Building Sewers and Connections
§ 230-152. Permit required.
No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Inspector.
§ 230-153. Permit classes; application requirements and fees; term
of permits.
§ 230-154. Permit terms and conditions.
A sewer permit's terms and conditions shall be subject to modification and
change by the Town, allowing 120 days for notification and compliance with
new permit terms and conditions.
§ 230-155. Transferability of permit.
A Class 2 sewer permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a
new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation.
§ 230-156. Permit modification.
An industrial-type discharger shall apply for a permit modification if
production or process is changed so that the wastewater characteristics or
flow is altered.
§ 230-157. Industrial-type permits.
Industrial-type permits shall require information concerning volume,
constituents and characteristics of wastewater, flow rates, each product
A. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: Class 1, for
service to residential, commercial or other establishments discharging
sanitary wastewater only, and Class 2, for service to industrial,
institutional and educational establishments and all other
establishments not specifically included in Class 1 above. In either case,
the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the Town.
B. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Inspector.
C. A permit and inspection fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
Town Board shall be paid to the Town at the time the application is filed.
D. The Class 1 permit shall have an indefinite term unless terminated in
accordance with other provisions of this Part 3. The Class 2 permit shall
have a term of three years.
§ 230-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-157
1:225
produced by type, amount and rate of production and description of
activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all
materials processed and types of materials which are or could be
discharged.
§ 230-158. Permit specifications.
Sewer permits may contain specifications for monitoring programs to
include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedules.
§ 230-159. Enforcement of permits.
Sewer permits shall be uniformly enforced by the Town in accordance with
this Part 3 and applicable state and federal regulations. Permits shall be
subject to all provisions of this Part 3, user charges and fee schedules and
other applicable regulations.
§ 230-160. Costs to be borne by owner.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify
the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 230-161. Independent building sewers required; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole may be considered as one building sewer.
§ 230-162. Use of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test supervised by the Inspector,
to meet all requirements of this Part 3.
§ 230-163. Material specifications.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and
the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing
and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the Town and be subject to the approval of the
Inspector. In no event, shall the diameter of such pipe be less than four
inches, nor shall the slope of such four-inch pipe be less than 1/4 inch per
foot unless approved by the Inspector.
§ 230-157 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-164
1:226
§ 230-164. Elevation of sewer; low building drains.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by approved means at the
owner's expense and discharged to the building sewer.
§ 230-165. Restricted connections.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected, directly or
indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by
the Inspector for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
§ 230-166. Connection standards.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Town or the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF
Manual of Practice No. 9.12 All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight. Any deviation from prescribed procedures and materials must
be approved by the Inspector before installation.
§ 230-167. Inspection before connection.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Inspector when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer.
§ 230-168. Connection to be supervised.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Inspector or his
or her representative.
§ 230-169. Excavations.
A. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard.
B. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
Town.
12.Editor's Note: Formerly the "Water Pollution Control Federation" and now the "Water
Environment Federation."
§ 230-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-170
1:227
§ 230-170. Grinder pump systems.
Certain houses will be served, individually or in groups, by grinder pump
systems provided by the Town. The user(s) will be responsible for the cost
of constructing his or her or their building sewer(s). All provisions of Article
XIX are applicable to discharge to grinder pump systems.
§ 230-170 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-170
1:228
ARTICLE XIX
Use of Public Sewers
§ 230-171. Prohibited discharges.
§ 230-172. Restricted discharges.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
waters, such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage or cooling water, to any sanitary sewer.
B. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a
natural outlet approved by the Inspector and other regulatory agencies.
The discharge of unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters
requires a NYSDEC SPDES permit and is subject to federal and state
regulations.
C. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(2) Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute
a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
plant.
(3) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.5 or higher than 8.5
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the
wastewater works.
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size as to be
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities,
such as but not limited to ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails
and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or
ground by garbage grinders.
A. The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be
limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or
quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment
process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or
constitute a nuisance. The Inspector and Superintendent may set
limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations
§ 230-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-172
1:229
below if, in their opinion, such more severe limitations are necessary
to meet the above objectives. In forming their opinion as to the
acceptability, the Inspector and Superintendent will give consideration
to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the
wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater
treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater
treatment plant, the requirements of the Town of Seneca Falls POTW
and other pertinent factors.
B. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste
or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be
violated without approval of the Inspector are as follows:
(1) Any liquid or vapor containing heat in amounts which will
accelerate biodegradation of wastes, cause the formation of
excessive amounts of hydrogen sulfide in the wastewater sewer or
inhibit biological activity in wastewater treatment facilities, but in
no case shall the discharge of heat cause the temperature in the
sewers to exceed 150º F. (65º C.) or the temperature at the POTW
to exceed 104º F. (40º C.).
(2) Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or products of mineral
oil origin.
(3) Toxic substances, as follows:
Cadmium
Hex. chromium
Total chromium
Copper
Lead
Mercury
Nickel
Zinc
Arsenic
Available chlorine
Cyanide, free
Cyanide, complex
Selenium
Sulfide
Barium
Manganese
Gold
§ 230-172 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-172
1:230
Silver
Fluorides:
To freshwater
To saline water
Phenol
(4) Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or
grease.
(5) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. (See the
definition of "properly shredded garbage" in § 230-147.) Garbage
grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels,
institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or
similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of
food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or
when served by caterers.
(6) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous substances
which exceed established limits at the point of entry into the public
sewers, unless a categorical standard has been promulgated for a
specific industry.
(7) Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances
exceeding limits which may be established by the Inspector.
(8) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by applicable local, state or
federal regulations.
(9) Quantities of flow or concentrations, or both, which constitute a
slug as defined herein.
(10)Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that
the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters.
(11) Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form
suspended solids which interfere with the collection system or
create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment
processes.
(12) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW, such as residues, sludge or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse. In no case, shall a substance
discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance
with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations
§ 230-172 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-172
1:231
§ 230-173. Acceptance of restricted discharges.
§ 230-174. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in
§ 230-172B(4), or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients,
except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Inspector and shall be located so as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain
records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review
by the Inspector. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not
developed under Section 405 of P.L. 95-217, any criteria guidelines
or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal development
pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act or
the Toxic Substance Control Act or state criteria applicable to the
sludge management method being used.
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 230-172 of this article
and which, in the judgment of the Inspector, may have a deleterious
effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving
waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the Inspector may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require that when pretreatment standards are adopted by the
USEPA or NYSDEC for any given class of industries, then such
industries must immediately conform to the USEPA or NYSDEC
timetable for adherence to these standards. The Inspector shall
further assure that compliance by industries to whom pretreatment
standards are applicable are in compliance with Section 307 of P.L.
92-500, as amended;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
B. When considering the above alternatives, the Inspector shall give
consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the
discharger. If the Inspector permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Inspector.
§ 230-172 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-174
1:232
performed by the owners' personnel must be performed by currently
licensed waste disposal firms.
§ 230-175. Pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities.
Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
§ 230-176. Observation structure and meters.
When required by the Inspector, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure,
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessible and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the Inspector. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his or her
expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
§ 230-177. Information which may be required.
The Inspector may require a user of sewer services to provide information
needed to determine compliance with this Part 3. These requirements may
include:
§ 230-178. Measurement, test and analysis standards; sampling.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this Part 3 shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies
A. Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period.
B. Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
C. Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
D. Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other
materials important to sewer use control.
E. A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
F. Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
G. Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the municipal sewer.
§ 230-174 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-178
1:233
are to be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the
Inspector.
§ 230-179. Special agreements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
be accepted by the Town for treatment. Acceptance of such waste shall not
cause the POTW to violate its SPDES permit or the receiving water quality
standards or any pretreatment regulations promulgated by the USEPA or
NYSDEC in accordance with Section 307 of P.L. 95-217.
§ 230-180. Dilution of discharges.
No user shall ever increase the use or process water or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards or in any other pollutant
specific limitation developed by the Town or state unless authorized by state
or federal regulations.
§ 230-181. Accidental discharges.
A user shall notify the Town and the operator of the POTW immediately
upon accidentally discharging wastes in violation of this Part 3. This
notification shall be followed, within 15 days of the date of occurrence, by
a detailed statement describing the causes of the accidental discharge and
the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. Such notification
will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the
sewer system, treatment plant or treatment process or for any fines
imposed on the Town under applicable state and federal regulations.
§ 230-178 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-181
1:234
ARTICLE XX
Industrial Cost Recovery
§ 230-182. Regulations.
This section will be developed in accordance with state and federal
regulations at such time as state and federal regulations are established.
§ 230-182 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-182
1:235

ARTICLE XXI
Enforcement Inspectors; Penalties.
§ 230-183. Enforcement.
The Town Board of the Town of Seneca Falls shall be responsible for
enforcement of this Part 3. The Board shall appoint inspectors to assure
compliance.
§ 230-184. Right of entry; inspection.
§ 230-185. Confidential information.
The Inspector or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain
information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing
on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system.
Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and
from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction, unless the industrial user specifically requests
and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town that the release
of such information would divulge information processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. The Town shall
implement measures to ensure the confidentiality of information provided
by an industrial user pursuant to this Part 3. In no event shall any claimed
confidential information be disclosed to any person without prior notice, in
writing, to the industrial user and without providing the industrial user with
the opportunity to protect such confidential information, including the right
to seek judicial relief.
A. The Inspector, other duly authorized employees of the Town and
representatives of the USEPA and NYSDEC bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties at
reasonable times for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the
community system in accordance with the provisions of this Part 3.
B. The Town shall have the right to set upon the user's property such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations.
C. The Town may, at reasonable times, have access to and copy any
records, inspect any monitoring equipment or method required by the
Town's wastewater discharge ordinance and sample any effluents
which the owner or operator of such source is required to sample.
D. Where a user has security measures in force, the user shall make
necessary arrangements with his or her security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the Town will be
permitted to enter without delay.
§ 230-183 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-186
1:237
§ 230-186. Safety rules; liability.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
§ 230-184 above, the Inspector or duly authorized employees of the Town
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
Town employees, and the Town shall indemnify the company against loss
or damage to its property by Town employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except
as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain
safe conditions as required in § 230-176.
§ 230-187. Easements.
The Inspector and other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the Town holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities
lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said
easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
§ 230-188. Grinder pump systems.
The Inspector and other duly authorized employees, representatives or
contractors of the Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall
be permitted to cross private properties served by grinder pump systems
for the purposes of gaining access, for both personnel and equipment, to the
grinder pump systems as required for operation and maintenance thereof.
This entry does not entitle said Town representatives to leave the property
in a damaged condition without just compensation.
§ 230-189. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person found to be violating any provisions of this Part 3 shall be
served by the Town with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated
in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Any violation which shall continue beyond the time limit provided for in
Subsection A of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both, for
each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall
be deemed a separate offense.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Part 3 shall become
liable to the Town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the Town
by reason of such violation.
§ 230-186 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-189
1:238
ARTICLE XXII
Charges
§ 230-190. Sewer use/benefit charges.
Subject to all applicable state and federal laws and/or regulations, the Town
Board shall establish such charges as are required to raise the necessary
revenue to defray the costs of debt service and capital expenditures and a
proportionate share of the operation and maintenance of the wastewater
treatment and collection facilities.
A. The Town will review, not less often than every two years, the
wastewater contributions, the total costs of operation and maintenance
(O&M) and the user charge system (UCS) itself. Revisions must be
made as necessary to conform to 40 CFR 35.929-2(b)(1) through (3).
B. Dischargers of toxic wastes which cause an increase in the cost of
treatment at the Town plant shall pay such increased costs, as per 40
CFR 35.929-2(c).
C. The cost of treating all extraneous flow will be distributed among all
users in accordance with 40 CFR 35.929-2(d)(1) and (2).
D. Each user is to be notified annually of the rate and portion of the
charges attributable to wastewater treatment.
E. Sewer use/benefit charges will be assigned by the Town to all benefited
properties in accordance with the attached Attachment A, Bridgeport
Sewer District,13 and Attachment B, West Seneca Falls Sewer District,14
and Extension No. 1, West Seneca Falls Sewer District.
F. Sewer use/benefit charges shall be determined by the Town on a yearto-
year basis. The Town reserves the right, from time to time, to change
sewer use/benefit charges originally or previously assigned to any
property owner.
13.Editor's Note: Attachment A is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
14.Editor's Note: Attachment B is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 230-190 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-190
1:239

ARTICLE XXIII
Rules and Regulations
§ 230-191. Power to adopt additional rules and regulations
reserved.
The Town reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, in accordance with
the laws of the State of New York, such additional rules and regulations as
it shall deem necessary and proper in connection with use and operation of
the sewerage works, which rules and regulations shall become and shall be
construed as part of this Part 3.
§ 230-192. Permit fees.
Before making any sewer connection, the owner or his or her agents shall
obtain a permit from the Town Clerk after paying a fee in an amount as set
from time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
§ 230-193. Conformance required; inspections.
All workmanship and materials shall conform to the requirements of these
rules. Notice must be given to the Town by the owner or his or her agent
when the work is ready for inspection. Inspection will be made by the Town
within 48 hours, excluding weekends and legal holidays, from the time
notice is given for the work to be inspected. Under no conditions is any
work to be covered up before it has been inspected and tested by the Town
(§ 230-167).
§ 230-194. Specifications.
A. Materials. The owner may use any of the following three types of pipe
for the building connection:
(1) Service class cast-iron soil pipe conforming to the requirements of
ASTM 74-75. Joints shall be hub-and-spigot type with preformed
rubber gaskets conforming to Specification HSN of the Cast Iron
Soil Pipe Institute.
(2) Rigid polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe which shall meet the
requirements of ASTM 3034-74-SDR-35. Pipes shall have an
integral bell and pipe, and fittings shall be jointed with a solid
rubber ring.
(3) HDPE pipe upon approval.
B. Pipe size. The minimum pipe size for building sewer house connections
shall be four inches in diameter.
C. Pipe slope. Wherever possible, four-inch sewer connections shall be laid
at a slope equal to 1/4 inch per foot. The minimum allowable slope shall
be 1/8 inch per foot and under such conditions, consideration should be
given for use of six-inch pipe.
§ 230-191 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-194
1:241
D. Cleanouts. A cleanout shall be provided on all building drains near the
point where the drain leaves the building. An additional cleanout shall
be installed for each 100 feet of building sewer which is required to
connect to the public sewer. A cleanout shall also be provided for each
change of direction of 90º or more. Such cleanouts shall be extended to
grade and constructed in such manner as to allow ready access of a
sewer rod for cleaning. Cleanouts shall not be less than four inches in
size, and no bend sharper than a one-eighth-bend (45º) shall be used for
a change in direction. An additional cleanout shall be installed at the
edge of the right-of-way.
E. Excavation and backfill.
(1) Trenches should be wide enough so as to permit proper installation
and inspection of the pipe. Where foundation conditions are
suitable, if care is taken to gauge the depth of the trench, it shall be
dug as close as possible to the desired level so as to allow the pipe
to rest on undisturbed soil. Should an unstable condition be found
or if the trench is in rock, it shall be overexcavated by as much as
four inches to six inches, and a bed of crushed stone shall be placed
on which to lay the pipe.
(2) After placement of the pipe and following inspection and approval
by the Inspector, the trench may be backfilled. Clean sand or fine
gravel shall first be placed to a depth of six inches above the crown
of the pipe. Following this, the material excavated from the trench
may be used for the remainder of the backfill.
F. Performance. All work shall be in accordance with the National
Plumbing Code or other applicable state and local codes.
G. Plumber registration. Each plumber will be required to register with
the Clerk of the Town before he or she will be permitted to do any work
described in this Part 3.
§ 230-194 SENECA FALLS CODE § 230-194
1:242
Chapter 242
SNOWMOBILES
§ 242-1. Operation on Town streets and highways permitted;
exception.
Chapter 246
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Explosives and combustibles — See Ch. 146.
Landfills — See Ch. 185.
Special events — See Ch. 250.
A. The operation of snowmobiles is hereby permitted on the shoulders of
all Town streets or highways throughout the Town of Seneca Falls, New
York; and all Town streets or highways throughout the Town of Seneca
Falls, New York, are hereby designated as uncongested and safe for
snowmobile travel, except as set forth in Subsection B below.
B. The operation of snowmobiles is not permitted on the streets or
highways within the boundaries of the former Village of Seneca Falls,
except during snow emergencies so declared by the Town Supervisor.
§ 230-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-1
1:243

ARTICLE I
Collection and Disposal
§ 246-1. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to any owner, lessee or occupant of
any premises within the Town.
§ 246-2. Supervision.
The collection and disposal of refuse shall be under the supervision of the
Town Highway Department in accordance with such regulations as may be,
from time to time, adopted by the Town Board.
§ 246-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASHES — The residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings.
BRUSH — Includes branches, leaves and organic yard waste.
BULKY RUBBISH — Rubbish consisting of large household items that
cannot be disposed of in the regular scheduled weekly garbage pickups. Up
to four passenger-sized tires can be accepted if they are kept separate from
other debris.
DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT — This district is designated as Fall
Street between Trinity Lane westerly up to and including 143 Fall Street.
The district also includes Cowing Street.
GARBAGE — Wastes from the preparation, cooking and consumption of
foods; market refuse; waste from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — These types of materials will not be picked up by
the Town of Seneca Falls. These materials include, but are not limited to:
A. Paint.
B. Paint thinners and paint strippers.
C. Rechargeable batteries.
D. Photographic chemicals.
E. Drain cleaners.
F. Pool chemicals.
G. Aerosol cans.
H. Pesticides.
I. Antifreeze.
§ 246-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-3
1:245
MULTI-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Five or more residential units located
on a single property or continuous properties under common co-ownership,
control or management.
NEWSPAPERS — Papers that are printed and sold or distributed at stated
intervals, usually daily or weekly, and that contain news, opinions,
advertisements and other matters of public interest, but excluding all
magazines or other periodicals, as well as all other paper products of every
nature.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Material that can be collected, separated and/
or processed, treated, reclaimed, used or reused to produce a raw material
or product.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — A structure occupied as the residence or home of
one family but not more than four families living independently of each
other.
ROLLING WASTE CONTAINER — A ninety-six-gallon rolling refuse
container with a lid, one-piece handle, wheels and a ten-year
manufacturer's warranty. Each waste container will be numbered and
assigned to a specific property.
RUBBISH — Tree branches, leaves, grass and hedge clippings and similar
garden refuse; wood; furniture; bedding; metals; crockery; small stones;
dirt and other mineral refuse.
SACKETT BUSINESS DISTRICT — That area located on Bridge Street from
39 Bridge Street North to the Bridge Street Bridge and the area of West
Bayard Street located between 47 West Bayard Street and 64 West Bayard
Street.
§ 246-4. Container standards.
J. Fertilizer.
K. Acids.
L. Gun powder.
M. Ammunition and fireworks.
N. Fluorescent bulbs and tubes.
O. Televisions, computers or other similar electronic components.
P. Medical waste.
A. Garbage shall be securely wrapped in paper and placed in watertight
metal or rigid plastic containers, which shall be kept covered at all
times, or multiple polyethylene trash bags, sealed with a tie so that the
garbage smell shall not become objectionable. Containers shall have
tight-fitting covers and be equipped with bails or handles for easy
handling.
§ 246-3 SENECA FALLS CODE § 246-4
1:246
§ 246-5. Placement of containers for collection.
Containers shall be placed within three feet of the curb not more than 12
hours prior to the day designated for their collection by the Town Board.
No containers shall be placed upon any street or sidewalk area. All empty
containers shall be removed from the pickup area prior to darkness on the
evening of the day designated for their collection.
§ 246-6. Collection times.
Collection of the several classes of refuse, as herein defined, shall be made
with such frequency and on such days and at such hours as may from time
to time be established by the Town Board.
§ 246-7. Prohibited materials.
B. Ash and rubbish containers shall be of a type suitable for the material
therein deposited. Such containers shall preferably be of wood, metal
or rigid plastic, but baskets, burlap, cloth or polyethylene trash bags
and substantial cartons may be used for light rubbish and shall be
reduced in volume as much as possible and securely tied to permit safe
and speedy handling.
C. The combined weight of any container and its contents shall not exceed
50 pounds nor have a capacity in excess of 35 gallons.
D. Containers shall be maintained clean and in good condition. Any
container that does not conform to the provisions of this article or that
may have ragged or sharp edges or any other defect liable to hamper or
injure the person collecting the contents thereof must be promptly
replaced by a proper receptacle upon receipt of notice to that effect
from the Highway Department; and if not so replaced within 10 days
after the receipt of such notice, such nonconforming or defective
container may be collected and disposed of as waste.
A. The Highway Department will under no conditions collect any of the
following described materials, and the transportation and disposal of all
such prohibited materials shall be the responsibility of the owner,
lessee or occupant of the premises, subject to such regulations as may
from time to time be promulgated by the Town Board:
(1) Solid or liquid waste resulting from industrial processes and
manufacturing operations, such as food processing wastes, boiler
house cinders, lumber scraps and shavings, waste oil and grease,
etc.
(2) Wearing apparel, bedding or other refuse from a home or other
place where highly infectious or contagious diseases have
prevailed.
(3) Offal, meats, fruits, vegetables and food products that are
unsalable or which have been condemned by health authorities.
§ 246-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-7
1:247
§ 246-8. Restricted materials.
(4) Dead animals.
(5) Abandoned automobiles.
(6) Swill, slops or garbage containing free liquids.
(7) Building rubbish or waste material from the construction,
remodeling and repair operation on houses, commercial buildings
and other structures, including, among other rejected matter,
excavated earth, stones, bricks, plaster, wallpaper, lumber,
shingles, concrete and waste parts from plumbing, heating and
electrical work and roofing.
(8) Rubbish from other contract operations on the premises.
B. The refuse collector will not accept for collection any refuse which is
not prepared, stored or placed for collection in accordance with the
provisions of this article, including but not limited to materials in
unsafe, inadequate or overloaded containers; material not placed at the
designated collection point; leaves and grass not in containers, etc.
C. Under no conditions shall there be placed in any material intended for
collection any gasoline, benzene, kerosene, turpentine, paint or similar
explosive or highly volatile liquids, nor any cartridges, shells,
ammunition, gunpowder or explosives of any kind.
D. Under no condition shall there be placed in any container any broken
glass, metal with jagged or sharp edges or other material liable to
injure the collector, unless properly packaged.
A. The refuse collector will collect normal amounts of all classes of refuse
from the premises; but where abnormal amounts are placed for
collection, the Town reserves the right to refuse the material, to defer
the collection, to collect the material in part or to make a special
collection thereof at charges herein provided, as may be desirable in
the public interest.
B. The amount of rubbish placed for collection on any one established
collection day shall be restricted to a total of 200 pounds of material
consisting of bundles weighing not more than 50 pounds each.
C. Rubbish in excess of the quantities or weight limit, or trees, tree
branches, logs, etc. not reduced to size and bundles, as provided in this
article, will be taken and collected by special collection at charges as
herein provided.
D. Other materials not specifically provided for herein may, on application
to the Town Board, be accepted, in its discretion, for special collection
at charges herein provided.
§ 246-7 SENECA FALLS CODE § 246-8
1:248
§ 246-9. Charges for special collection.
§ 246-10. Nonliability of Town.
E. Other materials not specifically provided for herein may, on application
to the Town Board, be accepted, in its discretion, for special collection
at charges herein provided.
A. The Town Board is authorized to establish charges for special
collections, based on the personnel and equipment required therefor,
plus a reasonable overhead but, in that event, not less than actual cost.
B. Such special collection service shall be rendered only at the
convenience of the Highway Department, subject to the availability of
personnel and equipment and without liability for delay.
C. The Highway Department will make collections of unusually bulky
rubbish at designated times and dates established by policy set by the
Town Board, as the same is defined in § 246-3 of this article. Any other
collection at the request of the disposing property owner made to the
Town Office shall be subject to payment of a fee as described in
Subsection F.
D. Any bulky rubbish left at the curbside by any owner of residential
property, in the absence of the notification of the Town Office of such
deposit, shall be removed by the Highway Department upon five days'
notice by regular mail sent by the Town to the property owner, and the
appropriate fee as set forth in Subsection F will be billed to said
property owner.
E. Upon the failure of any property owner to pay the appropriate
collection fee by May of the ensuing Town fiscal year, the Town Clerk is
hereby authorized to assess such unpaid charges against the real
property, all without notice to the owner of the property.
F. The following schedule is established for the special collection of bulky
rubbish. Rates for such schedule shall be established and amended
from time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
(1) For special collections as designated by the Town Board, due notice
having been filed with the Town Office.
(2) For special collections at the request of a property owner, due
notice having been filed with the Town Office.
(3) For special collection made at any time where bulky rubbish has
been left at the curbside without notice to the Town Office.
A. All refuse collected by the Town shall be the property of the Town.
Neither the Town nor its agents or employees shall be responsible for
the collection or disposal of material not intended for collection but
placed in error with the refuse.
§ 246-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-10
1:249
§ 246-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall become subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to
exceed 15 days, or both, for each offense.
B. The Town will not be responsible for failure to render collection
services to premises where conditions prevent safe, easy and ready
access.
§ 246-10 SENECA FALLS CODE § 246-11
1:250
ARTICLE II
Dumping Restrictions
§ 246-12. Import of waste for deposit; dumping.
No person shall transport or bring or cause to be transported or brought
into or shall throw, dump, deposit or cause to be thrown, dumped or
deposited in any part of the Town of Seneca Falls, New York, any garbage,
ashes, refuse or waste materials from any source whatever originating
outside of the Town of Seneca Falls, New York, including a designated
landfill, except as expressly permitted by the Town Board, and no person
shall permit such throwing, dumping or depositing thereof upon property
owned, leased or controlled by such person, including a designated landfill,
except as expressly permitted by the Town Board. The Town Board will
consider the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Seneca
Falls, New York, and be guided by what is in the best interests of the
community in reviewing any application for permission to so accept such
garbage, ashes, refuse or waste materials pursuant to this section.
§ 246-13. Use of landfill.
No person shall deposit or throw or cause to be deposited any substance
of any kind on a designated landfill except at the place and in the manner
directed by the Town Board of Seneca Falls, New York, or by a person in
charge of the premises under the authority of said Town Board.
§ 246-14. Deposit of waste on public or private lands.
No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited any
garbage, ashes, refuse or waste materials or abandoned vehicles or parts
thereof in or upon any public highway, street, place, stream, waterway or
body of water or upon any private lands.
§ 246-15. Accumulation of waste on private property.
No person shall suffer or permit garbage, ashes, refuse or other waste
materials to collect or remain upon premises owned or occupied by him or
her so that the same shall become offensive or harmful to the public health
or to any person or property.
§ 246-16. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this article may be punishable by a fine of not more than $500
or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 246-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-16
1:251
Chapter 250
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 102.
Animals — See Ch. 106.
Loitering — See Ch. 193.
Noise — See Ch. 201.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 213.
§ 250-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person(s) or organization who or which seeks a special
event permit from the Town to conduct or sponsor an event governed by this
policy. All applicants must be 21 years of age or older to file an application.
ATHLETIC EVENT — Any occasion in which a group of persons collectively
engage in a sport or form of physical exercise on a public street, sidewalk,
alley or other public right-of-way, which obstructs, delays, or interferes with
the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or does not comply with
traffic laws and controls. Athletic events include bicycle and foot races,
bike-a-thons and walk-a-thons.
MOTORCADE — Any organized procession containing 10 or more vehicles,
except funeral processions, upon a public street, alley or other public rightof-
way.
PARADE — Any march or procession consisting of people, animals, bicycles,
vehicles or a combination thereof, except funeral processions, on any public
street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right-of-way, which obstructs, delays,
or interferes, with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or does
not comply with traffic laws or controls.
SPECIAL EVENT — Any parade, fair, show, festival, carnival, rally, party,
filming (movie, video or television show), motorcade, run, street dance,
bike-a-thon, race, walk, athletic event or other attended entertainment or
celebration that is to be held in whole or in part upon publicly owned
property and/or a public right-of-way, or, if held wholly upon private
property, will nevertheless affect or impact the ordinary and normal use
by the general public of public property or public rights-of-way within the
vicinity of the event. "Special event" shall also mean any activity to be held
in whole or in part upon publicly owned or controlled property and/or public
rights-of-way where merchandise or services are offered for sale, whether
by for-profit or nonprofit organizations.
§ 246-16 SENECA FALLS CODE § 250-1
1:252
STREET DANCE — Any dance of eight or more people on or within any
publicly owned parking lot or other publicly owned property, or any other
public street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way.
§ 250-2. Permit required.
Any person(s) or organization desiring to conduct or sponsor a special event
in the Town shall obtain a special event permit from the Town Board.
§ 250-3. Permit not required.
Special event permits are not required for the following:
§ 250-4. Permit application requirements.
A. Wedding processions or funeral processions on the streets.
B. Parades involving a total of 30 or fewer pedestrians marching along a
parade route that is restricted to marching on sidewalks, and crossing
streets only at pedestrian crosswalks in accordance with traffic
regulations and controls.
C. Groups of students involved in exercising as part of an organized school
sports/club turnout.
D. Gatherings of people whose activities fall within the scope of the Town
facility being utilized, provided that said activities do not pose a
significant liability risk or risk to public safety.
E. Special events sponsored in whole or in part by the Town.
A. Filling of application. Any person(s) or organization desiring to sponsor
a special event not exempted by this policy shall apply for a special
event permit by filing a completed application with the Commissioner of
Parks and Recreation on a form supplied by the Parks and Recreation
Department (available at the Seneca Falls Community Center, 35 Water
Street). This application shall be filed not less than 60 days in advance
of the date on which the event is to occur.
B. Waiver of application deadline. Upon a showing of good cause, or at the
discretion of the Commissioner of Parks and Recreation, applications
filed after the deadline may be considered if there is sufficient time to
process and investigate the application and obtain police and/or other
Town services for the event. Sufficient time must also be available to
allow for timely approval of said event by the Town Board. Good cause
can be demonstrated by the applicant showing that the circumstance
that gave rise to the permit application did not reasonably allow the
participant(s) to file within the time prescribed or that the event is for
the purpose of exercising the right of free speech.
C. Information requested on application. In order that adequate
arrangements may be made for the proper protection of the special
§ 250-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-4
1:253
§ 250-5. Permit application review.
In reviewing the application for the purpose of determining whether the
permit should be issued or denied, the Commissioner of Parks and
Recreation shall notify and seek consultation with other Town officials
(Police, DPW, Fire, etc.) and shall make such review in conformance with
the grounds for denial set forth in this policy. Upon the proper, timely, and
diligent review of qualified applications, the Commissioner of Parks and
Recreation shall present said application to the Town Board for approval.
Disqualified or incomplete applications shall be sent back to applicants
with reasons for disqualification or with a request for more information,
clarifications, or corrections.
§ 250-6. Permit denial.
The Town Board may deny an application for a special event if it is
determined from a consideration of the application or other pertinent
information that:
event, the Commissioner of Parks and Recreation shall have the
authority to set the information required on the application. Such
information shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) The name of the applicant(s), the sponsoring organization(s), the
special event coordinator(s), and appropriate address(es) and
telephone number(s) of applicant(s).
(2) The purpose of the special event, the date(s) when it is proposed to
be conducted, location(s), hours of operation, site map(s) or event
route(s), and schedule of events.
(3) Such other information as deemed reasonably necessary by the
Commissioner of Parks and Recreation.
D. Application filing fee. The application for a special event permit shall be
accompanied by a filing fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
Town Board, which will also serve as a refundable security/cleanup
deposit. The fee shall be refunded upon Town/permittee inspection of
the event site(s) at the completion of the event. (See further information
regarding cleanup requirements in § 250-12 of this chapter.)
A. Information contained in the application, or supplemental information
requested from the applicant, is found to be false or nonexistent in any
material detail; or
B. The applicant fails to complete the application form after having been
notified of the additional information or documents required; or
C. The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all of the
conditions and terms of the permit; or
§ 250-4 SENECA FALLS CODE § 250-6
1:254
§ 250-7. Conditions.
The Town Board may condition the issuance of a special event permit by
imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place and manner
D. It is found that the purpose of the special event is principally devoted to
the advertising and sale of a commercial product or service or for a
private commercial process; or
E. The time, route, hours, location, or size of the special event will
unnecessarily disrupt the movement of other traffic within the area; or
F. The special event is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so
great a number of Town police officers to properly safeguard the event,
site, and contiguous areas that allowing the special event would
unreasonably deny police protection to the remainder of the Town and
its residents; or
G. Another special event permit application has already been received, or
has already been approved, to hold another event at the same time and
place requested by the applicant, or so close in time and place as to
cause undue traffic congestion, or the Police Department and/or other
Town departments are unable to meet the needs for police and/or other
Town services for both events; or
H. The location of the special event would cause undue hardship for
adjacent businesses or residents; or
I. The location of the event will substantially interfere with any
construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or
along public property or a right-of-way, or a previously granted right-ofway
disturbance permit; or
J. The event is scheduled to occur at a time when a school is in session at
a route or location adjacent to the school or class thereof, and the noise
created by the activities of the event would substantially disrupt the
education activities of the school or class; or
K. The event would endanger public health or safety; or
L. The event would seriously inconvenience the general public's use of
public property, services, or facilities; or
M. The applicant fails to comply with the liability insurance requirements,
or the applicant's insurance lapses or is cancelled; or
N. The event would create or constitute a public nuisance; or
O. The event would be likely to cause significant damage to public
property or facilities; or
P. The event would engage in or encourage participants to engage in
illegal acts.
§ 250-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-7
1:255
of the event, and such requirements as are necessary to protect the safety
of persons and property, and the control of traffic, provided such conditions
shall not unreasonably restrict the right of free speech. Such restrictions
may include, but are not limited to:
A. Alteration of the date, time, route or location of the event proposed on
the event application.
B. Elimination of an activity which cannot be mitigated to a point so as to
ensure public safety and welfare or which causes undue liability to the
Town.
C. Conditions concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of a parade
or other events occurring along a route.
D. Conditions concerning the accommodation of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, including restricting the event to only a portion of a street or
right-of-way.
E. Requirements for the use of traffic cones or barricades.
F. Requirements for the use of Town personnel and equipment, including
payment of the reasonable cost of providing such personnel and
equipment. Town personnel and equipment may include, but are not
limited to, traffic barricades, vehicles, employee overtime expenses,
etc.
G. Requirements for the provision of first aid or sanitary facilities.
H. Requirements for the use of event monitors and providing notice of
permit conditions to event participants.
I. Requirements to provide notice to surrounding property owners.
J. Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, animals, or structures
at the event, and inspection and approval of floats, structures and
decorated vehicles for fire safety.
K. Compliance with animal protection ordinances and laws.
L. Requirement for the use of garbage containers, cleanup and restoration
of Town property.
M. Restrictions on the use of amplified sound and compliance with noise
ordinances, regulations and laws.
N. Compliance with any relevant ordinance or law and obtaining any
legally required permit or license.
O. Any other restriction or requirement deemed necessary to ensure
public health, safety and well-being.
P. Restrictions on the sale and/or consumption of alcohol.
§ 250-7 SENECA FALLS CODE § 250-8
1:256
§ 250-8. Permit issuance.
The Commissioner of Parks and Recreation shall issue the special event
permit once the application has been approved by the Town Board and the
applicant has agreed in writing to comply with the terms and conditions of
the permit as well as the sections of this policy dealing with indemnification,
insurance, fees associated with Town services, and facility restoration/
cleanup requirements, when applicable.
§ 250-9. Indemnification agreement.
Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the permit applicant and/
or authorized representative of the sponsoring organization, if any, must
sign an agreement to defend the Town against claims, and indemnify and
hold harmless the Town, its officers, employees, agents and authorized
volunteers, where such claim arises in whole or in part out of the activities
for which such permit is issued, except any claims arising solely out of the
negligent acts or omissions of the Town, its officers, employees, agents and
authorized volunteers.
§ 250-10. Insurance requirements.
§ 250-11. Use of Town services and equipment.
A. Liability coverage required. The applicant/sponsoring organization of
an event must possess or obtain public liability insurance to protect
against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of
bodily injury and property damage arising from the event. A certificate
of insurance shall be filed 30 days prior to the event with the
Commissioner of Parks and Recreation, and shall name the Town, its
officials, employees, agents and authorized volunteers, as additional
insured. Insurance coverage must be maintained for the duration of the
event.
B. Minimum limits defined. Coverage shall be a commercial general
liability policy. Minimum limits required are $1,000,000 each
occurrence combined single limit bodily injury and property damage;
$2,000,000 aggregate. If alcoholic beverages are sold or served at
event, the policy must also include an endorsement for liquor liability. If
the event involves athletic or other types of active participants, the
policy must include participant coverage. The Town Board may require
additional endorsements depending upon the proposed activity.
C. Waiver of insurance. An insurance waiver may be issued if the applicant
or representative of an organization signs a verified statement that he
or she believes the event's purpose is First Amendment expression, and
that the cost of obtaining insurance is so financially burdensome that it
would constitute an unreasonable burden on the right of First
Amendment expression. The statement shall include the name and
address of two insurance agents or other source of insurance coverage
contacted to determine premium rates for insurance coverage.
§ 250-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-11
1:257
§ 250-12. Security/Cleanup deposits.
§ 250-13. Revocation of permit.
Any permit issued pursuant to this policy may be revoked by the
Commissioner of Parks and Recreation on consultation with the Chief of
Police, Fire Chief and the Town Supervisor, if available, at any time when, by
reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, it is determined
that the safety of the public or property requires such revocation. They may
also summarily revoke any permit issued pursuant to this policy if it is found
that the permit has been issued based upon false information or when the
permittee exceeds the scope of the permit. Written notice of such action
revoking a permit shall be delivered in person to the permittee or, if time
allows, by certified mail at the address specified by the permittee on the
application. Revocations based on disaster, public calamity or other issues
outside the permittee's control shall result in full refund of all deposits/
payments. Any revocation based on the providing of false information or the
exceeding of the scope of the permit shall result in forfeiture of all deposits
and may result in the invoicing of fees incurred by the Town in regards to
the event.
§ 250-14. Duties of permittee or sponsor of event.
A. Fees for the use of Town services and equipment will be waived in part
or in full by the Town Board if, in review of the application, it feels that
the event is of sufficient community benefit to warrant the expenditure
of Town funds without reimbursement by the applicant(s).
B. The fees for Town services and equipment may also be waived in part or
in full by the Town Board if the applicant(s) signs a verified statement
that the event's purpose is First Amendment expression, and that the
cost of Town services and equipment is so financially burdensome that
it would constitute an unreasonable burden on the right of First
Amendment expression.
A. As stated earlier, upon satisfactory Town/permittee inspection of
property/facilities used for the special event, the permittee(s) shall be
refunded the security/cleanup deposits submitted upon filing of the
original application.
B. If properties and/or facilities used for the special event have not been
properly cleaned and/or restored, the applicant(s) shall be billed for the
actual cost of the Town for cleanup and/or restoration less the per-day
security/cleanup deposit submitted with the original application.
A. The permittee whose name appears on the permit and/or an officer of
the sponsoring organization must be available and present at the
special event site throughout duration of event.
§ 250-11 SENECA FALLS CODE § 250-14
1:258
§ 250-15. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to the revocation of a permit as provided in § 250-13 of this
chapter, any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any
conditions of a permit issued in accordance with this chapter, shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a penalty in an amount not to exceed $500,
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or both, for each offense.
Chapter 255
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 158.
Highway construction — See Ch. 169.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 173.
Sewers — See Ch. 230.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
B. The permittee must carry a copy of permit, as well as any list of
conditions placed on the event, on his or her person throughout the
duration of the event.
C. The permittee must maintain compliance with all terms and conditions
of the permit.
D. The permittee shall ensure that the person leading a parade or other
event along a route shall be informed of all permit conditions.
E. The permittee shall ensure that restoration/cleanup is conducted such
that property/facilities are left in same condition as existed prior to the
event.
F. Upon completion of the event, the permittee shall be available to
inspect, along with Town representatives, property/facilities used by
the event in accordance with restoration/cleanup requirements.
§ 250-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-15
1:259

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 255-1. Authority of Planning Board.
By the authority of the resolution of the Town Board of the Town of Seneca
Falls, pursuant to the provisions of Article 16 of the Town Law of the State of
New York, the Planning Board of the Town of Seneca Falls in authorized and
empowered to approve plats showing lots, blocks or sites, with or without
streets or highways, to approve the development of entirely or partially
undeveloped plats already filed in the office of the Clerk of the county and
to approve preliminary plats within that part of the Town of Seneca Falls
outside the limits of any incorporated city or village.
§ 255-2. Declaration of policy; title.
It is declared to be the policy of the Planning Board to consider land
subdivision plats as part of a plan for the orderly, efficient and economical
development of the Town. This means, among other things, that land to be
subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building
purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other menace;
that proper provision shall be made for drainage, water supply, sewerage
and other needed improvements; that all proposed lots shall be so laid
out and of such size as to be in harmony with the development pattern
of the neighboring properties; that the proposed streets shall compose a
convenient system conforming to the Official Map, if such exists, and shall
be properly related to the proposals shown on the Master Plan, if such
exists, and shall be of such width, grade and location as to accommodate the
prospective traffic, to facilitate fire protection and to provide access of firefighting
equipment to buildings; and that proper provision shall be made
for open spaces for parks and playgrounds. In order that land subdivisions
may be made in accordance with this policy, these regulations, which shall
be known as and which may be cited as the "Town of Seneca Falls Land
Subdivision Regulations," have been adopted by the Planning Board and
approved by the Town Board.
§ 255-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, certain words and terms used herein
are defined as follows:
CLERK OF THE PLANNING BOARD — That person who shall be designated
to perform the duties of the Clerk of the Planning Board for all purposes of
these regulations.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which serves or is designed to serve as a
traffic way for a neighborhood or as a feeder to a major street.
DEAD-END STREET or CUL-DE-SAC — A street or a portion of a street with
only one vehicular traffic outlet.
§ 255-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-3
1:261
EASEMENT — Authorization by a property owner for the use by another
and for a specified purpose of any designated part of his or her property.
ENGINEER or LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person
licensed as a professional engineer by the State of New York.
MAJOR STREET — A street which serves or is designed to serve heavy
flows of traffic and which is used primarily as a route for traffic between
communities and/or other heavy-traffic-generating areas.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision, including but not limited to subdivisions of five or more lots,
or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of municipal
facilities.
MASTER OR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A comprehensive plan, prepared
by the Planning Board pursuant to § 272-a of the Town Law, which indicates
the general locations recommended for various functional classes of public
works, places and structures and for general physical development of the
Town and includes any unit or part of such plan separately prepared and
any amendment to such plan or parts therein.
MINOR STREET — A street intended to serve primarily as an access to
abutting properties.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than four
lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road
or the extension of municipal facilities and not adversely affecting the
development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property and not
in conflict with any provision or portion of the Master Plan, Official Map or
Chapter 300, Zoning, if such exists, or these regulations.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map established by the Town Board pursuant to
§ 270 of the Town Law, showing streets, highways and parks and drainage,
both existing and proposed.
OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISION — A subdivision developed under the
provisions of § 278 of the Town Law and where up to 50% of the developable
portion of the parcel is dedicated as perpetual open space for recreational,
conservation or agricultural purposes, while still allowing the same number
of residential lots as could otherwise be developed.
PLANNING BOARD or BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A drawing or drawings clearly marked "preliminary
plat" showing the layout of a proposed subdivision, as specified in Article II,
§ 255-6, of these regulations, submitted to the Planning Board for approval
prior to submission of the plat in final form and of sufficient detail to apprise
the Planning Board of the layout of the proposed subdivision.
SKETCH PLAN — A sketch of a proposed subdivision showing the
information specified in Article II, § 255-4, of these regulations to enable
the subdivider to save time and expense in reaching a general agreement
with the Planning Board as to the form of the layout and objectives of these
regulations.
§ 255-3 SENECA FALLS CODE § 255-3
1:262
STREET — Includes streets, roads, avenues, lanes or other traffic ways
between right-of-way lines.
STREET PAVEMENT — The wearing or exposed surface of the roadway
used by vehicular traffic.
STREET WIDTH — The width of a right-of-way, measured at right angles to
the center line of the street.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association
who or which shall lay out any subdivision or part thereof as defined herein,
either for himself or herself or others.
SUBDIVISION —
SUBDIVISION PLAT or FINAL PLAT — A drawing, in final form, showing
a proposed subdivision containing all information or detail required by law
and by these regulations to be presented to the Planning Board for approval
and which, if approved, may be duly filed or recorded by the applicant in
the office of the County Clerk or Registrar.
SURVEYOR — A person licensed as a land surveyor by the State of New
York.
TOWN ENGINEER — The duly designated engineer of the Town.
The division of any parcel of land into two or more lots, blocks or sites,
with or without streets or highways, and includes resubdivision.
A.
Exceptions.
Notwithstanding the definition of "subdivision" above, or any other
provision of this chapter, the following parcels are hereby
determined to constitute valid building lots:
Tax Map Number
38-1-84
38-1-71
38-1-03.112
38-1-03.12
38-1-77
38-1-82
38-1-75
38-1-74
38-1-73
(1)
This exception applies only to the requirements for subdivision
approval. All other requirements of Chapter 300, Zoning, shall
apply to said lots.
(2)
B.
§ 255-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-3
1:263

ARTICLE II
Documents to be Submitted
§ 255-4. Sketch plan.
The sketch plan initially submitted to the Planning Board shall be based on
Tax Map information or some other similarly accurate base map at a scale
(preferably not less than 200 feet to the inch) to enable the entire tract
to be shown on one sheet The sketch plan shall be submitted showing the
following information:
§ 255-5. Minor subdivision plat.
In the case of minor subdivision only, the subdivision plat application shall
include the following information:
A. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided, in relation to the
entire tract, and the distance to the nearest existing street intersection.
B. All existing structures, wooded areas, streams and other significant
physical features within the portion to be subdivided and within 200
feet thereof. If topographic conditions are significant, contours shall
also be indicated at intervals of not more than 10 feet.
C. The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
D. The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers, if available.
E. All the utilities available and all streets which are either proposed,
mapped or built.
F. The proposed pattern of lots (including lot width and depth), street
layout, recreation areas, systems of drainage, sewerage and water
supply (see § 255-5C) within the subdivided area.
G. All existing restrictions on the use of land, including easements,
covenants or zoning lines.
A. A copy of such covenants or deed restrictions as are intended to cover
all or part of the tract.
B. An actual field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving complete
descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and certified to by a
licensed land surveyor. The corners of the tract shall also be located on
the ground and marked by monuments as approved by the Town
Engineer and shall be referenced and shown on the plat.
C. All on-site sanitation and water supply facilities shall be designed to
meet the minimum specifications of the State Department of Health,
and a note to this effect shall be stated on the plat and signed by a
licensed engineer.
§ 255-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-5
1:265
§ 255-6. Major subdivision preliminary plat.
In the case of a preliminary plat for a major subdivision, the following
documents shall be submitted for approval:
D. The proposed subdivision name and the name of the town and county in
which it is located.
E. The date, North point, map scale and the name and address of the
record owner and subdivider.
F. The plat to be filed with the County Clerk shall be printed upon linen or
be clearly drawn in India ink upon tracing cloth or be submitted on
reproducible Mylar. The size of the sheet shall be 36 inches by 48 inches
or 24 inches by 36 inches.
A. Five copies of the preliminary plat, prepared at a scale of not more than
100 feet but preferably not less than 50 feet to the inch, showing:
(1) The proposed subdivision name, the name of the town and county
in which it is located, the date, true North point, scale and the
name and address of the record owner, subdivider and engineer or
surveyor, including license number and seal.
(2) The name of all subdivisions immediately adjacent and the name of
the owners on record of all adjacent property.
(3) The zoning district, including the exact boundary lines of the
district, if more than one district, and any proposed changes in the
zoning district lines and/or the Zoning Local Law test applicable to
the area to be subdivided.15
(4) All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the
conditions of such dedication.
(5) The location of existing property lines, easements, buildings,
watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, single trees
with a diameter of eight inches or more, as measured three feet
above the base of the trunk, and other significant existing features
for the proposed subdivision and adjacent property.
(6) The location of existing sewers, water mains, culverts and drains on
the property, with pipe sizes, grades and direction of flow.
(7) Contours with intervals of five feet or less as required by the Board,
including elevations on existing roads; approximate grading plan, if
natural contours are to be changed more than two feet.
(8) The width and location of any streets or public ways or places
shown on the Official Map or the Master Plan, if such exist, within
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
§ 255-5 SENECA FALLS CODE § 255-6
1:266
the area to be subdivided and the width, location, grades and street
profiles of all streets or public ways proposed by the developer.
(9) The approximate location and size of all proposed water lines,
valves, hydrants and sewer lines and fire alarm boxes; connection
to existing lines or alternate means of water supply or sewage
disposal and treatment as provided in the Public Health Law;
profiles of all proposed water and sewer lines.
(10) A storm drainage plan indicating the approximate location and size
of proposed lines and their profiles; connection to existing lines or
alternate means of disposal.
(11) Plans and cross sections showing the proposed location and type of
sidewalks, streetlight standards, street trees, curbs, water mains,
sanitary sewers and storm drains, and the size and type thereof, the
character, width and depth of pavements and subbase and the
location of manholes, basins and underground conduits.
(12) Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be
required.
(13) The proposed lot lines, with approximate dimensions and area of
each lot.
(14) Where the topography is such as to make difficult the inclusion of
any of the required facilities within the public areas as laid out, the
preliminary plat shall show the boundaries of proposed permanent
easements over or under private property, which permanent
easements shall not be less than 20 feet in width and which shall
provide satisfactory access to an existing public highway or other
public highway or public open space shown on the subdivision or
the Official Map.
(15) An actual field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving
complete descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and
certified to by a licensed land surveyor. The corners of the tract
shall also be located on the ground and marked by substantial
monuments of such size and type as approved by the Town
Engineer and shall be referenced and shown on the plat.
B. If the application covers only a part of the subdivider's entire holding, a
map of the entire tract, drawn at a scale of not less than 400 feet to the
inch, showing an outline of the platted area with its proposed streets
and indication of the probable future street system with its grades and
drainage in the remaining portion of the tract and the probable future
drainage layout of the entire tract The part of the subdivider's entire
holding submitted shall be considered in the light of the entire holdings.
C. A copy of such covenants or deed restrictions as are intended to cover
all or part of the tract.
§ 255-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-7
1:267
§ 255-7. Major subdivision final plat.
In the case of a final plat for a major subdivision, the following documents
shall be submitted for plat approval:
A. The plat to be filed with the County Clerk shall be printed upon linen or
be clearly drawn in India ink upon tracing cloth or be submitted on
reproducible Mylar. The size of the sheets shall be 36 inches by 48
inches or 24 inches by 36 inches, including a margin for binding of two
inches, outside of the border, along the left side and a margin of one
inch, outside of the border, along the remaining sides. The plat shall be
drawn at a scale of no more than 100 feet to the inch and oriented with
the North point at the top of the map. When more than one sheet is
required, an additional index sheet of the same size shall be filed
showing, to scale, the entire subdivision, with lot and block numbers
clearly legible.
B. The plat shall show:
(1) The proposed subdivision name or identifying title and the name of
the town and county in which the subdivision is located, the name
and address of the record owner and subdivider, and the name,
license number and seal of the licensed land surveyor.
(2) Street lines, pedestrianways, lots, reservations, easements and
areas to be dedicated to public use.
(3) Sufficient data acceptable to the Town Engineer to determine
readily the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line
and boundary line and to reproduce such lines upon the ground.
Where applicable, these should be referenced to monuments
included in the State System of Plane Coordinates and, in any
event, should be tied to reference points previously established by
a public authority.
(4) The length and bearing of all straight lines, radii, length of curves
and central angles of all curves, tangent bearings shall be given for
each street. All dimensions and angles of the lines of each lot shall
also be given. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of
a foot. The plat shall show the boundaries of the property, the
location, graphic scale and true North point.
(5) By proper designation thereon, all public open spaces for which
deeds are included and those spaces the title to which is reserved
by the developer. For any of the latter, there shall be submitted with
the subdivision plat copies of agreements or other documents
showing the manner in which such areas are to be maintained and
the provisions made therefor.
(6) All offers of cession and covenants governing the maintenance of
unceded open space shall bear the certificate of approval of the
Town Attorney as to their legal sufficiency.
§ 255-7 SENECA FALLS CODE § 255-7
1:268
(7) Lots and blocks within a subdivision shall be numbered and
lettered in alphabetical order in accordance with the prevailing
Town practice.
(8) Permanent reference monuments shall be shown and shall be
constructed in accordance with the specifications of the Town
Engineer. When referenced to the State System of Plane
Coordinates, they shall also conform to the requirements of the
State Department of Transportation. They shall be placed as
required by the Town Engineer, and their location shall be noted
and referenced upon the plat.
(9) All lot corner markers shall be permanently located satisfactorily to
the Town Engineer, at least 3/4 inch (if metal) in diameter and at
least 24 inches in length, and located in the ground to existing
grade.
(10) Monuments of a type approved by the Town Engineer shall be set at
all corners and angle points of the boundaries of the original tract
to be subdivided and at all street intersections, angle points in
street lines, points of curve and such intermediate points as shall
be required by the Town Engineer.
C. Construction drawings, including plans, profiles and typical cross
sections, as required, showing the proposed location, size and type of
streets, sidewalks, streetlighting standards, street trees, curbs, water
mains, sanitary sewers and storm drains, pavements and subbase,
manholes, catch basins and other facilities.
§ 255-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-7
1:269

ARTICLE III
Procedures
§ 255-8. Application for approval required.
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed to be made and before any
contract for the sale of or any offer to sell any lots in such subdivision or any
part thereof is made and before any permit for the erection of a structure
in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdivider or his or her
duly authorized agent shall apply, in writing, for approval of such proposed
subdivision in accordance with the following procedures.
§ 255-9. Sketch plan.
A. Submission of sketch plan.
(1) Any owner of land shall, prior to subdividing or resubdividing land,
submit to the Secretary of the Planning Board, at least 10 days
prior to the regular meeting of the Board, two copies of a sketch
plan(s) of the proposed subdivision, which shall comply with the
requirements of Article II, § 255-4, for the purposes of classification
and preliminary discussion.
(2) Any property owner proposing five or more residential lots shall
present to the Board two sketch plans, one plan which meets all the
requirements for single-lot development within the zone where it is
to be located and a second plan which utilizes the provisions for
open space subdivision.
B. Discussion of requirements and classification.
(1) The subdivider or his or her duly authorized representative shall
attend the meeting of the Planning Board to discuss the
requirements of these regulations for street improvements,
drainage, sewerage, water supply, fire protection and similar
aspects, as well as the availability of existing services and other
pertinent information.
(2) Classification of the sketch plan is to be made at this time by the
Planning Board as to whether it is a minor subdivision or major
subdivision as defined in these regulations. The Board may require,
however, when it deems it necessary for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare, that a minor subdivision comply with all
or some of the requirements specified for major subdivisions. If the
sketch plan is classified as a minor subdivision, the subdivider shall
then comply with the procedure outlined in Article III, §§ 255-10
and 255-13, of these regulations. If it is classified as a major
subdivision, the subdivider shall then comply with the procedures
outlined in Article III, §§ 255-11 through 255-15.
C. Study of sketch plan. The Planning Board shall determine whether the
sketch plan meets the purposes of these regulations and shall, where it
§ 255-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-9
1:271
§ 255-10. Minor subdivision.
deems it necessary, make specific recommendations, in writing, to be
incorporated by the applicant in the next submission to the Planning
Board.
A. Application and fee.
(1) Within six months after classification of the sketch plan as a minor
subdivision by the Planning Board, the subdivider shall submit an
application for approval of a subdivision plat. Failure to do so shall
require resubmission of the sketch plan to the Planning Board for
reclassification. The plat shall conform to the layout shown on the
sketch plan plus any recommendations made by the Planning
Board. Said application shall also conform to the requirements
listed in Article II, § 255-5.
(2) All applications for plat approval for minor subdivisions shall be
accompanied by a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
Town Board.
B. Number of copies. Five copies of the subdivision plat shall be presented
to the Clerk of the Planning Board at the time of submission of the
subdivision plat.
C. Subdivider to attend Planning Board meeting. The subdivider or his or
her duly authorized representative shall attend the meeting of the
Planning Board to discuss the subdivision plat.
D. When officially submitted. The time of submission of the subdivision
plat shall be considered to be the date on which the application for plat
approval, complete and accompanied by the required fee and all data
required by Article II, § 255-5, of these regulations, has been filed with
the Clerk of the Planning Board.
E. Public hearing. A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board
within 62 days from the time of submission of the subdivision plat for
approval. Said hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town at least five days before such hearing.
F. Action on subdivision plat.
(1) The Planning Board shall, within 62 days from the date of the
public hearing, act to conditionally approve, conditionally approve
with modification, disapprove or grant final approval and authorize
the signing of the subdivision plat. This time may be extended by
mutual consent of the subdivider and the Planning Board. Failure of
the Planning Board to act within such time shall constitute
approval of the plat.
(2) Upon granting conditional approval, with or without modification,
to the plat, the Planning Board shall empower a duly authorized
§ 255-9 SENECA FALLS CODE § 255-10
1:272
§ 255-11. Major subdivision.
officer to sign the plat upon compliance with such conditions and
requirements as may be stated in its resolution of conditional
approval. Within five days of the resolution granting conditional
approval, the plat shall be certified by the Clerk of the Planning
Board as conditionally approved, a copy shall be filed in his or her
office, and a certified copy shall be mailed to the subdivider. The
copy mailed to the subdivider shall include a certified statement
of such requirements which, when completed, will authorize the
signing of the conditionally approved plat. Upon completion of
such requirements, the plat shall be signed by the duly designated
officer of the Planning Board. Conditional approval of a plat shall
expire 180 days after the date of the resolution granting such
approval unless the requirements have been certified as completed
within that time. The Planning Board may, however, extend the time
within which a conditionally approved plat may be submitted for
signature if, in its opinion, such extension is so warranted under
the circumstances, for not to exceed two additional periods of 90
days each.
G. Neighboring municipality notification. As required by § 239-nn of the
General Municipal Law, notice shall be given to an adjacent
municipality (town or village) whenever a public hearing is held by the
Town Planning Board regarding a subdivision review and approval on
property that is within 500 feet of such adjacent municipality. Such
notice shall be given by mail to the clerk of the adjacent municipality at
least 10 days prior to any such hearing. Such adjacent municipality may
appear and be heard.
A. Preliminary plat for major subdivision.
(1) Application and fee.
(a) Prior to the filing of an application for the approval of a major
subdivision plat, the subdivider shall file an application for the
approval of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision.
Such preliminary plat shall be clearly marked "preliminary
plat" and shall be in the form described in Article II, § 255-6,
hereof. The preliminary plat shall, in all respects, comply with
the requirements set forth in the provisions of §§ 276 and 277
of the Town Law and Article II, § 255-6, of these regulations,
except where a waiver may be specifically authorized by the
Planning Board.
(b) The application for approval of the preliminary plat shall be
accompanied by a fee as set from time to time by resolution of
the Town Board.
§ 255-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-11
1:273
(2) Number of copies. Five copies of the preliminary plat shall be
presented to the Clerk of the Planning Board at the time of
submission of the preliminary plat.
(3) Subdivider to attend Planning Board meeting. The subdivider or his
or her duly authorized representative shall attend the meeting of
the Planning Board to discuss the preliminary plat.
(4) Study of preliminary plat. The Planning Board shall study the
practicability of the preliminary plat, taking into consideration the
requirements of the community and the best use of the land being
subdivided. Particular attention shall be given to the arrangement,
location and width of streets, their relation to the topography of the
land, water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, lot sizes and
arrangement, the future development of adjoining lands as yet
unsubdivided and the requirements of the Master Plan, the Official
Map and Chapter 300, Zoning, if such exist.
(5) When officially submitted. The time of submission of the
preliminary plat shall be considered to be the date on which the
application for approval of the preliminary plat, complete and
accompanied by the required fee and all data required by Article II,
§ 255-6, of these regulations, has been filed with the Clerk of the
Planning Board.
(6) Approval of the preliminary plat.
(a) Within 62 days after the receipt of such preliminary plat by the
Clerk of the Planning Board, the Planning Board shall hold a
public hearing, which hearing shall be advertised at least once
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least five
days before such hearing. The Planning Board may provide
that the hearing be further advertised in such manner as it
deems most appropriate for full public consideration of such
preliminary plat. Within 62 days after the date of such hearing,
the Planning Board shall approve, with or without modification,
or disapprove such preliminary plat, and the grounds of a
modification, if any, or the grounds for disapproval shall be
stated upon the records of the Planning Board. The time in
which the Planning Board must take action on such plat may be
extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Planning
Board. When so approving a preliminary plat, the Planning
Board shall state, in writing, modifications, if any, as it deems
necessary for submission of the plat in final form. Within five
days of the approval of such preliminary plat, it shall be
certified by the Clerk of the Planning Board as granted
preliminary approval and a copy shall be filed in his or her
office, a certified copy shall be mailed to the owner and a copy
shall be forwarded to the Town Board. Failure of the Planning
Board to act within such forty-five-day period shall constitute
approval of the preliminary plat.
§ 255-11 SENECA FALLS CODE § 255-11
1:274
(b) When granting approval to a preliminary plat, the Planning
Board shall state the terms of such approval, if any, with
respect to the modifications to the preliminary plat, the
character and extent of the required improvements for which
waivers may have been requested and which, in its opinion,
may be waived without jeopardy to the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare and the amount of improvement or
the amount of all bonds therefor which it will require as a
prerequisite to the approval of the subdivision plat. Approval of
a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the
subdivision plat, but, rather, it shall be deemed an expression
of approval of the design submitted on the preliminary plat as a
guide to the preparation of the plat, which will be submitted for
approval of the Planning Board and for recording upon
fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations. Prior to
approval of the subdivision plat, the Planning Board may
require additional changes as a result of further study of the
subdivision in final form or as a result of new information
obtained at the public hearing.
B. Final plat for major subdivision.
(1) Application for approval and fee. The subdivider shall, within six
months after the approval of the preliminary plat, file with the
Planning Board an application for approval of the subdivision plat
in final form, submitted in writing. All applications for plat approval
for major subdivisions shall be accompanied by a fee as set from
time to time by resolution of the Town Board. If the final plat is not
submitted within six months after the approval of the preliminary
plat, the Planning Board may refuse to approve the final plat and
require resubmission of the preliminary plat.
(2) Number of copies. A subdivider intending to submit a proposed
subdivision plat for the approval of the Planning Board shall
provide the Clerk of the Board with a copy of the application and
three copies (one copy, in ink, on linen or an acceptable equal) of
the plat, the original and one true copy of all offers of cession,
covenants and agreements and two prints of all construction
drawings.
(3) When officially submitted. The time of submission of the
subdivision plat shall be considered to be the date on which the
application for approval of the subdivision plat, complete and
accompanied by the required fee and all data required by Article II,
§ 255-7, of these regulations, has been filed with the Clerk of the
Planning Board.
(4) Endorsement of state and county agencies. Water and sewer
facility proposals contained in the subdivision plat shall be properly
endorsed and approved by the Seneca Department of Health.
Applications for approval of plans for sewer or water facilities will
§ 255-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-11
1:275
be filed by the subdivider with all necessary Town, county and
state agencies. Endorsement and approval by the Seneca County
Department of Health shall be secured by the subdivider before
official submission of the subdivision plat.
(5) Public hearing. Within 62 days of the submission of a plat in final
form for approval, a hearing shall be held by the Planning Board.
This hearing shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Town at least 10 days before such
hearing; provided, however, that when the Planning Board deems
the final plat to be in substantial agreement with a preliminary plat
approved under § 255-11A of this article and modified in
accordance with requirements of such approval, if such preliminary
plat has been approved with modification, the Planning Board may
waive the requirement for such public hearing.
(6) Action on proposed subdivision plat.
(a) The Planning Board shall, by resolution, conditionally approve,
conditionally approve with or without modification, disapprove
or grant final approval and authorize the signing of such plat
within 62 days of its receipt by the Clerk of the Planning Board
if no hearing is held or, in the event that a hearing is held,
within 62 days after the date of such hearing. This time may be
extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Planning
Board. Failure to take action on a final plat within the time
prescribed therefor shall be deemed approval of the plat.
(b) Upon resolution of conditional approval of such final plat, the
Planning Board shall empower a duly authorized officer to sign
the plat upon completion of such requirements as may be
stated in the resolution. Within five days of such resolution, the
plat shall be certified by the Clerk of the Planning Board as
conditionally approved and a copy filed in his or her office and
a certified copy mailed to the subdivider. The copy mailed to
the subdivider shall include a certified statement of such
requirements which, when completed, will authorize the
signing of the conditionally approved final plat. Upon
completion of such requirements, the plat shall be signed by
said duly authorized officer of the Planning Board. Conditional
approval of a final plat shall expire 180 days after the date of
the resolution granting such approval unless the requirements
have been certified as completed within that time. The
Planning Board may, however, extend the time within which a
conditionally approved plat may be submitted for signature if,
in its opinion, such extension is warranted under the
circumstances, for not to exceed two additional periods of 90
days each.
C. Neighboring municipality notification. As required by § 239-nn of the
General Municipal Law, notice shall be given to an adjacent
§ 255-11 SENECA FALLS CODE § 255-11
1:276
§ 255-12. Required improvements.
municipality (town or village) whenever a public hearing is held by the
Town Planning Board regarding a subdivision review and approval on
property that is within 500 feet of such adjacent municipality. Such
notice shall be given by mail to the clerk of the adjacent municipality
at least 10 days prior to any such hearing. Such adjacent municipality
may appear and be heard.
A. Improvements and performance bond.
(1) Before the Planning Board grants final approval of the subdivision
plat, the subdivider shall follow the procedure set forth in either
Subsection A(1)(a) or (b) below:
(a) In an amount set by the Planning Board, the subdivider shall
either file with the Town Clerk a certified check to cover the
full cost of the required improvements or the subdivider shall
file with the Town Clerk a performance bond to cover the full
cost of the required improvements. Any such bond shall comply
with the requirements of § 277 of the Town Law and, further,
shall be satisfactory to the Town Board and Town Attorney as
to form, sufficiency, manner of execution and surety. A period
of one year or such other period as the Planning Board may
determine appropriate, not to exceed three years, shall be set
forth in the bond within which required improvements must be
completed.
(b) The subdivider shall complete all required improvements to
the satisfaction of the Town Engineer, who shall file with the
Planning Board a letter signifying the satisfactory completion
of all improvements required by the Board. For any required
improvements not so completed, the subdivider shall file with
the Town Clerk a bond or certified check covering the costs of
such improvements and the cost of satisfactorily installing any
improvement not approved by the Town Engineer. Any such
bond shall be satisfactory to the Town Board and Town
Attorney as to form, sufficiency, manner of execution and
surety.
(2) The required improvements shall not be considered to be
completed until the installation of the improvements has been
approved by the Town Engineer and a map satisfactory to the
Planning Board has been submitted, indicating the location of
monuments marking all underground utilities as actually installed.
If the subdivider completes all required improvements according to
Subsection A(1)(b), then said map shall be submitted prior to
endorsement of the plat by the appropriate Planning Board officer.
However, if the subdivider elects to provide a bond or certified
check for all required improvements as specified in Subsection
§ 255-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-12
1:277
§ 255-13. Filing of approved plat.
A(1)(a), such bond shall not be released until such a map is
submitted.
B. Modification of design of improvements. If, at any time before or during
the construction of the required improvements, it is demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Town Engineer that unforeseen conditions make
it necessary or preferable to modify the location or design of such
required improvements, the Town Engineer may, upon approval by a
previously delegated member of the Planning Board, authorize
modifications, provided that these modifications are within the spirit
and intent of the Planning Board's approval and do not extend to the
waiver or substantial alteration of the function of any improvements
required by the Board. The Town Engineer shall issue any authorization
under this subsection in writing and shall transmit a copy of such
authorization to the Planning Board at its next regular meeting.
C. Inspection of improvements. At least five days prior to commencing
construction of required improvements, the subdivider shall pay to the
Town Clerk the inspection fee required by the Town Board and shall
notify the Town Board, in writing, of the time when he or she proposes
to commence construction of such improvements so that the Town
Board may cause inspection to be made to assure that all Town
specifications and requirements shall be met during the construction of
required improvements and to assure the satisfactory completion of
improvements and utilities required by the Planning Board.
D. Proper installation of improvements. If the Town Engineer shall find,
upon inspection of the improvements performed before the expiration
date of the performance bond, that any of the required improvements
have not been constructed in accordance with plans and specifications
filed by the subdivider, he or she shall so report to the Town Board,
Zoning Officer and Planning Board. The Town Board then shall notify
the subdivider and, if necessary, the bonding company and take all
necessary steps to preserve the Town's rights under the bond. No plat
shall be approved by the Planning Board as long as the subdivider is in
default on a previously approved plat.
A. Final approval and filing. Upon completion of the requirements in
§§ 255-11B and 255-12 above and notation to that effect upon the
subdivision plat, it shall be deemed to have final approval and shall be
properly signed by the duly designated officer of the Planning Board
and may be filed by the applicant in the office of the County Clerk. Any
subdivision plat not so filed or recorded within 62 days of the date upon
which such plat is approved or considered approved by reasons of the
failure of the Planning Board to act shall become null and void.
B. Plat void if revised after approval. No changes, erasures, modifications
or revisions shall be made in any subdivision plat after approval has
been given by the Planning Board and endorsed, in writing, on the plat,
§ 255-12 SENECA FALLS CODE § 255-13
1:278
§ 255-14. Street acceptance.
The approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision plat shall not be
deemed to constitute or be evidence of any acceptance by the Town of any
street, easement or other open space shown on such subdivision plat.
§ 255-15. Ownership and maintenance of recreation areas and open
space.
§ 255-16. Open space subdivisions.
Pursuant to resolution of the Town Board, the Planning Board is empowered
to modify applicable provisions of the Chapter 300, Zoning, in accordance
with the provisions of § 278 of the Town Law for the purpose of enabling and
encouraging flexibility of design and development of land in such a manner
as to promote the most appropriate use of land, to facilitate the adequate
and economic use of streets and utilities and to preserve the natural and
scenic qualities of open lands. The following shall be the procedure and
standards:
unless said plat is first resubmitted to the Planning Board and such
Board approves any modifications. In the event that any such
subdivision plat is recorded without complying with this requirement,
the same shall be considered null and void, and the Board shall institute
proceedings to have the plat stricken from the records of the County
Clerk.
A. When a park, playground or other recreation area shall have been
shown on a plat, the approval of said plat shall not constitute an
acceptance by the Town of such area. The Planning Board shall require
the plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. The
Planning Board may also require the filing of a written agreement
between the applicant and the Town Board covering future deed and
title, dedication and provision for the cost of grading, development,
equipment and maintenance of any such recreation area.
B. All open space in an open space subdivision which is to be used only for
recreational, conservation or agricultural purposes shall be owned
jointly or in common by the owners of the residential lots; owned by the
Town, subject to acceptance; or the deed to the open space land, with
permanent conservation restrictions, may remain with the original
property owner, who has sold the development rights to this part of the
parcel to the developer, who, in turn, has sold an undivided equal
interest in these rights to each new residential parcel owner in the
development.
A. Request by subdivider. A subdivider may request the use of § 278
simultaneously with or subsequent to presentation of the sketch plan
according to the procedure described in this Article III. Any submission
subsequent to preliminary approval of a plat shall require a
reapplication for sketch plat review.
§ 255-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-16
1:279
B. Sketch plat. A subdivider shall present, along with a proposal in
accordance with the provisions of § 278, a standard sketch plat which is
consistent with all the criteria established by these subdivision
regulations, including but not limited to streets being consistent with
the Highway Construction Specifications16 and lots being consistent
with Chapter 300, Zoning.
C. Park, recreation, open space or other municipal purposes. If the
application of this procedure results in a plat showing land available for
park, recreation, open space or other municipal purposes directly
related to the plat, then conditions as to ownership, use and
maintenance of such lands as are necessary to assure the preservation
of such lands for their intended purposes shall be set forth by the
Planning Board.
D. Plat submission. Upon determination that such sketch plat is suitable
for the procedures under § 278 and subsequent to the resolution
authorizing the Planning Board to proceed, a preliminary plat meeting
all of the requirements of the resolution shall be presented to the
Planning Board, and thereafter the Planning Board shall proceed with
the required public hearings and all other requirements of these
regulations.
E. Filing, notation on Zoning Map. On the filing of a plat in the office of the
County Clerk in which § 278 has been used, the subdivider shall file a
copy with the Town Clerk, who shall make appropriate notations and
reference thereto in the Town Zoning Map.17 The Secretary of the
Planning Board shall notify the Building Inspector when such a plat is
filed.
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 169, Highway Construction.
17.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to Chapter 300, Zoning.
§ 255-16 SENECA FALLS CODE § 255-16
1:280
ARTICLE IV
General Requirements and Design Standards
§ 255-17. Standards to be considered minimum requirements.
In considering applications for subdivision of land, the Planning Board shall
be guided by the standards set forth hereinafter. Said standards shall be
considered to be minimum requirements and shall be waived by the Board
only under circumstances set forth in Article V herein.
§ 255-18. General requirements.
§ 255-19. Street layout.
A. Character of land. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that
it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or
peril from fire, flood or other menace.
B. Conformity to Official Map and Master Plan. Subdivisions shall conform
to the Official Map of the Town and shall be in harmony with the Master
Plan, if such exists.
C. Specifications for required improvements. All required improvements
shall be constructed or installed to conform to the Town specifications,
which may be obtained from the Town Engineer.
A. Width, location and construction. Streets shall be of sufficient width,
suitably located and adequately constructed to conform with the
Master Plan and/or the Town Highway Construction Specifications,18
and to accommodate the prospective traffic and afford access for firefighting,
snow removal and other road maintenance equipment. The
arrangement of streets shall be such as to cause no undue hardship to
adjoining properties and shall be coordinated so as to compose a
convenient system.
B. Arrangement. The arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall
provide for the continuation of principal streets of adjoining
subdivisions and for proper projection of principal streets into adjoining
properties which are not yet subdivided, in order to make possible
necessary fire protection, movement of traffic and the construction or
extension, presently or when later required, of needed utilities and
public services, such as sewers, water and drainage facilities. Where, in
the opinion of the Planning Board, topographic or other conditions
make such continuance undesirable or impracticable, the above
conditions may be modified.
C. Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by
through traffic will be discouraged.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 169, Highway Construction.
§ 255-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-19
1:281
D. Special treatment along major streets. When a subdivision abuts or
contains an existing or proposed major street, the Board may require
marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting
contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep
lots with rear service alleys or such other treatment as may be
necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to
afford separation of through and local traffic.
E. Provision for future resubdivision. Where a tract is subdivided into lots
substantially larger than the minimum size required in the zoning
district in which a subdivision is located, the Board may require that
streets and lots be laid out so as to permit future resubdivision in
accordance with the requirements contained in these regulations.
F. Dead-end streets. The creation of dead-end or loop residential streets
will be encouraged wherever the Board finds that such type of
development will not interfere with normal traffic circulation in the
area. In the case of dead-end streets, where needed or desirable, the
Board may require the reservation of a twenty-foot-wide easement to
provide for continuation of pedestrian traffic and utilities to the next
street. Subdivisions containing 20 lots or more shall have at least two
street connections with existing public streets or streets shown on the
Official Map, if such exists, or streets on an approved subdivision plat
for which a bond has been filed.
G. Block size. Blocks generally shall not be less than 400 feet nor more
than 1,200 feet in length. In general, no block width shall be less than
twice the normal lot depth. In blocks exceeding 800 feet in length, the
Planning Board may require the reservation of a twenty-foot-wide
easement through the block to provide for the crossing of underground
utilities and pedestrian traffic, where needed or desirable, and may
further specify, at its discretion, that a four-foot-wide, paved footpath
shall be included.
H. Intersections with collector or major roads. Minor or secondary street
openings into such roads shall, in general, be at least 500 feet apart.
I. Street jogs. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet
shall be avoided.
J. Angle of intersection. In general, all streets shall join each other so that,
for a distance of at least 100 feet, the street is approximately at right
angles to the street it joins.
K. Relation to topography. The street plan of a proposed subdivision shall
bear a logical relationship to the topography of the property, and all
streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many of the building sites as
possible at or above the grade of the streets. Grades of streets shall
conform as closely as possible to the original topography.
L. Other required streets. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a
railroad right-of-way or limited-access highway right-of-way, the
§ 255-19 SENECA FALLS CODE § 255-19
1:282
§ 255-20. Street design.19
Planning Board may require a street approximately parallel to and on
each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate
use of the intervening land (as for park purposes in residential districts
or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts). Such
distances shall also be determined with due regard for the
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
A. Widths of rights-of-way. Streets shall have the following minimum rightof-
way widths. (When not indicated on the Master Plan or Official Map,
if such exists, the classification of streets shall be determined by the
Board.)
(1) Major streets: 66 feet.
(2) Collector streets: 60 feet.
(3) Minor streets: 60 feet.
B. Improvements. Streets shall be graded and improved with pavements,
curbs and gutters, sidewalks, storm drainage facilities, water mains,
sewers, streetlights and signs, street trees and fire hydrants, except
where waivers may be requested, and the Planning Board may waive,
subject to appropriate conditions, such improvements as it considers
may be omitted without jeopardy to the public health, safety and
general welfare. Pedestrian easements shall be improved as required by
the Town Engineer. Such grading and improvements shall be approved
as to design and specifications by the Town Engineer.
(1) Fire hydrants. Installation of fire hydrants shall be in conformity
with all requirements of standard thread and nut as specified by
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(2) Streetlighting facilities. Lighting facilities shall be in conformance
with the lighting system of the Town. Such lighting standards and
fixtures shall be installed after approval by the appropriate power
company and the authorized Town electrical inspector.
C. Utilities in streets. The Planning Board shall, wherever possible,
require that underground utilities be placed in the street right-of-way
between the paved roadway and street line to simplify location and
repair of lines when they require attention. The subdivider shall install
underground service connections to the property line of each lot within
the subdivision for such required utilities before the street is paved.
D. Utility easements. Where topography is such as to make impractical the
inclusion of utilities within the street rights-of-way, perpetual
unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width shall be otherwise
provided with satisfactory access to the street. Wherever possible,
19.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 169, Highway Construction.
§ 255-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-20
1:283
easements shall be continuous from block to block and shall present
as few irregularities as possible. Such easements shall be cleared and
graded, where required.
E. Grades. Grades of all streets shall conform in general to the terrain and
shall not be less than 1/2% nor more than 6% for major or collector
streets or 10% for minor streets in residential zones, but in no case
more than 3% within 50 feet of any intersection.
F. Changes in grade. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical
curves of such length and radius as meet with the approval of the Town
Engineer so that clear visibility shall be provided for a safe distance.
G. Curve radii at street intersections. All street right-of-way lines at
intersections shall be rounded by curves of at least twenty-foot radius,
and curbs shall be adjusted accordingly.
H. Steep grades and curves; visibility of intersections. A combination of
steep grades and curves shall be avoided. In order to provide visibility
for traffic safety, that portion of any corner lot (whether at an
intersection entirely within the subdivision or of a new street with an
existing street) within the triangle formed by the street lot lines and a
line drawn between the points along such street lot lines 40 feet distant
from their point of intersection shall be cleared of all growth (except
isolated trees) and obstructions above the level 30 inches higher than
the center line of the street. If directed, ground shall be excavated to
achieve visibility.
I. Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac). Where dead-end streets are designed to
be so permanently, they should, in general, not exceed 500 feet in
length and shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum
right-of-way radius of 60 feet and pavement radius of 50 feet. At the end
of temporary dead-end streets, a temporary turnaround with a
pavement radius of 50 feet shall be provided, unless the Planning Board
approves alternate arrangements.
J. Watercourses.
(1) Where a watercourse separates a proposed street from abutting
property, provision shall be made for access to all lots by means of
culverts or other structures of design approved by the Town
Engineer.
(2) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement
or drainage right-of-way as required by the Town Engineer and in
no case less than 20 feet in width.
K. Curve radii. In general, street lines within a block, deflecting from each
other at any one point by more than 10º, shall be connected with a
curve, the radius of which for the center line of the street shall not be
§ 255-20 SENECA FALLS CODE § 255-20
1:284
§ 255-21. Street names.
§ 255-22. Lots.
less than 400 feet on major streets, 200 feet on collector streets and
100 feet on minor streets.
L. Service streets or loading space in commercial development. Paved
rear service streets of not less than 20 feet in width or, in lieu thereof,
adequate off-street loading space, suitably surfaced, shall be provided
in connection with lots designed for commercial use.
M. Free flow of vehicular traffic abutting commercial developments. In
front of areas zoned and designed for commercial use or where a
change of zoning to a zone which permits commercial use is
contemplated, the street width shall be increased by such amount on
each side as may be deemed necessary by the Planning Board to assure
the free flow of through traffic without interference by parked or
parking vehicles and to provide adequate and safe parking space for
such commercial or business district.
A. Type of name. All street names shown on a preliminary plat or
subdivision plat shall be approved by the Planning Board. In general,
streets shall have names and not numbers or letters.
B. Names to be substantially different. Proposed street names shall be
substantially different so as not to be confused in sound or spelling with
present names, except that streets that join or are in alignment with
streets of an abutting or neighboring property shall bear the same
name. Generally, no street should change direction by more than 90º
without a change in street name.
A. Lots to be buildable. The lot arrangement shall be such that, in
constructing a building in compliance with Chapter 300, Zoning, there
will be no foreseeable difficulties for reasons of topography or other
natural conditions. Lots should not be of such depth as to encourage the
later creation of a second building lot at the front or rear.
B. Side lines. All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street
lines and radial to curved street lines, unless a variance from this rule
will give a better street or lot plan.
C. Corner lots. In general, corner lots should be larger than interior lots to
provide for proper building setbacks from each street and provide a
desirable building site.
D. Driveway access. Driveway access and grades shall conform to
specifications of the Town Driveway Ordinance, if one exists. Driveway
grades between the street and the setback line shall not exceed 10%.
E. Access from private streets. Access from private streets shall be
deemed acceptable only if such streets are designed and improved in
§ 255-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-22
1:285
§ 255-23. Drainage.
§ 255-24. Park and recreation areas.
accordance with these regulations and in accordance with the Town of
Seneca Falls Highway Construction Specifications.20
F. Monuments and lot corner markers. Permanent monuments meeting
specifications approved by the Town Engineer as to size, type and
installation shall be set at such block corners, angle points, points of
curves in streets and other points as the Town Engineer may require,
and their location shall be shown on the subdivision plat.
A. Removal of spring water and surface water. The subdivider may be
required by the Planning Board to carry away, by pipe or open ditch,
any spring water or surface water that may exist either previous to or
as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in
the street right-of-way, where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed
easements of appropriate width.
B. Drainage structure to accommodate potential development upstream. A
culvert or other drainage facility shall, in each case, be large enough to
accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area,
whether inside or outside the subdivision. The Town Engineer shall
approve the design and size of the facility based on anticipated runoff
from a ten-year storm under conditions of total potential development
permitted by Chapter 300, Zoning, in the watershed.
C. Responsibility from drainage downstream. The subdivider's engineer
shall also study the effect of each subdivision on the existing
downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision; this
study shall be reviewed by the Town Engineer. Where it is anticipated
that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision
will overload an existing downstream drainage facility during a fiveyear
storm, the Planning Board shall notify the Town Board of such
potential condition. In such case, the Planning Board shall not approve
the subdivision until provision has been made for the improvement of
said condition.
D. Land subject to flooding. Land subject to flooding or land deemed by
the Planning Board to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for
residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase danger
to health, life or property or aggravate the flood hazard, but such land
within the plat shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be
endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or improved in a
manner satisfactory to the Planning Board to remedy said hazardous
conditions.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 169, Highway Construction.
§ 255-22 SENECA FALLS CODE § 255-24
1:286
A. Recreation areas shown on Town Plan. Where a proposed park,
playground or open space shown on the Town Plan is located, in whole
or in part, in a subdivision, the Board shall require that such area or
areas be shown on the plat in accordance with the requirements
specified in Subsection B below. Such area or areas may be dedicated to
the Town or county by the subdivider if the Town Board approves such
dedication.
B. Parks and playgrounds not shown on Town Plan.
(1) The Planning Board shall require that the plat show sites of a
character, extent and location suitable for the development of a
park, playground or other recreation purpose. The Planning Board
may require that the developer satisfactorily grade any such
recreation areas shown on the plat.
(2) The Board shall require that not less than three acres of recreation
space be provided per 100 dwelling units shown on the plat.
However, in no case shall the amount be more than 10% of the total
area of the subdivision. Such area or areas may be dedicated to the
Town by the subdivider if the Town Board approves such
dedication. Appropriate legal measures should be taken to assure
that such land can never be developed for other than recreational
purposes.
C. Information to be submitted. In the event that an area to be used for a
park or playground is required to be so shown, the subdivider shall
submit, prior to final approval, to the Board three prints (one on cloth)
drawn in ink showing, at a scale of not less than 30 feet to the inch, such
area and the following features thereof:
(1) The boundaries of said area, giving lengths and bearings of all
straight lines and radii, lengths, central angles and tangent
distances of all curves.
(2) Existing features, such as brooks, ponds, clusters of trees, rock
outcrops and structures.
(3) Existing and, if applicable, proposed changes in grade and contours
of said area and of the area immediately adjacent.
D. Waiver of plat designation of area for parks and playgrounds.
(1) In cases where the Planning Board finds that, due to the size,
topography or location of the subdivision, land for park, playground
or other recreation purpose cannot be properly located therein or
if, in the opinion of the Board, it is not desirable, the Board may
waive the requirement that the plat show land for such purposes.
The Board shall then require as a condition to approval of the plat a
payment to the Town per gross acre of land which otherwise would
have been acceptable as a recreation site. The amount of the
payment per acre shall be determined from time to time by
§ 255-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-24
1:287
§ 255-25. Reserve strips.
Reserve strips of land which might be used to control access from the
proposed subdivision to any neighboring property or to any land within the
subdivision itself shall be prohibited.
§ 255-26. Preservation of natural features.
The Planning Board shall, wherever possible, establish the preservation
of all natural features which add value to residential developments and
to the community, such as large trees or groves, watercourses and falls,
beaches, historic spots, vistas and similar irreplaceable assets. No tree with
a diameter of eight inches or more, as measured three feet above the base
of the trunk, shall be removed unless such tree is within the right-of-way of
a street as shown on the final subdivision plat. Removal of additional trees
shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board. In no case, however,
shall a tree with a diameter of eight inches or more, as measured three
feet above the base of the trunk, be removed without prior approval by the
Planning Board.
resolution of the Town Board. The amount of land which otherwise
would have been acceptable as a recreation site shall be
determined in accordance with the standards set forth in Article IV,
§ 255-24B.
(2) Such amount shall be paid to the Town Board at the time of final
plat approval, and no plat shall be signed by the authorized officer
of the Planning Board until such payment is made. All such
payments shall be held by the Town Board in a special Town
Recreation Site Acquisition and Improvement Fund, to be used for
the acquisition of land that is suitable for permanent park,
playground or other recreational purposes; is so located that it will
serve primarily the general neighborhood in which the land
covered by the plat lies; and shall be used only for park, playground
or other recreational land acquisition or improvements. Such
money may also be used for the physical improvement of existing
parks or recreation areas serving the general neighborhood in
which the land shown on the plat is situated, provided that the
Planning Board finds there is a need for such improvements.
§ 255-24 SENECA FALLS CODE § 255-26
1:288
ARTICLE V
Waivers
§ 255-27. Grant of waiver.
Where the Planning Board finds that, due to the special circumstances of
a particular plat, the provision of certain required improvements is not
requisite in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare
or is inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities
adjacent or in proximity to the proposed subdivision, it may waive such
requirements subject to appropriate conditions, provided that such waiver
will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the Official
Map, the Master Plan or Chapter 300, Zoning, if such exist.
§ 255-28. Conditions.
In granting waivers, the Planning Board shall require such conditions as
will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or
requirements so waived.
§ 255-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-28
1:289
Chapter 266
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic preservation — See Ch. 173. Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 255-28 SENECA FALLS CODE § 255-28
1:290
ARTICLE I
Senior Citizens Exemption
§ 266-1. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as "A Local Law of the Town of Seneca
Falls Providing a Partial Exemption from Taxation to Persons 65 years of
Age or Older Pursuant to the Provisions of Section 467 of the Real Property
Tax Law of the State of New York."
§ 266-2. Exemption granted; conditions.
A. Real property situate within the bounds of the Town of Seneca Falls,
Seneca County, New York, owned by one or more persons, each of
whom is 65 years of age or over, or real property owned by husband and
wife or siblings (i.e., a brother or sister, whether related through half
blood, whole blood or adoption), one of whom is 65 years of age or over,
shall be exempt from taxation for real estate taxes to be levied by the
Town of Seneca Falls for the year 2007 and thereafter by the
percentage of exemption specified for the annual income ranges listed
below. Such exemptions shall be based upon the assessed valuation of
the exempt real property and shall be computed after all other partial
exemptions allowed by law have been subtracted from the total amount
assessed.
Annual Income Ranges Exemption Percentage
$15,000 or less 50%
$15,000.01 to $15,999.99 45%
$16,000 to $16,999.99 40%
$17,000 to $17,999.99 35%
$18,000 to $18,899.99 30%
$18,900 to $19,799.99 25%
$19,800 to $20,699.99 20%
$20,700 to $21,599.99 15%
$21,600 to $22,499.99 10%
B. Annual income shall include the income of the owner or the combined
income of the owners of the property for the income year immediately
preceding the date of making an application for exemption. "Income tax
year" shall mean the twelve-month period for which the owner or
owners filed a federal personal income tax return or, if no such return is
filed, the calendar year. Where title is vested in either the husband or
the wife, their combined income may not exceed such sum except
where the husband or wife, or ex-husband or ex-wife, is absent from the
property as provided in Real Property Tax Law § 467, Subparagraph (ii)
of Paragraph (d), then only the income of the spouse or ex-spouse
residing on the property shall be considered and may not exceed such
§ 266-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-2
1:291
sum. Such income shall include social security and retirement benefits,
interest, dividends, total gain from the sale or exchange of a capital
asset, which maybe offset by a loss from the sale or exchange of a
capital asset in the same income tax year, net rental income, salary or
earnings, and net income from self-employment, but shall not include
a return of capital, gifts, inheritances, payments made to individuals
because of their status as victims of Nazi persecution, as defined in P.L.
103-286, or monies earned through employment in the federal foster
grandparent program. In computing net rental income and net income
from self-employment, no depreciation deduction shall be allowed for
the exhaustion or wear and tear of real property held for the production
of income.
(1) Any such income shall be offset by all medical and prescription
drug expenses actually paid which were not reimbursed or paid for
by insurance.
(2) Such income shall not include the proceeds of a reverse mortgage,
as authorized by Banking Law § 6-h, and Real Property Law §§ 280
and 280-a; provided, however, that monies used to repay a reverse
mortgage may not be deducted from income, and provided
additionally that any interest or dividends realized from the
investment of reverse mortgage proceeds shall be considered
income.
(3) The provisions of this subsection notwithstanding, such income
shall not include veterans disability compensation, as defined in
Title 38 of the United States Code.
C. No exemption shall be granted unless the title of the property shall have
been vested in the owner or one of the owners of the property for at
least 12 consecutive months prior to the date of making application for
exemption; provided, however, that in the event of the death of either a
husband or wife in whose name title of the property shall have been
vested at the time of death and then becomes vested solely in the
survivor by virtue of devise by or descent from the deceased husband or
wife, the time of ownership of the property by the deceased husband or
wife shall be deemed continuous for the purposes of computing such
period of 12 consecutive months. In the event of a transfer by either a
husband or wife to the other spouse of all or part of the title to the
property, the time of ownership of the property by the transferor spouse
shall be deemed also a time of ownership by the transferee spouse and
such ownership shall be deemed continuous for the purposes of
computing such period of 12 consecutive months. Where property of
the owner or owners has been acquired to replace property formerly
owned by such owner or owners and taken by eminent domain or other
involuntary proceeding, except a tax sale, the period of ownership of
the former property shall be combined with the period of ownership of
the property for which application is made for exemption and such
periods of ownership shall be deemed to be consecutive for purposes of
this section. Where a residence is sold and replaced with another within
§ 266-2 SENECA FALLS CODE § 266-2
1:292
§ 266-3. Application for exemption.
one year and both residences are within the state, the period of
ownership of both properties shall be deemed consecutive for purpose
of the exemption from taxation. Where the owner or owners transfer
title to property which as of the date of transfer was exempt from
taxation under the provisions of this section, the reacquisition of title by
such owner or owners within nine months of the date of transfer shall
be deemed to satisfy the requirements of this subsection that the title of
the property shall have been vested in the owner or one of the owners
for such period of 12 consecutive months. Where, upon or subsequent
to the death of an owner or owners, title to the property which as the
date of such death was exempt from taxation under such provisions
becomes vested by virtue of devise or descent from the deceased owner
or owners, or by transfer by any other means, within nine months after
such death, solely in person or persons who, at the time of such death,
maintained such property as a primary residence, the requirement of
this subsection that the title of the property shall have been vested
in the owner or one of the owners for such period of 12 consecutive
months shall be deemed satisfied.
D. No exemption shall be granted unless the property is used exclusively
for residential purposes; provided, however, that in the event that any
portion of such property is not so used exclusively for residential
purposes but is used for other purposes, such portion shall be subject to
taxation and the remaining portion only shall be entitled to the
exemption provided by this section.
E. No exemption shall be granted unless the real property is the legal
residence of and is occupied in whole or in part by the owner or by all of
the owners of the property, except where:
(1) An owner is absent from the residence while receiving healthrelated
care as an inpatient of a residential health care facility, as
defined in § 2801 of the Public Health Law, and provided that any
income accruing to that person shall only be income to the extent
that it exceeds the amount paid by such owner, spouse, or co-owner
for care in the facility; and provided, further, that during such
confinement such property is not occupied by other than spouse or
co-owner of such owner; or
(2) The real property is owned by a husband and/or wife, or an exhusband
and/or an ex-wife, and either is absent from the residence
due to divorce, legal separation or abandonment and all other
provisions of this section are met, provided that where an
exemption was previously granted when both resided on the
property, then the person remaining on the real property shall be
62 years of age or older.
A. Application for such exemption must be made by the owner or all of the
owners of the property on forms to be furnished by the Town of Seneca
§ 266-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-3
1:293
Falls Assessor's Office; such applications shall furnish the information,
and the forms are to be executed in the manner required or prescribed
in such forms and shall be filed in such Assessor's Office on or before
the date for hearing of complainants in the Town of Seneca Falls.
No person otherwise qualifying under this article shall be denied the
exemption under this article if he/she becomes 65 years of age after the
appropriate taxable status date but on or before December 31 of the
same year.
B. At least 60 days prior to the appropriate taxable status date, the
Assessors shall mail to each person who was granted exemption
pursuant to this article on the latest completed assessment roll an
application form and a notice that such application must be filed on or
before the taxable status date and be approved in order for the
exemption to be granted. The Assessor shall, within three days of the
completion and filing of the tentative assessment roll, notify by mail any
applicant who has included with this application at least one selfaddressed,
prepaid envelope, of the approval or denial of the
application; provided, however, that the Assessor shall, upon the
receipt and filing of the application, send mail notification of receipt to
any applicant who has included two such envelopes with the
application. Failure to mail any such application form or notices or the
failure of such person to receive any part of the same shall not prevent
the levy, collection and enforcement of the payment of the taxes on
property owned by such person.
C. Any person who has been granted an exemption pursuant hereto on five
consecutive completed assessment rolls, including any years when the
exemption was granted to a property owned by a husband and/or wife
while both resided in such property, shall not be subject to the requires
set forth in Subsection B of this section; however, said person shall be
mailed an application form and a notice informing him or her of his or
her rights. Such exemption shall automatically be granted on each
subsequent assessment roll; provided, however, that when tax payment
is made by such person, a sworn affidavit must be included with such
payment that shall state that such person continues to be eligible for
such exemption. Such affidavit shall be on a form prescribed by the
Commissioner of Taxation and Finance. If such affidavit is not included
with the tax payment, the collecting officer shall proceed pursuant to
§ 551-a of the Real Property Tax Law.
D. Purchase of property after levy of taxes.
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section,
where a person who meets the requirements for an exemption,
pursuant to this article, purchases property after the levy of taxes,
such person may file an application for exemption to the Assessor
within 30 days of the transfer of title to such person. The Assessor
shall make a determination as to whether the parcel would have
qualified for exempt status on the tax roll on which the taxes were
levied, had title to the parcel been in the name of the applicant on
§ 266-3 SENECA FALLS CODE § 266-3
1:294
the taxable status date applicable to the tax roll. The application
shall be on a form prescribed by the Commissioner of Taxation
and Finance. The Assessor, no later than 30 days after receipt of
such application, shall notify both the applicant and the Board of
Assessment Review, by first class mail, of the exempt amount, if
any, and the right of the owner to a review of the exempt amount
upon the filing of a written complaint. Such complaint shall be on
a form prescribed by the Board of Assessment Review and shall be
filed within 20 days of the mailing of this notice. If no complaint is
received, the Board of Assessment Review shall notify the Assessor,
and the exempt amount determined by the Assessor shall be final.
If the applicant files a complaint, the Board of Assessment Review
shall schedule a time and place for a hearing with respect thereto
no later than 30 days after the mailing of the notice by the Assessor.
The Board of Assessment Review shall meet and determine the
exempt amount, and shall immediately notify the Assessor and the
applicant, by first class mail, of its determination. The amount of
exemption determined pursuant to this subsection shall be subject
to review as provided in Article 7 of the Real Property Tax Law
of the State of New York. Such a proceeding shall be commenced
within 30 days of the mailing of the notice of the Board of
Assessment Review to the new owner as provided in this
subsection.
(2) Upon receipt of a determination of exempt amount as provided in
Subsection D(1), the Assessor shall determine the pro-rata
exemption to be credited toward such property by multiplying the
tax rate or tax rates for each municipal corporation which levied
taxes, or for which taxes were levied, on the appropriate tax roll
used for the fiscal year or years during which the transfer occurred
times the exempt amount, as determined in Subsection D(1), times
the fraction of each fiscal year or years remaining subsequent to
the transfer of title. The Assessor shall immediately transmit a
statement of the pro-rata exemption credit due to each municipal
corporation which levied taxes or for which taxes were levied on
the tax roll used for the fiscal year or years during which the
transfer occurred and to the applicant.
(3) Each municipal corporation which received notice of pro-rata
exemption credits pursuant to this subsection shall include an
appropriation in its budget for the next fiscal year equal to the
aggregate amount of such credits to be applied in that fiscal year.
Where a parcel, the owner of which is entitled to a pro-rata
exemption credit, is subject to taxation in said next fiscal year, the
receiver or collector shall apply the credit to reduce the amount of
taxes owned for the parcel in such fiscal year. Pro-rata exemption
credits in excess of the amount of taxes, if any, owed for the parcel
shall be paid by the treasurer of the municipal corporation which
levies such taxes for or on behalf of the municipal corporation to all
§ 266-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-3
1:295
owners of property entitled to such credits within 30 days of the
expiration of the warrant to collect taxes in said next fiscal year.
E. Purchase of property after taxable status date.
(1) Notwithstanding the provision of Subsection A of this section,
where a person who meets the requirements for an exemption
pursuant to this article purchases property after the taxable status
date, but prior to the levy of taxes, such person may file an
application for an exemption to the Assessor within 30 days of the
transfer of title to such person. The Assessor shall make a
determination within 30 days after receipt of such application
whether the applicant would qualify for an exemption pursuant to
this section on the assessment roll if title had been in the name of
the applicant on the taxable status date applicable to such
assessment roll. The application shall be made on a form
prescribed by the Commissioner of Taxation and Finance.
(2) If the Assessor's determination is made prior to the filing of the
tentative assessment roll, the Assessor shall enter the exempt
amount, if any, on the tentative assessment roll and, within 10 days
after filing such roll, notify the applicant of the approval or denial of
such exemption, the exempt amount, if any, and the applicant's
right to review by the Board of Assessment Review.
(3) If the Assessor's determination is made after the filing of the
tentative assessment roll, the Assessor shall petition the Board of
Assessment Review to correct the tentative or final assessment roll
in the manner provided in Title 3 or Article 5 of the Real Property
Tax Law, with respect to unlawful entries, in the case of wholly
exempt parcels, and with respect to clerical errors, in the case of
partially exempt parcels, if the Assessor determines that an
exemption should be granted and, within 10 days of petitioning the
Board of Assessment Review, notify the applicant of the approval or
denial of such exemption, the amount of such exemption, if any, and
the applicant's right to administrative or judicial review of such
determination pursuant to Article 5 or Article 7 of the Real
Property Tax Law, respectively.
F. If, for any reason, a determination to exempt property from taxation as
provided in Subsection E of this section is not entered on the final
assessment roll, the Assessor shall petition the Board of Assessment
Review to correct the final assessment roll.
G. If, for any reason, the pro-rata tax credit as provided in Subsection D of
this section is not extended against the tax roll immediately succeeding
the fiscal year during which the transfer occurred, the Assessor shall
immediately notify the municipal corporation which levied the tax or for
which the taxes were levied of the amount of pro-rata exemption credits
for the year in which such transfer occurred. Such municipal
corporation shall proceed as provided in Subsection D(3) of this section.
§ 266-3 SENECA FALLS CODE § 266-3
1:296
§ 266-4. Penalties for offenses.
The making of any willful false statement in the application for an
exemption under this article shall be a violation thereof, and a conviction
for any such violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100
and shall disqualify the applicant or applicants from further exemption for
a period of five years.
H. If, for any reason, a determination to exempt property from taxation as
provided in Subsection E of this section is not entered on the tax roll for
the year immediately succeeding the fiscal year during which the
transfer occurred, the Assessor shall determine the pro-rata tax
exemption credit for such tax roll by multiplying the tax rate of tax rates
for each municipal corporation which levied taxes, or for which taxes
were levied, times the exempt amount and shall immediately notify
such municipal corporation or corporations of the pro-rata exemptions
credits for such tax roll. Such municipal corporation shall add such prorata
exemption credits for such property to any outstanding pro-rata
exemption amounts and proceed as provided in Subsection D(3) of this
section.
§ 266-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-4
1:297

ARTICLE II
Business Investment Exemption
§ 266-5. Exemption granted.
Pursuant to Subdivision 2 of § 485-b of the Real Property Tax Law of the
State of New York, real property constructed, altered, installed or improved
for the purpose of commercial, business or industry activity in the Town of
Seneca Falls shall be exempt from taxation and special ad valorem levies
to the extent hereinafter provided. The following table shall illustrate the
computation of the tax exemption:
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 50%
2 45%
3 40%
4 35%
5 30%
6 25%
7 20%
8 15%
9 10%
10 5%
§ 266-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-5
1:299

ARTICLE III
Alternative Veterans Exemption
§ 266-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide a limited exemption from real
property taxes pursuant to Subdivision 2(a), (b) and (c) of § 458-a of the Real
Property Tax Law.
§ 266-7. Exemption amount.
Pursuant to Subdivision 2(d)(ii) of § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law, the
maximum exemption allowable in Subdivision 2(a), (b) and (c) of § 458-a of
the Real Property Tax Law shall not exceed $12,000, $8,000 and $40,000,
respectively.
§ 266-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-7
1:301

ARTICLE IV
Exemption for Persons with Disabilities and Limited Income
§ 266-8. Purpose.
This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of § 459-c of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York to grant a partial exemption from
taxation to certain resident property owners of the Town of Seneca Falls
(the "Town") with disabilities who have limited incomes.
§ 266-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INCOME TAX YEAR — The twelve-month period for which the owner or
owners filed a federal personal income tax return or, if no such return is
filed, the calendar year.
PERSON WITH A DISABILITY — One who has a physical or mental
impairment, not due to current use of alcohol or illegal drugs, which
substantially limits such person's ability to engage in one or more major life
activities, such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking,
seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working, and who (i)
is certified to receive Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) or
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits under the federal Social
Security Act, or (ii) is certified to receive Railroad Retirement Disability
benefits under the federal Railroad Retirement Act, (iii) has received a
certificate from the State Commission for the Blind and Visually
Handicapped stating that such person is legally blind, (iv) is certified to
receive a United States Postal Service disability pension; or (v) is certified
to receive a United States Department of Veterans Affairs disability pension
pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1521. An award letter from the Social Security
Administration or the Railroad Retirement Board or a certificate from the
state Commission for the Blind and Visually Handicapped or an award
letter from the United States Postal Service or an award letter from the
United States Department of Veterans Affairs shall be submitted as proof of
disability.
SIBLING — A brother or a sister, whether related through half blood, whole
blood or adoption.
§ 266-10. Exemption granted; conditions.
A. Real property situate within the bounds of the Town of Seneca Falls,
Seneca County, New York, owned by husband and wife or by siblings, at
least one of whom has a disability, and whose income, as hereinafter
defined, is limited by reason of such disability, shall be exempt from
taxation for real estate taxes to be levied by the Town for the year 2007
and thereafter by the percentage of exemption hereinafter specified for
the annual income ranges listed below to the extent of 50% of the
assessed valuation thereof. Such exemption shall be based upon the
§ 266-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-10
1:303
assessed value of the exempt real property and shall be computed after
all other partial exemptions allowed by law have been subtracted from
the total amount assessed:
Annual Income Ranges Exemption Percentage
$15,000 or less 50%
$15,000.01 to $15,999.99 45%
$16,000 to $16,999.99 40%
$17,000 to $17,999.99 35%
$18,000 to $18,899.99 30%
$18,900 to $19,799.99 25%
$19,800 to $20,699.99 20%
$20,700 to $21,599.99 15%
$21,600 to $22,499.99 10%
B. No exemption shall be granted:
(1) If the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of
the property for the income tax year immediately preceding the
date of making application for exemption exceeds the sum of
$22,500. Where title is vested in either the husband or the wife,
their combined income may not exceed such sum, except where the
husband or wife, or ex-husband or ex-wife, is absent from the
property due to divorce, legal separation or abandonment, then
only the income of the spouse or ex-spouse residing on the property
shall be considered and may not exceed such sum. Such income
shall include social security and retirement benefits, interest,
dividends, total gain from the sale or exchange of a capital asset,
which may be offset by a loss from the sale or exchange of a capital
asset in the same income tax year, net rental income, salary or
earnings, and net income from self-employment, but shall not
include a return of capital, gifts or inheritances or monies earned
through employment in the federal foster grandparent program. In
computing net rental income and net income from selfemployment,
no depreciation deduction shall be allowed for the
exhaustion or wear and tear of real or personal property held for
the production of income. Any such income shall be offset by all
medical and prescription drug expenses actually paid which were
not reimbursed or paid for by insurance.
(2) Unless the property is used exclusively for residential purposes;
provided, however, that in the event that any portion of such
property is not so used exclusively for residential purposes but is
used for other purposes, such portion shall be subject to taxation
and the remaining portion only shall be entitled to the exemption
provided by this article.
§ 266-10 SENECA FALLS CODE § 266-10
1:304
§ 266-11. Application for exemption.
§ 266-12. Penalties for offenses.
The making of any willful false statement in the application for an
exemption under this article shall be a violation thereof and a conviction for
any such violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.
(3) Unless the real property is the legal residence of and is occupied in
whole or in part by the disabled person, except where the disabled
person is absent from the residence while receiving health-related
care as an inpatient or a residential health care facility, as defined
in § 2801 of the Public Health Law, and provided that any income
accruing to that person shall be considered income for the
purposes of this article only to the extent that it exceeds the
amount paid by such person or spouse, or sibling of such person for
care in the facility.
C. No parcel may receive an exemption for the same municipal tax
purpose pursuant to both this article and Article I, Senior Citizens
Exemption, of this chapter, as amended.
D. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
provisions of this article shall apply to real property held in trust solely
for the benefit of a person or persons who would otherwise be eligible
for a real property tax exemption pursuant to this article were such
person or persons the owner or owners of such real property.
A. Application for such exemption must be made annually by the owner or
all of the owners of the property on forms to be furnished by the Town
Assessor's Office. Such applications shall furnish the information, and
the forms are to be executed in the manner required or prescribed in
such forms and shall be filed in such Assessor's office on or before
taxable status date; provided, however, proof of a permanent disability
need be submitted only in the year exemption pursuant to this article is
first sought or the disability is first determined to be permanent.
B. At least 60 days prior to the appropriate taxable status date, the
Assessor shall mail to each person who was granted exemption
pursuant to this article on the latest completed assessment roll an
application form and a notice that such application must be filed on or
before the taxable status date and be approved in order for the
exemption to be granted. Failure to mail any such application form or
notices or the failure of such person to receive any of the same shall not
prevent the levy, collection and enforcement of the payment of the taxes
on property owned by such person.
§ 266-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-12
1:305

ARTICLE V
Historic Property Exemption
§ 266-13. Exemption granted.
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 444-a of the Real Property Tax Law
of the State of New York, properties designated individually as historic
landmarks or that are classified as historic, and therefore contribute to the
character of the Seneca Falls Human Heritage Historic District, shall be
exempt from taxation to the extent of any increase in value attributable
to such alteration or rehabilitation completed in accordance with Chapter
173, Historic Preservation, of the Code of the Town of Seneca Falls. Such
alteration or rehabilitation shall have been made for means of historic
preservation and must meet guidelines and review standards as established
in Chapter 173. Additionally, such improvements shall be exempt from
special ad valorem levies but shall be liable for special assessments.
§ 266-14. Conditions.
A. The historic property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of any
increase in value attributable to such alteration or rehabilitation
pursuant to the following schedule:
Year Exemption
1 100%
2 100%
3 100%
4 100%
5 100%
6 80%
7 60%
8 40%
9 20%
10 0%
B. No such exemption shall be granted for such alterations or
rehabilitations unless:
(1) Such property has been designated as a landmark or is a property
classified as historic, and therefore contributes to the character of
the Seneca Falls Human Heritage Historic District established in
Chapter 173 of the Code of the Town of Seneca Falls as adopted
pursuant to §§ 96-a and 119-dd of the General Municipal Law of the
State of New York.
(2) Alteration or rehabilitation must be for the purpose of historic
preservation. For purposes of qualifying for a real property tax
§ 266-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-14
1:307
exemption pursuant to this article, alterations and rehabilitations
shall be deemed to be for the purpose of historic preservation if:
(a) Only exterior work is involved; or
(b) At least 5% of the total cost of the project is directly
attributable to exterior work and/or work that enhances the
structural stability or structural integrity of the property; or
(c) Interior work that is approved under 36 CFR, Part 67, Historic
Preservation Certifications Pursuant to Sec. 48(g) and Sec.
170(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; or
(d) Any work, be it exterior, interior or structural, is approved
under 36 CFR Part 67, Historic Preservation Certifications
Pursuant to Sec. 48(g) and Sec. 170(h) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended; or
(e) The project returns to use a building that has not been used for
a permissible purpose under Chapter 300, Zoning, for a
continuous period of at least two years.
(3) Such alteration or rehabilitation of historic property meets
guidelines and review standards established in Chapter 173 of the
Code of the Town of Seneca Falls.
(4) The Heritage Preservation Commission issues a certificate of
appropriateness for such alterations or rehabilitation of historic
property, or approval is rendered as noted in Subsection B(2)(d),
prior to commencement of work.
(5) Such alterations or rehabilitations are commenced subsequent to
the enactment of this article.
C. Such exemption shall be granted only by application of the owner or
owners of such historic real property on a form prescribed by the
Commissioner of Taxation and Finance. The application shall be filed
with the Assessor on or before the appropriate taxable status date of
the Town.
D. Such exemption shall be granted where the Assessor is satisfied that
the applicant is entitled to an exemption pursuant to this section. The
Assessor shall approve such application and such property shall
thereafter be exempt from taxation and special ad valorem levies as
herein provided commencing with the assessment roll prepared on the
basis of the taxable status date referred to in Subsection C. The
assessed value of any exemption granted pursuant to this article shall
be entered by the Assessor on the assessment roll with the taxable
property, with the amount of the exemption shown in a separate
column.
E. Such exemption shall be applicable only to those alterations or
rehabilitations which would otherwise result in an increase in the
§ 266-14 SENECA FALLS CODE § 266-14
1:308
§ 266-15. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately and shall apply to assessment rolls
completed on or after such effective date.
assessed valuation of the real property but which consist of an historic
preservation to an existing building structure.
§ 266-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-15
1:309
Chapter 280
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 266-15 SENECA FALLS CODE § 266-15
1:310
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 280-1. Definitions.
§ 280-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Highway Superintendent shall install and maintain traffic control
devices when and as required under the provisions of this chapter, to make
effective the provisions of this chapter, and may install and maintain such
additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate,
warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York, subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law. The
Police Department shall survey the condition of traffic control devices on a
regular basis and file recommendations with the Highway Superintendent
as to devices in need of installation, replacement or maintenance.
§ 280-3. Schedules; adoption of regulations.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article
1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for the purposes
of this chapter:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named
herein or on traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard
which is in current use in this state.
A. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations
adopted under the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby
established a system of schedules in which shall be entered all
regulations after adoption.
B. Regulations shall be adopted by the Town Board in accordance with
provisions of the Town Law and the Vehicle and Traffic Law, or by an
officer or agency authorized by the Town Board to adopt regulations
pursuant to § 1603 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 280-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-4
1:311
§ 280-4. Measurements.
Any linear measurements specified under this chapter shall be deemed
approximate, and the regulation to which they pertain shall not be affected
in any way by the altering or reconstruction of a street.
§ 280-5. Highway markings and traffic control devices.
The New York State Department of Transportation Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices is hereby made applicable to the streets of the
Town. All pavement markings made upon Town streets shall have the same
meaning and effect as similar markings upon state roads or highways.
§ 280-4 SENECA FALLS CODE § 280-5
1:312
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 280-6. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the following
described intersections:
Intersection
Fall Street and Black Brook Road
Fall Street and Ovid Street Bridge
Fall Street and Rumsey Street
Fall Street and State Street
West Bayard Street and Bridge Street
West Bayard Street and Ovid Street
§ 280-7. Speed limits.
The maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed on or along any streets
or highways within the former Village boundary is hereby established at 30
miles per hour, except that the speed limit for vehicles proceeding on or
along those streets or parts of streets described below shall be as indicated,
and except as otherwise posted on state highways in the Town by the New
York State Department of Transportation.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Chief Seneca Avenue 20 Entire street
Clinton Street 15 From 118 Clinton Street north
and west to Black Brook Road
Clinton Street 15 Upper Clinton Street in the area
of 118 Clinton Street
Mynderse Street 25 From Fall Street north to the
parking lot of the Seneca Falls
Middle School
Park Place
apartment complex
(Maple Grove
Avenue)
15 Any street within complex
Seneca Circle 20 Entire length
Seneca Manor Drive 20 Entire length
Seneca Place 20 Entire length
§ 280-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-8
1:313
§ 280-8. School speed limits.
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of the speeds indicated
below, in the areas described below, during school days between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
§ 280-9. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described are hereby designated as one-way
streets in the direction indicated:
A. Mynderse Academy/Seneca Falls Middle School: Monday through
Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; all zones.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Troy Street 15 Northbound at Butler Avenue
Troy Street 15 Southbound 300 feet north of
Tyre Avenue
B. Frank Knight School: Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; all
zones.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Clinton Street 15 Northbound at Porter Street
Clinton Street 15 Southbound across from #114
Clinton Street
Porter Street 15 Westbound 100 feet from
Clinton Street
Porter Street 15 Eastbound at Clinton Street to
100 feet east
C. Cady Stanton School: Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.;
all zones.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Chapin Street 15 Eastbound at Spring Street
Chapin Street 15 Westbound at Meadow Street
Garden Street 15 Eastbound in front of #26
Garden Street
Garden Street 15 Westbound across from #48
Garden Street
§ 280-8 SENECA FALLS CODE § 280-9
1:314
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Mynderse Street North Fall Street to Oak Street
Sanderson Lane East Entrance to municipal parking
Seneca Manor Drive East Ovid Street to Chief Seneca
Avenue
Seneca Manor Drive West Chief Seneca Avenue to Ovid
Street
§ 280-10. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any Town street within the former Village
boundaries.
§ 280-11. Motor vehicles over certain weights excluded.
Motor vehicles in excess of the weights indicated are hereby excluded from
the streets or parts of streets described below, except for the pickup and
delivery of materials on such streets, and except for fire, rescue, emergency,
Town or school vehicles:
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons) Location
All streets, except as
indicated below
6 Entire length
Center Street 3 Entire length
East Bayard Street 10 Entire length
West Bayard Street 10 Entire length
§ 280-12. Truck route system.
A. A truck route system upon which all trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer
combinations having a total gross weight in excess of 10 tons are
permitted to travel and operate shall be as set forth below.
B. All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations having a total gross
weight in excess of 10 tons are hereby excluded from all streets except
those streets listed below, except that this exclusion shall not be
construed to prevent the delivery or pickup of merchandise or other
property along the street from which such vehicles and combinations
are excluded:
Name of Street Location
Rte. 5 and 20 Cayuga Street
Rte. 5 and 20 Fall Street
§ 280-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-12
1:315
Name of Street Location
Rte. 414 Ovid Street
§ 280-12 SENECA FALLS CODE § 280-12
1:316
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 280-13. Applicability of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 280-14. Parking prohibited at all times. [Amended 12-2-2014 by
L.L. No. 7-2014]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Location
Auburn Road East In front of 12 Auburn Road
Auburn Road West From Cayuga Street to the south
boundary line of 13 Auburn Road
Barker Street South 50 feet east to Ovid Street
Bridge Street East In front of 39 Bridge Street
Bridge Street West Between West Bayard Street and
Shamrock Avenue
Center Street North and
west
Entire length
Chapel Street Both From State Street to Clinton Street
Chapin Street Both Entire length
Clinton Street Both From Chapel Street to Porter Street
Cowing Street South Along canal promenade
East Bayard Street North Entire length
Fall Street Both From Rumsey Street west to the Town
line
Fall Street North From Rumsey Street to Goulds
Pumps, Inc., driveway at 256 Fall
Street
Garden Street Both 500 feet from the intersection of Ovid
Street
Garden Street South From Meadow Street
Garden Street South From Meadow Street west to in front
of 52 Garden Street
Green Street South Entire length
Green Street South From in front of 4 Green Street west
to Ovid Street
§ 280-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-14
1:317
Name of Street Side Location
Haigh Street North From Bridge Street west to Swaby
Street
Haigh Street North In the area to the east of the
intersection of Haigh Street and
Swaby Street
Jefferson Street South From Mynderse Street 50 feet to the
west
Johnston Street Both From Cayuga Street to railroad
crossing
John Street Both Between State Street and across Troy
Street to dead end
Laws Lane West From Chapel Street to Pleasant Street
Maple Street Both North of Oxford Place
Meadow Street West Entire length
Miller Street Between
signs
In front of 31 Miller Street
Miller Street North Entire length
North Park Street South From State Street to Academy Square
Oak Street North From Rumsey Street 100 feet to the
east
Pleasant Street Both From Rumsey Street to Goulds Pumps
Porter Street South From Clinton Street east to Mynderse
Street
Porter Street South Between State Street and Troy Street
Ridge Street Both From Rumsey Street to across from
28 Ridge Street
Rumsey Street East Between Chapel Street and Chestnut
Street
Rumsey Street West Between Chestnut Street and Oak
Street
Sackett Street East From 11 Sackett Street north to West
Bayard Street
South Park Street Both From State Street to Cayuga Street
South Street South From Ovid Street east to dead end
Spring Street West From Garden Street to Green Street
State Street East 32 State Street
State Street East From North Park Avenue to Beryl
Avenue
State Street East From Porter Street to Boston Avenue
§ 280-14 SENECA FALLS CODE § 280-14
1:318
Name of Street Side Location
State Street East From Porter Street to Butler Avenue
Swaby Street Both Entire length
Toledo Street East Across from No. 18 north to West
Bayard Street
Toledo Street West From No. 8 north to West Bayard
Street
Trinity Lane Both From Cayuga Street to Fall Street
Troy Street East Between Butler Avenue and Leland
Drive
Troy Street West Entire length
Tyre Avenue North From State Street to Troy Street
West Bayard Street Both Entire length
William Street Both Entire length
§ 280-15. No stopping.
No person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described below:
Name of Street Side Location
Laws Lane West From Chapel Street to Pleasant Street
West Bayard Street North From Town line to 170 West Bayard
Street
West Bayard Street South From California Avenue to Kids'
Territory
§ 280-16. No standing.
No person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described below:
Name of Street Side Location
Cayuga Street Both 50 feet north of Fall Street
Cayuga Street Both 50 feet north and south of Trinity
Lane
Fall Street Both 50 feet east and west of the
intersection of Cayuga Street and
Ovid Street
Laws Lane West From Chapel Street to Pleasant Street
Ovid Street Both From East Bayard Street 25 feet to
the south
§ 280-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-16
1:319
Name of Street Side Location
West Bayard Street North From Town Line to 170 West Bayard
Street
West Bayard Street South From California Avenue to Kids'
Territory
West Bayard Street South From Ovid Street west to Center
Street
§ 280-17. Parking prohibited certain hours. [Amended 12-2-2014 by
L.L. No. 7-2014]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified, unless
otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described
below:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Fall Street Both 1:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Clinton Street to Cayuga
Street
Maple Street
Median
Both 1:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Entire length
State Street Both 1:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Fall Street to Sanderson
Lane
§ 280-18. Time-limit parking. [Amended 12-2-2014 by L.L. No.
7-2014; 10-5-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown at any
time between the hours listed, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Time Limit/Side Hours/Days Location
Cayuga Street 2 hrs./East All/All Trinity Lane
south to Fall
Street
Fall Street 2 hrs./Both All/All From Clinton
Street to Trinity
Lane
Fall Street 15 mins./South 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Mon.
through Fri.
Directly in front
of 59 Fall Street,
adjacent to the
west side of the
crosswalk
Fall Street 2 hrs./North 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
From State Street
to Cayuga Street
§ 280-16 SENECA FALLS CODE § 280-18
1:320
Name of Street Time Limit/Side Hours/Days Location
Fall Street 2 hrs./South 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Mon.
through Sat.
From Water
Street to Ovid
Street Bridge
Heath Street 2 hrs./Both All/All From 221 feet
north of Fall
Street to Fall
Street
Maple Street 6 hrs./All 6:00 a.m. to 1:00
a.m.
Entire median
Oak Street 3 hrs./East All/All From Rumsey
Street to across
from 42 Oak
Street
Oak Street 3 hrs./South 6:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Mon.
through Fri.
Between Rumsey
Street and
Walnut Street
State Street 2 hrs./Both All/All From Fall Street
to Sanderson
Lane
State Street 15 mins./East All/All Post Office
State Street 15 mins./West All/All 31 State Street
§ 280-19. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described below, except at the angle designated and only within the painted
stall lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is now or
shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked
with the front thereof nearest the curb.
Name of Street Side Location
Bridge Street West From West Bayard Street north to Ken
Burns Drive
State Street East From Fall Street north to Sanderson
Lane
§ 280-20. Loading zones.
The locations described below are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Fall Street East All/All 20 feet adjacent to building
entrance
Fall Street North All/All Rear of building in
municipal parking lot
§ 280-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-20
1:321
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Fall Street North All/All Behind Sincropi Florist
property
Fall Street West All/All 20 feet on east side of State
Street measured from Fall
Street
State Street West 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From the north corner of
the existing driveway at 33
State Street north
approximately 33 feet
§ 280-21. Seasonal parking restrictions.
A. Restrictions.
(1) No parking will be allowed on any roads, streets or Town parking
lots within the Town between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
between November 1 of any year and May 1 of the following year.
(2) The Police Department will be charged with enforcing this section,
which enforcement will involve tagging offending vehicles and, in
the case of emergency, towing offending vehicles away, subject to
the provisions of Subsection B.
B. Exceptions.
(1) Registration. Owners of vehicles who reside in C-1 Zones who do
not have private parking facilities available to them and who must
park their vehicles in designated municipal parking spaces may
register with the Police Department on a form to be prepared by
the Police Department, which form shall contain sufficient
information to enable the Police Department to contact such
persons for the moving of their vehicles when snow removal
necessitates such vehicle moving.
(2) Shared information. Duplicate copies of the parking registration
form shall be shared with the Highway Department, and certain
personnel of that department will be designated and authorized to
also make contact with vehicle owners when necessary.
(3) Identification. Each registrant will be provided with a distinctive
window sticker which shall be affixed to the rear left passenger
window of his or her vehicle, and vehicles so tabbed and identified
shall be exempt from the provisions of Subsection A(1) for so long
as their owners maintain a record of cooperation with police and
street personnel when asked to relocate their vehicles in an
emergency, which record of cooperation shall be noted on their
registration form. Repeated lack of cooperation shall result in
revocation of the parking exemption herein created.
§ 280-20 SENECA FALLS CODE § 280-21
1:322
§ 280-22. Parking prohibited in municipal parking lots.
Parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., from November 1 of
any year and May 1 of the following year, shall be prohibited in municipal
parking lots unless vehicles are registered with the Town Police Department
pursuant to § 280-22.
§ 280-23. Parking prohibited between sidewalk and curb or within
right-of-way; exceptions.
No parking of vehicles shall take place between the sidewalk and curb,
or within the street right-of-way if no sidewalk or curbs exist, for the
purpose of accommodating residents of residential dwellings, except for
circumstances such as yard sales, garage sales, receptions or like events,
the duration of which shall be less than one day.
§ 280-24. Handicapped parking.
(4) Discretion. In the case of violations by nonregistered vehicles, if no
immediate snow emergency exists when such vehicles are found,
the first tagging of such a vehicle is to be a warning, rather than a
citation, said warning to have a reproduction of Subsection A and
this subsection printed thereon, with a record maintained by a
vehicle plate number to enable repeat offenders to be cited.
Enforcement of these subsections should be guided by the
purposes for which it was enacted, namely to enable snow removal.
(5) Exempt vehicles and owner's extended absences. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of an exempt vehicle, when he or she
expects to be away from the Town without his or her vehicle for any
extended period of time (defined as an absence that embraces two
or more consecutive days), to so advise the Police Department and,
if requested to do so, to park his or her vehicle in a specific spot to
be designated by the Highway Superintendent.
(6) Sackett Business District.
(a) Findings and purpose. A determination has been made that, in
order to provide for snow removal in the Sackett Business
District, it is necessary to require vehicles with a valid reason
for parking overnight to be registered with the Town Police
Department. This will enable vehicle owners to be contacted
when the need arises for the purpose of snow removal.
(b) In compliance with this Subsection B, the off-street parking
areas to the east and west of the intersection at Bridge Street
and Bayard Street, commonly known as the “Sackett Business
District,” are designated as the applicable off-street parking
areas.
§ 280-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-24
1:323
§ 280-25. Motor vehicle weight-restricted parking.
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle or permit a vehicle owned
by him or her to be stopped, standing, or parked in any area designated
as a place for handicapped parking unless the vehicle bears a permit
issued under Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1203-a, or is registered in
accordance with Vehicle and Traffic Law § 404-a, and such vehicle is
used for the transportation of a severely disabled or handicapped
person. Handicapped parking spaces are established and provided as
follows:
Name of Street Side Location
Bridge Street East 15 Bridge Street
Bridge Street West 28 Bridge Street
Chestnut Street South In front of 15 Chestnut Street
Fall Street North 32 Fall Street
Fall Street South 27 Fall Street
Fall Street South 55 Fall Street
Fall Street South 123 Fall Street
Fall Street South 141 Fall Street
Fall Street South In front of Mynderse Library
State Street East North of Fall Street intersection
B. Designation of additional handicapped parking spaces and placement of
signs shall be at the discretion of the Chief of Police for all on-street and
municipal parking locations.
A. The parking of motor vehicles weighing over two tons, whether a single
motor vehicle or a motor vehicle with a trailer attached thereto, is
hereby prohibited in the locations described below:
Name of Street Location
Cayuga Street Entire length
B. There shall be no parking of any tractor or trailer except those loading
or unloading between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on streets
within the former Village boundary, in the Town parking lots, or on any
Town property.
§ 280-24 SENECA FALLS CODE § 280-25
1:324
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 280-26. Penalties for offenses.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision
of this chapter which is not a violation of any provision of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York shall, for a first conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second such
conviction within 18 months thereafter, such person shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $200 or by imprisonment for not more than 45 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction
within 18 months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $300 or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 280-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-26
1:325
Chapter 285
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Backflow prevention devices — See Ch. 111.
Sewers — See Ch. 230.
Taxation — See Ch. 266.
Wells, cisterns and cesspools — See Ch. 290.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 280-26 SENECA FALLS CODE § 280-26
1:326
ARTICLE I
Title; Definitions; General Rules
§ 285-1. Title; applicability.
This chapter may be known and cited as the "Town of Seneca Falls Water
System Rules and Regulations" and shall apply to the Town of Seneca Falls.
§ 285-2. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the
words and terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ANSI — The latest revised standards of the American National Standards
Institute.
ASTM — The latest revised standards of American Society for Testing and
Materials.
AWWA — The latest revised standards of the American waterworks
Association.
BUILDER — Any person, firm or corporation who or which undertakes to
construct any building, either under contract or for resale.
CLERK — The person designated by the Town Board to perform the duties
herein conferred on the Clerk of the Departments of Water and Sewer.
DEVELOPER — Any person, firm or corporation who or which subdivides
lands for the purpose of constructing or causing to be constructed buildings
for which provisions are required to be made for water supply.
FAMILY — A single distinct household, consisting of one or more persons
who live in a single residence or live apart from the other occupants of the
same building.
HYDRANT — The valved standpipe, connected to the water main, for
supplying water for fire protection.
OWNER — Any person having title to real property.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
PROPERTY LINE — The boundary line of a public highway, street, alley or
easement controlled by the Town of Seneca Falls or other public agency or
body.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the Town Board to be in
charge of the water and sanitary sewer maintenance crews and who shall
perform the duties herein conferred.
SUPPLY LINE — A water line on the building side of the meter used for the
distribution of water to the building.
TOWN BOARD — The duly elected Town Board of the Town of Seneca Falls.
§ 285-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-2
1:327
TOWN ENGINEER — The duly appointed Town Engineer of the Town of
Seneca Falls, New York, or a consulting professional engineer retained by
the Town of Seneca Falls.
WATER — Water collected from any well, spring, stream, pond or lake which
is treated and distributed to the public for human consumption.
WATER LINE — A pipe or conduit used for transporting water.
WATER MAIN — The water distribution line located in any public street or
easement of the Town of Seneca Falls or other public agency or body within
the water service area of the Town of Seneca Falls.
WATER SERVICE — The water line from the water main to supply a
building.
WATER SYSTEM — All facilities for producing, pumping, storing and
distributing water.
§ 285-3. Connection to public water main required.
The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the Town of
Seneca Falls water service area and abutting on any street, alley or right-ofway
in which there is now located or may in the future be located a water
main of the Town of Seneca Falls, is hereby required at his or her expense
to install suitable plumbing facilities therein and to connect such facilities
directly to the water main in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said
public water main has been installed and is located within 100 feet of the
property line.
§ 285-4. Cross-connections.21
No pipe or fixture connected with the water mains of the Town of Seneca
Falls shall be cross connected with pipes or fixtures supplied with water
from any other source. All water supplied to any fixture or apparatus
connected to a sanitary or storm sewer, public or private, shall be supplied
through an approved physical break or cross-connection control device
approved by the New York State Department of Health.
§ 285-5. Restrictions on use of water.
At such times as the Town Board deems it in the best interest of any
inhabitants to the water service area, the Clerk, on direction of the Town
Board, shall shut off or limit the amount of water furnished to consumers
within such area. In an emergency, the Clerk or Superintendent may direct
that the water may be shut off in the service area or any part thereof.
21.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 111, Backflow Prevention Devices.
§ 285-2 SENECA FALLS CODE § 285-6
1:328
§ 285-6. Liability for damage.
The Town, its agents, representatives and employees shall not be liable
for damage or loss of any kind to person or property by reason of rust or
discoloration of water supplied from or through any water system, or by
reason of a change in pressure or by reason of shutting off the water supply
from all or any part of any water system, with or without notice to any
person.
§ 285-7. Payment for repairs to system.
Any injury to water mains, water services, hydrants, valves, valve boxes or
other fixtures or appurtenances or any damage resulting therefrom shall be
paid by the person causing such damage or injury.
§ 285-8. Damaging, defacing or tampering with waterworks.
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is a part of the Town waterworks. Any person violating this provision
shall be subject to immediate arrest under a charge of disorderly conduct.
§ 285-9. Separate service required.
A separate tap, water service and meter are required for each building
served with water, except that a group of buildings owned by one person
where all portions thereof are occupied by persons for similar purposes may
be served by one water service and meter. No person owning or occupying
any premises shall allow neighboring premises to be supplied with water
from such owned or occupied premises by any means whatsoever. The
penalty for illegal connections shall be as determined by the Town Board.
§ 285-10. Use of private systems.22
§ 285-11. Number of parties supplied with water from main.
No owner or tenant of any premises supplied with water by the waterworks
will be allowed to supply water to other persons or families, or leave his or
her faucet or fixtures in such shape or position that other parties may obtain
water therefrom. If found so doing, the supply will be discontinued and the
supply will not be restored until all sums due for water have been paid,
A. Where public water is not available under the provisions of § 285-9, a
private system shall be provided complying with the requirements of
the New York State Department of Health.
B. A private water source, such as wells, springs or cisterns, may be used
in areas served by public water for nondomestic use, provided that said
water is not discharged into the public sewer.
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 290, Wells, Cisterns and Cesspools.
§ 285-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-11
1:329
along with the additional sum of $50 as a penalty; and except where special
permission is granted by the Town Board, each consumer must be supplied
by an independent service pipe from the main. In case two or more parties
are supplied with water from the same service, if either of said parties fails
to pay the water rent when due or to comply with any rules of the Town
Board, the Superintendent shall turn off the water from such pipe until the
water rent is paid and the rules strictly complied with.
§ 285-12. Prevention of waste.
Taps at sinks, wash basins, water closets, baths, urinals, sprinklers and
other uses must be kept closed when not in actual use, and must not be
allowed to leak. If a street washer, sprinkler or hose is found out of order,
leaking or used for any purpose other than permitted, the water supply will
be cut off without previous notice. Water will not be furnished where there
are defective or leaky fixtures. When discovered, the water supply may be
withdrawn unless repaired immediately and at the expense of the consumer.
All unnecessary waste must be prevented by the consumer.
§ 285-13. Yard fountains and jets.
No yard fountain or jet shall be used for a longer period than six hours
in any one day and then only for a period not exceeding six months in
any one year, without permission of the Town Board. All applications for
such permission must be in writing and shall fix the hour of the day and
the length of time in each year during which such fountain or jet will be
operated. If said fountain or jet is operated at any different time from
that specified in the application and permit, water will be shut off to the
premises.
§ 285-14. Access to premises.
The Clerk personally, and any person delegated by him or her for that
purpose, bearing proper identification, may at all reasonable hours have
free access to all parts of the premises to which water is delivered, for
the purpose of inspection and examination of fixtures, and all persons
using water must at all times, frankly and without concealment, answer all
questions put to them relating to its consumption.
§ 285-15. Vacant premises.
Any owner or duly authorized agent wishing to discontinue the water
service to premises temporarily vacant must give written notice thereof
at the office of the Town Clerk and order the same turned off; otherwise,
charges will be continued until such notice is given. For shutting off and
turning on water, a charge will be made as set from time to time by
resolution of the Town Board to cover the cost of each operation.
§ 285-11 SENECA FALLS CODE § 285-16
1:330
§ 285-16. Water for building purposes.
All persons desiring to use water for building purposes must make
application in writing at the office of the Town Clerk for permission to
use water for that purpose, and such application shall state accurately the
quantity of brick or stone to be laid or the quantity of plastering to be done
and, if for some other purpose, the approximate amount of water to be used.
Before such permission for such use of water is granted, the water rental
therefor shall be paid.
§ 285-17. Steam boilers.
Steam boilers taking water from the waterworks will be required to have
tanks that will contain an ample supply of water for 10 hours in case the
water is shut off for any purpose. The Town Board will not be responsible
for any accidents or damages should such be sustained by a violation of
this rule. All houses and boilers shall be fitted with suitable check valves
to prevent accidents from collapse or damage in case the water is suddenly
drained off from the main pipe.
§ 285-18. Pipes for fire suppression.
Stand pipes or pipes for the automatic suppression of fires in a building,
which fixtures are intended only for such use, will be permitted to be
attached to the Town water supply system. All such pipes must be provided
with a suitable valve outside of the building, which shall be under the
exclusive control of the Town. Also in the case of standpipes, a valve must
be provided and placed at the bottom of the standpipe and at each hose
opening, which valve shall be sealed by the Town Water Department. In
case such seals shall be broken for the extinguishment of any fire, the
party breaking the seal shall immediately thereafter notify the Clerk or
Superintendent and the valve shall be resealed.
§ 285-19. Use restrictions.
The Town Supervisor and his or her representatives reserve the right
to restrict or prohibit the use of water for sprinkling purposes or other
nonessential purposes at such times and for such periods as he or she
deems necessary or proper; and all directives by the Town Supervisor or
his or her duly authorized representative relative to the curtailment or
prohibition of the use of water for sprinkling or other nonessential purposes
shall be complied with.
§ 285-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-19
1:331

ARTICLE II
Water Mains
§ 285-20. Materials.
A. Pipe.
(1) Water main pipe size shall be determined by the expected domestic
and fire flow needs in the area. All water mains shall be ductile iron
and have a minimum size of eight inches in diameter.
(2) Water main pipe thickness class shall be determined by the
expected working pressure in the area. All water mains shall be
designed with a minimum of 150 pounds per square inch and in
accordance with American waterworks Association (AWWA)
Standard C150.
(3) Water main pipe size and pipe thickness class shall be approved by
the Town Board before the start of construction.
(4) All water main pipe shall conform to AWWA Standard C151.
(5) All water main pipe shall be cement-lined conforming to AWWA
Standard C104.
(6) All water main pipe shall be tar-coated conforming to AWWA
Standard C151.
(7) In lieu of the use of ductile-iron pipe for water mains, PVC SDR 18
meeting AWWA C900 or HDPE may be used when approved by the
Town Board. The PVC pipe shall be joined by preformed confined
rubber gasket joints designed for the pressure expected to be
experienced in the installation. A request for use of the PVC pipe
alternate shall include details assuring compatibility with existing
water facilities, especially connections, fillings and service
connections. When installed, the pipe shall be buried with metalfaced
plastic tape and other device to permit pipe location with
magnetic-type metal detectors. Use of PVC pipe where approved
shall comply in all aspects of installation with the requirements
contained herein.
B. Joints. All pipe joints for ductile-iron pipe shall be made with a
preformed rubber gasket conforming to AWWA Standard C111.
C. Fittings. Fittings shall be ductile iron and meet AWWA Specifications
C110 for short-body cast-iron fittings. All fittings shall be of North
American manufacture.
D. Valves. All water main valves shall be gate valves and shall conform to
AWWA Specification C500. Valves shall have a ductile iron body, fully
bronze-mounted, resilient seat with O-ring packing. Valves shall be
nonrising stem with two-inch operating nuts and shall open to the right
§ 285-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-20
1:333
§ 285-21. Minimum earth cover.
The minimum earth cover over the top of the water main pipe shall be four
feet six inches.
§ 285-22. Installation.
(clockwise). Gate valves shall be designed for 175 pounds per square
inch working pressure and tested for 300 pounds per square inch.
E. Valve boxes. All gate valves shall be equipped with cast-iron, Buffalotype,
two-piece, screwed valve boxes, with a shaft of 5 1/4 inches
(Mueller style H-10360 or equal). The valve box cover shall be marked
"Water."
A. All water mains shall be installed in accordance with AWWA
Specification C600 on a uniform grade and at an elevation to conform to
the connecting mains.
B. All PVC water mains shall be bedded in No. 1 stone or sand.
C. Mains shall be interconnected where possible, and dead ends, where
avoidable, shall not exceed 600 feet in length and shall be provided with
a hydrant at the end for flushing. A main-line-size valve will be installed
immediately after the hydrant tee.
D. Mains shall be installed on a bed of selected earth free of stones, or in a
bed of fine crushed stone, to provide uniform support the full length of
the pipe. In no case shall pipe be laid on blocks for support.
E. In the event the natural soil in the bottom of the trench is soft and will
not adequately support the pipe in the opinion of the Clerk or
Superintendent, the unstable soil shall be excavated from the trench
and suitable, select granular material will be thoroughly compacted in
its place.
F. Trenches shall be kept pumped out in such a manner that the pipe can
be assembled under dry conditions.
G. All backfill around the pipe and for a height 12 inches above the pipe
shall be carefully placed and compacted in six-inch layers. This backfill
shall be No. 1 stone or sand and free of large stones, vegetable matter,
ashes, cinders or other material that may be harmful to the pipe. The
balance of the trench backfilled shall be thoroughly compacted.
H. Valves and fittings shall be adequately supported, on concrete pads if
necessary, to assure that they will not have a differential settlement
from the adjacent water main.
I. "Dead-end" mains shall end with fire hydrant assembly as per Article
III, § 285-30.
§ 285-20 SENECA FALLS CODE § 285-23
1:334
§ 285-23. Thrust blocks and restraints.
Concrete thrust blocks and approved mechanical restraints shall be
provided at all tees, bends, plugs, pipe ends and hydrants to firmly support
the pipe and to prevent the pipe from shifting out of alignment. The thrust
block shall bear on undisturbed ground at the side of the trench. The size of
thrust blocks shall be calculated by standard engineering design methods
and approved by the Town Board.
§ 285-24. Location of line valves.
Line valves shall be located at each street intersection in such a manner
that each block of each street can be isolated from the system by closing no
more than two valves. Valves shall be placed so that the distance between
valves will not exceed 1,000 feet.
§ 285-25. Operation of water main valves restricted.
No one, except an employee of the Town of Seneca Falls Water Department,
shall operate any water main valves within the water service area of the
Town of Seneca Falls.
§ 285-26. Flushing.
All new mains, before they are put in service, shall be flushed with enough
velocity to assure that all dirt, sand, gravel, etc., is thoroughly washed out
of the section of main.
§ 285-27. Testing.
§ 285-28. Sterilization.
After testing as outlined above, all sections of water main, including
hydrants and hydrant branch lines, shall be sterilized using the following
procedure:
A. After the section of main is flushed, the line shall be filled with water,
making sure that all air is expelled from the main by bleeding off the air
at all high points on the line for this purpose. In any case, the line shall
be filled from the lowest point possible and a tap or blow off shall be
available at the highest point.
B. After the line is filled, the pressure in the line shall be pumped up to a
minimum of 150 pounds per square inch at the lowest point on the line.
At this test pressure, the maximum allowable leakage shall not exceed
the requirements of AWWA Specification C600.
A. The section to be sterilized shall be completely isolated from the rest of
the water system by closed valves.
B. A tap shall be made in the main adjacent to the valve through which the
flow of water is to be admitted to the section of main to be sterilized for
§ 285-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-28
1:335
§ 285-29. Inspection of installation, testing and sterilization.
The installation, testing and sterilizing of all water mains to be connected
to the Town of Seneca Falls water systems must be witnessed and approved
by the Superintendent or a person designated by him or her to witness such
tests.
the purpose of injecting chlorine or hypochlorite solution. If a hydrant
is not available at the far end of the section to be sterilized, a second
tap shall be made at the end of the line to discharge water during the
sterilizing procedure.
C. The valve controlling the water from the water system shall be opened
and the hydrant or tap at the end of the line shall be opened. Either
liquid chlorine or hypochlorite solution shall be injected into this flow of
water in such a concentration as to give a minimum chlorine residual in
the new main of 50 parts per million and a maximum chlorine residual
of 100 parts per million. The new main shall be completely filled with
this chlorinated water for 24 hours. At the end of 24 hours, the chlorine
residual must be at least 25 parts per million or the sterilization
procedure must be repeated.
D. At the end of 24 hours, the chlorinated water shall be flushed from the
mains. Care should be taken in this flushing so that the highly
chlorinated water will not cause damage to adjacent property or cause
fish kill in adjacent streams.
E. After final flushing and before the water main is replaced in service, a
sample or samples shall be collected from the end of the line, shall be
tested for bacteriological quality in accordance with Standard Methods,
and shall show the absence of coliform organisms. At least one sample
shall be collected from the new main and one from each branch. If the
initial disinfection fails to produce satisfactory bacteriological samples,
the main may be reflushed and shall be resampled. If check samples
show the presence of coliform organisms, then the main shall be
rechlorinated until satisfactory results are obtained.
F. Depositing hypochlorite powder or tablets in the main as it is being laid
will not be an acceptable substitute for the above-mentioned
sterilization procedure.
§ 285-28 SENECA FALLS CODE § 285-29
1:336
ARTICLE III
Hydrants
§ 285-30. Materials.
A. All hydrants shall conform to AWWA Standard C502.
B. Hydrants shall have cast-iron body and be fully bronze-mounted.
C. Hydrants shall be designed for a working pressure of 150 pounds per
square inch and tested to a hydrostatic pressure of 300 pounds per
square inch.
D. Hydrant valves shall be so arranged that the barrel drain valve will be
open when the main hydrant valve is closed and the barrel drain will be
closed when the hydrant valve is open. The hydrants shall be so
constructed that the hydrant valve shall be shut reasonably tight when
the upper portion of the hydrant barrel is broken off.
E. Hydrants shall be so constructed that the internal working parts of the
hydrant can be withdrawn from the top without disturbing the hydrant
barrel.
F. Hydrants shall be either:
(1) AFC (Darling), Model B-62B-1 Traffic-type, as manufactured by the
Darling Valve and Manufacturing Co., Williamsport, Pennsylvania.
(2) Kennedy, Model K-81D hydrant, as manufactured by the Kennedy
Valve Manufacturing Company, Elmira, New York.
G. Hydrants shall have a valve opening of 5 1/4 inches and a seven-inch
barrel inside diameter.
H. Hydrants shall have two two-and-one-half-inch hose nozzles and one
four-and-one-half-inch pumper connection. Hose and pumper threads
shall be in conformity with ANSI Specification B-26 for Natural
(American) Standard Fire-Hose coupling screw thread.
I. The operating nut and nozzle cap nuts shall be of pentagonal shape and
shall measure 1 1/2 inches from point to flat at the base of the nut.
J. Nozzle caps shall be furnished with chains.
K. Hydrants shall open left (counter-clockwise). An arrow showing the
direction of opening shall be clearly embossed on the hydrant bonnet.
L. A typical hydrant base shall be furnished to receive six-inch cast-iron
pipe and shall be mechanical joint.
M. Hydrants shall be supplied with a minimum five-foot depth of bury
(ground line to bottom of hydrant branch pipe).
N. Hydrants shall be furnished painted as follows:
§ 285-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-30
1:337
§ 285-31. Branch lines.
All hydrant branch lines from the water main to hydrant shall be six-inch
ductile-iron pipe with a six-inch gate valve and valve box in conformance
with § 285-20 of this chapter.
§ 285-32. Installation.
(1) Below the ground-line mark, the hydrant exterior shall be painted
with two coats of asphalt varnish.
(2) Above the ground-line mark, the hydrant exterior shall be painted
with one coat of zinc chromate primer, two coats of primer and one
finish coat of enamel, colors of which shall be designated by the
Town Board.
(3) The interior of the hydrant shall be painted according to
manufacturer's usual standards. At least one primer coat shall be
applied.
A. All hydrants shall be set plumb and shall be set on a solid base of
concrete.
B. Each hydrant shall have concrete reaction block from the base of the
hydrant to the undisturbed ground at the end of the trench. The bearing
area of the concrete block against the ground shall be sufficient to
withstand the water pressure thrust against the hydrant base.
C. The area around the base of the hydrant shall be backfilled with No. 2
washed or crushed stone to allow the hydrant to drain. This backfill
shall have a minimum radius of two feet and a minimum depth of three
feet.
D. Hydrants shall be set so that the quick-fix or traffic flange is at least two
inches above the ground surface.
E. Each hydrant shall be so placed that it is located between the traveled
portion of the highway, including the shoulder or curb if there is a curb
and the highway side of any existing or future sidewall that is between
the edge of the shoulder or curb and the sidewalk area. All exposed
portions of the hydrant shall be at least one foot in back of the curb.
F. Hydrants shall be set so that the pumper connection is facing the street.
G. Each hydrant shall be set so as to be readily accessible to the Fire
Department and shall not be set in cutouts, ground depressions, or on
high embankments above the road.
H. Each hydrant shall be so installed that the height, as measured from the
crown of the finished road or street surface to the center line of the
lowest outlet connection on such hydrant, shall not be less than 18
inches. All hydrants shall be installed so that the minimum distance
from the center line of the lowest outlet connection to finished ground
§ 285-30 SENECA FALLS CODE § 285-32
1:338
§ 285-33. Placement.
§ 285-34. Use and maintenance.
shall be at least 18 inches. All hydrants installed on other than public
roads shall also be installed to meet the above requirements.
A. Hydrants shall be placed at each street intersection.
B. Hydrants shall be placed at the end of all dead-end water lines.
C. When so directed by the Town Board, hydrants shall be placed at high
points on water mains.
D. When so directed by the Town Board, hydrants shall be placed at other
areas designated.
E. All hydrants shall be so placed that the distance between hydrants on
any street, measured along the center line of the street will not be more
than 600 feet.
A. All hydrants are under the control of the Town of Seneca Falls Water
Department. No person except an employee of the Town of Seneca Falls
or a fire fighter in the act of fighting a fire shall open, disturb or use any
hydrant or take water therefrom, under any circumstances, without the
written consent of the Superintendent.
B. No person shall use any wrench to open a hydrant except a hydrant
wrench specifically made for that purpose.
C. Any person, including fire fighters, shall report the use of any hydrant
to the Clerk or Superintendent on the next regular work day so that the
hydrant can be checked by the Water Department.
D. No person except Water Department personnel shall paint any hydrant.
No person shall in any way deface any hydrant or in any way obstruct
any hydrant from use either by planting trees or shrubs between the
hydrant and the street or in any other way place any obstruction
between the hydrant and the street.
E. Any person running into a hydrant or in any way damaging a hydrant
shall be financially responsible for its repairs or replacement.
F. No person shall erect or plant any obstruction within 3 1/2 feet of any
hydrant or cause any obstruction that will in any way hinder a fire
company from hooking onto it or operating any hydrant. No obstruction
shall be placed so as to obstruct the view of any hydrant for a distance
of at least 200 feet up and down the street.
§ 285-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-34
1:339

ARTICLE IV
Services
§ 285-35. Materials.
A. Pipe, from main to curb stop.
(1) Pipe for three-fourths-inch through one-inch services shall be Type-
K soft copper or CTS 200 psi PVC and meet ASTM Serial
Designation B-88 for underground service.
(2) Pipe for one-and-one-quarter-inch to two-inch services shall be
Type K soft copper or CTS 200 psi PVC pipe.
(3) Pipe for three-inch or larger services shall be pipe meeting the
requirements of § 285-20 of this chapter.
B. Taps.
(1) Taps for one-and-one-half-inch and two-inch services shall be
tapped into the main using a two-strap tapping saddle or service
clamp (Mueller Style H-10526 or approved equal) and corporation
cock (Mueller Style H-15000 or equal).
(2) There shall be no direct service taps on PVC water main brass or
stainless steel.
(3) Taps for three-inch or larger services shall be made with a tapping
sleeve and valve. The valve shall meet the requirements for valves
in § 285-20 of this chapter.
C. Curb stops.
(1) Curb stops for three-fourths-inch and one-inch services shall be
brass, inverted key, round way curb stops without drain (Mueller
Style H-15200 or approved equal).
(2) Curb stops for one-and-one-half-inch and two-inch copper services
shall be teflon-coated, brass, plug valves (Mueller Style H-15201 or
approved equal).
(3) Curb stops for three-inch cast-iron pipe service shall be AWWA,
double-disk gate valves meeting the requirements of § 285-20 of
this chapter.
D. Curb boxes.
(1) Curb boxes for three-fourths-inch and one-inch services shall be
cast-iron, Buffalo-type, screwed curb box with two-and-one-halfinch
shaft (Mueller style H-10350 or approved equal). The cover
shall be marked "water."
(2) Curb boxes for one-and-one-half-inch and two-inch copper services
shall be cast-iron, Buffalo-type, screwed curb box with three-inch
§ 285-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-35
1:341
§ 285-36. Service size.
The minimum size service for a single-family dwelling shall be 3/4 inch. The
service size for any other installation shall be determined by consulting with
the Superintendent. Service size shall be determined by expected water
requirements, length of service and static pressure available at the water
main.
§ 285-37. Installation.
shaft (Mueller style H-10346 or approved equal). The cover shall be
marked "water."
(3) Curb boxes for three-inch or larger cast-iron service with AWWA
gate valves shall be a valve box in compliance with § 285-20 of this
chapter.
A. All water services shall be installed so that there will be a minimum of
four feet six inches of cover over the pipe, bedded in sand or stone dust,
run with twelve-gauge trace wire (PVC-CTS).
B. All joints in copper water services shall be flared/compression joints. No
soldered connections will be permitted between the water main and the
meter.
C. The tap in the water main shall be made in the middle of the upper
quadrant of the pipe (same position as 2:00 on a clock).
D. An eight-inch-radius loop shall be provided in the copper pipe at the
connection with the corporation stop to provide flexibility.
E. No couplings will be permitted between the main and the curb box. No
couplings will be permitted between the curb box and the inside of the
cellar wall except where such services are longer than 100 feet in
length.
F. The service pipe trench shall not be backfilled until the service pipe has
been inspected by the Superintendent.
G. Care shall be taken in backfilling so that the pipe is not damaged by
large stones. The backfill material around and one foot over the pipe
shall not contain any organic matter, ashes or cinders, or any material
that may cause damage to the pipe.
H. Curb stops shall be set as near the property line as practicable. Curb
boxes shall be centered over the curb stops, set plumb, and the top of
the box shall be left flush with the finished grade.
I. Water services shall be subject to a pressure test approved by the
Superintendent.
§ 285-35 SENECA FALLS CODE § 285-37
1:342
§ 285-38. Maintenance.
J. In new subdivisions, the developer shall furnish a water service for each
proposed lot on any street or portion thereof before final acceptance of
the street by the Town.
K. In the existing water service area, where a service has not been
previously provided, the new service from the main to the curb box shall
be the responsibility of the Town of Seneca Falls Water Department at
the property owner's expense.
L. No water service shall be laid closer than 10 feet to a sanitary sewer
service, septic tank or sewage leaching area.
M. Where a water main or service has to cross a sanitary sewer line, the
water line shall be laid at an elevation 18 inches above the sewer line.
N. All water line excavations shall be properly barricaded and shall have
adequate warning lights at night so that at all times notice of the
excavation will be given to the public.
O. All water services in excess of 250 feet shall install a meter pit at the
direction of the Superintendent.
A. Once a water service between the main and the curb stop has been
installed at the developer's or property owner's expense and in
compliance with previous sections of this chapter, it will become part of
the water system and shall be maintained by the Town.
B. The water service between the curb stop and the meter shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to maintain and keep free from
leaks.
C. The curb box shall be maintained by the property owner in such a
manner that the curb stop is readily accessible. The curb box shall be
flush with the ground, straight over the curb stop, have a tight cover
and not be full of dirt, stones, sticks or other interferences.
D. As soon as the new service has been tested and approved, the curb stop
shall be closed and no water used from the service until the service is
metered. If water is needed for construction purposes, it shall be used
through a meter.
E. Whenever a service is found to be leaking between the curb stop and
the meter, the owner shall be notified, in writing, to repair or replace
such leak or service, and upon his or her failure to do so 15 days after
date of notice, the water to such service will be shut off.
F. Whenever a leaking service between the curb stop and the meter is
found to be of some material other than material specified in § 285-35 of
this chapter, the entire service from the curb stop to the meter shall be
replaced in accordance with this chapter.
§ 285-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-39
1:343
§ 285-39. Application form; supplementary information; fees.
The owner or his or her agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the Town. The permit shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of the Clerk. For services of 3/4 inch and one inch size, the fee shall
be determined by the Town Board. Services larger than one inch will be
calculated at the time of application.
§ 285-39 SENECA FALLS CODE § 285-39
1:344
ARTICLE V
Meters
§ 285-40. Materials.
§ 285-41. Furnishing and ownership; costs.
§ 285-42. Installation.
§ 285-43. Testing.
A. Meters for services 3/4 inch through two inches shall be approved
meters with frost-protection bottoms. Registers shall be straight
reading and calibrated in cubic feet.
B. Meters for services larger than two inches shall be compound meters
with straight-reading registers calibrated in gallons.
A. The Town of Seneca Falls shall furnish water meters for all water
services connected to the Town of Seneca Falls water mains. The
meters shall constitute packages, and the cost will be determined by
the Town Board from time to time and shall be paid for by the owner,
developer or builder upon procurement of the water service permit. All
water meters shall remain under the full ownership and control of the
Town of Seneca Falls.
B. The cost of any meter two inches or greater shall be borne by the
consumer.
A. Meters shall be installed in the water service as near to the wall where
it enters the building as practical.
B. No supply line shall be installed in the water service ahead of the meter.
C. The meter shall be installed in a horizontal position and in a place
where it will be readily accessible for reading and maintenance. The
meter will be furnished with connections (tail pieces or companion
flanges) that will be installed with the meter to facilitate meter
installation and removal.
D. An approved compression stop shall be installed in the water service
line immediately ahead of and behind the meter.
A. All meters will be tested by the Town of Seneca Falls Water Department
before installation. No meter will be installed that varies more than plus
or minus 1.5% from 100% at flows established as "Normal Test Flow
Limits" as shown in Table 1 of AWWA Standard C700.
B. Meters will be tested periodically as experience dictates the need.
C. If the property owner feels that a meter is not reading correctly, he or
she may demand, in writing, that the meter be removed and tested by
the Town of Seneca Falls Water Department. If the meter is found to be
§ 285-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-43
1:345
§ 285-44. Maintenance.
§ 285-45. Meter reading.
§ 285-46. Shutting off water.
within plus or minus 1.5% of 100% accurate at all normal test flows
as shown in Table 1 of AWWA C700-64, a charge in an amount set
from time to time by resolution of the Town Board will be made to the
property owner for the meter test. If the meter is found to be more
than 1.5% slow, the water bills for the preceding two quarters will
be adjusted in favor of the Town. If the meter is found to be more
than 1.5% fast, the water bills for the preceding two quarters will be
adjusted in favor of the property owner.
A. The owner shall protect from damage any meter installed on a water
line on his or her premises. In the event of any damage whatsoever,
except ordinary wear, the meter shall be removed and repaired by the
Town and the cost thereof shall be paid by the owner.
B. No person, except an employee of the Town Water Department, shall
remove a meter from a water line, break a meter seal, remove a register
or change a meter setting.
A. Meters will be read and the customers billed on a schedule established
by the Town Board. Meters will be read in each district the last two
weeks of the month preceding the billing date.
B. Each property owner will be responsible for making sure the meter
reader can get in the premises each time the meter has to be read.
C. If, for any reason, the meter reader cannot get in to read the meter
during any reading period, the amount of the water consumption for
billing purposes will be estimated on the basis of previous readings.
D. Water consumption will only be estimated for one billing period and the
meter must be read the next billing period.
E. In cases where no one is home during regular hours for meter reading
(8:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday), the Town Board may,
in its discretion, have a remote meter reading register installed at the
property owner's expense or have the water shut off, after due notice,
until arrangements for reading the meter regularly can be made.
F. Special meter readings will be made any time the ownership or tenant
occupancy of a property is changing hands at a cost to the property
owner in an amount set from time to time by resolution of the Town
Board. Any other special reading requested by a property owner will be
charged at a rate established by the Town Board.
A. Whenever an owner requests that the water be shut off at any property,
the water shall be shut off at the curb stop and the meter removed;
§ 285-43 SENECA FALLS CODE § 285-46
1:346
except that if the water is to be shut off for less than a day, it will not be
necessary to remove the meter.
B. If the curb box is not in good working order, it will be put in good
working order by the Town of Seneca Falls at the property owner's
expense.
C. A fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board will be
charged by the Town Board for turning off water and a similar charge
will be imposed for turning the water back on.
D. Prior to turning water on, the service shall be inspected for compliance
with code. In the event a service does not meet code, the owner shall be
notified and required to bring service into compliance prior to turn on.
§ 285-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-46
1:347

ARTICLE VI
Water System Extensions
§ 285-47. Design.
All extensions to the water system that will be operated and maintained
by the Town shall be properly designed in accordance with the standards
of the American waterworks Association and in strict conformance with
all requirements of the New York State Department of Health. Plans and
specifications for water extensions shall be submitted to, and approval
obtained from, the Town of Seneca Falls and the New York State
Department of Health before construction may proceed. The design of
water systems must anticipate and allow for the requirements of all possible
future extensions or developments within the immediate area.
§ 285-48. Petition for extension; assessment of costs.
Property owners may propose water extension within the incorporated
Town by drafting a written petition, signed by a majority of the benefiting
property owners, and filing it with the Town Board. The cost of such
extensions may be assessed to the benefited property owners in any manner
determined by the Town Board.
§ 285-49. Construction; responsibility for costs.
A. Water extensions, including individual service connections from the
water main to the curb box, may be constructed by the Town under
public contract if, in the opinion of the Town Board, the number of
properties to be served by such extension warrants its cost. Under this
arrangement, the property owner shall pay for and install the service
pipes from the curb box to his or her residence or place of business in
accordance with the requirements of Article IV.
B. If the Town does not elect to construct a water extension under public
contract, the property owner, builder or developer may construct the
necessary water extension, if such extension is approved by the Town
Board in accordance with the requirements of § 285-47. He or she or
they must pay for the entire installation, including all expenses
incidental thereto. Each building service pipe installed must be
installed and inspected as previously required and inspection fees as
determined by the Town Board shall be paid. Design of the water
system shall be as specified in Articles II, III and IV. The installation of
the water extension must be subject to periodic inspection by the Town
Board or its designee, and the expenses for this inspection shall be paid
for by the owner, builder or developer. Town Board decisions shall be
final in matters of quality and methods of construction. The water
system, as constructed, must pass the tests required in § 285-27 before
it is to be used. The cost of water extension thus made, including all
building water pipes, shall be absorbed by the developers or the
property owners.
§ 285-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-50
1:349
§ 285-50. Ownership and maintenance; guaranty.
§ 285-51. Suitable water system prerequisite to obtaining zoning
permit.
No builder or developer shall be issued a zoning permit for a new dwelling
or structure requiring water facilities within the Town unless a suitable
water source is proposed. All new developments shall be provided with a
public water system, unless otherwise permitted by the Town Board and
New York State Department of Health.
A. All water extensions constructed at the property owner's, builder's or
developer's expense, after final approval and acceptance by the Town,
shall become the property of the Town and shall thereafter be
maintained by the Town.
B. Said water systems, after their acceptance by the Town, shall be
guaranteed against defects in materials or workmanship for 12 months.
The guaranty shall be in a form provided for by the Town. At the sole
discretion of the Town, a completion bond or certified check may be
demanded as part of the guaranty.
§ 285-50 SENECA FALLS CODE § 285-51
1:350
ARTICLE VII
Rents and Charges
§ 285-52. Payment required; credits for proven leaks.
A. All persons owning, having or occupying lots, parcels or tracts of land
situated within the Town of Seneca Falls water service area having
thereon buildings or structures of any kind connected to the
waterworks shall pay to the Town Clerk, at the times provided by the
Town Board, rents and charges as may be fixed by the Town Board from
time to time and based on the criteria set forth in the following sections.
B. In addition to the current schedules of water rates, a new category,
applying to consumers within the Town limits only using over 150,000
cubic feet per month, is to be added, and the rate for such users is to be
set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board.
C. In the case of a water customer experiencing excessive water charges
that are proven attributable to an undetected leak on his or her
property, the Town of Seneca Falls will offer relief based on the
following guidelines:
(1) When a customer contacts the Town Water and Sewer Billing Office
regarding what he or she has been billed for water and his or her
consumption is above normal, he or she will be advised to check for
possible leaks in his or her system.
(2) If a leak is detected, it must be repaired without delay.
(3) Once the leak has been repaired, the customer may apply in writing
to the Water and Sewer Billing Office requesting relief for the
portion in excess of his or her normal usage. The subject request
must include details of where the detected leak was on the property
along with name, property address and phone number.
(4) The Water and Sewer Billing Office will submit the request to the
Town Supervisor for review and recommendation to the Town
Board. This will be done after the next regularly scheduled meter
reading for the subject property which reflects normal
consumption.
(5) The Town Supervisor will review each request on a case-by-case
basis and recommend either to grant or deny the submitted request
to the Town Board by resolution. Credit will be granted one time
only per property and consist of 50% credit of the portion in excess
of normal usage.
(6) The Town Board will either accept or reject the recommendation of
the Town Supervisor and indicate final action by resolution.
(7) If approval is granted, credit will be applied to the customer's
account and a new bill will be issued.
§ 285-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-52
1:351
§ 285-53. Schedules of rents; frequency of readings.
Revenues to be derived from water rents shall be levied on all property
connected to and receiving or able to receive water from the waterworks.
The water rent shall include a minimum charge plus a unit price for the
quantity of water consumed as determined by periodic water meter
readings. The frequency of meter readings and billings and the amounts
of minimum charges and unit price for water shall be reviewed by the
Town Supervisor from time to time and their recommendations filed with
the Town Board. The schedules so determined shall be established in
accordance with appropriate Town law and published and available to all
Town water system users.
§ 285-54. Delinquent payments.
§ 285-55. Senior citizen account credit.
(8) If approval is not granted, the Town Clerk will correspond with the
customer, advising him or her of the decision.
A. Each water rent levied pursuant to this chapter is hereby made a lien on
the premises; and if the same is not paid within 30 days after it shall be
due and payable, it shall be certified to the Town Clerk, who shall place
the same on the real property tax bill for that year with interest and
penalties allowed by law and be collected as other Town taxes are
collected.
B. Those water consumers who have not paid their bills 30 days after bills
have been rendered for the services described herein, and at the rate
prescribed herein, shall be deemed to be delinquent, and the service to
their premises may be discontinued. Such service shall not be restored
until proper settlement of the delinquent customer's account has been
made to the satisfaction to the Clerk, together with any additional costs
which might have been incurred by the Town in discontinuing or
restoring the delinquent customer's service.
A. A partial credit to the extent of a maximum of 50% of water and sewer
charges shall be applied to the accounts of certain persons with limited
income who are 65 years of age or older and reside within the Town of
Seneca Falls limits, meeting all other requirements set forth in a policy
adopted by the Town Board and amended from time to time.
B. The maximum income level for the credit set forth in Subsection A is
established at the current maximum income eligibility for the senior
citizen tax exemption in Chapter 266, Taxation, Article I, of the Code of
the Town of Seneca Falls.
§ 285-52 SENECA FALLS CODE § 285-56
1:352
§ 285-56. Additional charges.
Additional charges above and beyond water rents may be imposed on Town
water customers, including returned check fees, service fees, invoice fees
and the like.
§ 285-57. Water hauler charges.
From time to time the Town sells metered water from hydrants to water
haulers. These haulers are supplying water to their customers, who may or
may not be Town customers, and the Town has no regulation over the usage.
Therefore this section is enacted to clarify charges for such sales.
A. Returned check fees.
(1) The Town will charge the account of the intended account a
returned check fee for all checks returned to the Water Office. The
amount will be as permitted by New York State law and will be
applied to the customer’s water bill.
(2) Upon notice from the Town’s financial institution, the account clerk
shall cause such correction to be made. The actual costs of making
such correction will be billed to the account and the customer’s
failure to pay on the account shall be deemed as delinquent.
B. Service fees and invoiced fees for additional services and work related
to water and sewer services in the Town.
(1) When these charges are incurred and go unpaid for a period of 30
days, the Town will send a second notice stating "payable upon
receipt."
(2) If unpaid by the next billing cycle, charges will be placed on the
water account. The owner, as designated on the application for
water service, is ultimately the responsible party; by completing
the application for water service, the homeowner is accepting
responsibility for all water rents and additional charges placed on
the account.
(3) Upon delinquency, the account clerk shall issue a notice advising
that if the delinquency is not corrected within 15 days, the Town
will cause such correction to be made and the actual costs of
making such correction will be billed to the account. Upon failure
to pay on the account, the same shall be added to the next real
property tax bill of the owner as designated on the application for
water service.
A. Haulers will incur an initial daily fee as set by the Town Board for the
privilege of obtaining water from a hydrant, as well as incur a rate
charge per cubic foot of water metered at the usage rate used for
customers above 1,200 cubic feet each time the hauler contracts with
the Town to use the hydrant.
§ 285-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-57
1:353
(1) Haulers will incur an interest rate of 10% on balances due past 30
days.
(2) Haulers will incur a returned check fee upon notice from the
Town’s financial institution.
(3) Haulers may also be denied the ability to purchase water if billing
issues appear as a result of late payments or several returned
checks fees are incurred, as well as if any legal litigation is needed
to collect charges. Haulers may also be denied connection in the
event that unauthorized use of the hydrants is determined by the
Town.
B. Haulers must submit company billing information and driver
information prior to requesting a purchase, as the charges associated
with the purchase will be invoiced to the company.
C. Haulers must provide notice of intended purchase, with information
regarding the date of use, length of use and approximate amount of
intended use, prior to authorization to connect at the designated
hydrant so that a meter may be placed at the location and meter
reading obtained to ensure proper billing.
§ 285-57 SENECA FALLS CODE § 285-57
1:354
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement
§ 285-58. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, other
than those provisions pertaining to the payment of charges for services
established herein, shall be guilty of an offense against this chapter and
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500, imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or both, for each offense. The continued violation of any
provision of any section of this chapter, other than those pertaining to
the payment of charges for services established herein, shall constitute a
separate offense for each and every day such violation of any provision
hereof shall continue.
§ 285-59. Alternative remedies.
As an alternative, upon violation of this chapter, the proper authorities
of the Town, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate
action or proceedings to compel compliance with or to restrain the violation
of any provision of this chapter.
§ 285-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-59
1:355

ARTICLE IX
Inspections
§ 285-60. Inspection of completed work; fee for missed inspections.
At such time as work requiring an inspection by the provisions of Chapter
285 has been completed and is ready for such inspection, the property
owner, builder or developer shall notify the Clerk and request such
inspection, which shall be done as promptly as possible. However, if the
property owner or agent does not show up for the inspection, a subsequent
scheduled inspection shall cause a fee to be charged to the property owner
in an amount set from time to time by resolution of the Town Board; and
each inspection thereafter, if necessary, shall be at a cost set from time to
time by resolution of the Town Board. There shall continue to be no cost for
the first inspection if the requesting party is present.
§ 285-61. Procedure upon disapproval.
In the event that such work is not ready for inspection or for any other
reason may not be approved by the inspecting officer, the property owner,
builder or developer shall be notified that such work has not been approved
and the reason therefor, and at the same time shall be notified that no
further inspection of such work will be made until the property owner,
builder, or developer has paid to the Town Treasurer a sum as set from time
to time by resolution of the Town Board to cover the extra expense and
cost to the Town. In the event of further disapproval of this same work, a
further payment shall be made by the property owner, builder or developer
in accordance with the above schedule before a further inspection shall be
made.
§ 285-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-61
1:357
Chapter 290
WELLS, CISTERNS AND CESSPOOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 290.
§ 290-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPEN OR UNGUARDED WELL, CISTERN, CESSPOOL OR MINE HOLE
— One which is not securely covered by a cover sufficient to withstand
500 pounds of pressure for each 10 square feet of the covered area or
completely enclosed by a permanent wire fence at least four feet in height.
§ 290-2. Nuisances.
An open or unguarded well, cistern, cesspool or mine hole situated within
the limits of the Town of Seneca Falls, New York, within 500 feet of the side
line of any road, street or highway used by the public, is declared to be a
public nuisance.
§ 290-3. Duty to abate nuisance.
Any such public nuisance shall be abated by the owner of the land on which
said public nuisance exists after a notice in writing shall have been given to
the owner by the Clerk of the Town of Seneca Falls, as hereinafter set forth.
§ 290-4. Notice to abate nuisance.
The Town Clerk of the Town of Seneca Falls is hereby empowered,
authorized and directed, upon a public nuisance as herein defined being
called to his or her attention, to notify in writing the owner of the land on
which such public nuisance exists to abate such public nuisance within five
days from the service of the notice upon such owner, by either placing a
cover over such nuisance sufficient to withstand 500 pounds of pressure
for each 10 square feet of the covered area or by completely enclosing the
public nuisance with a permanent wire fence at least four feet in height
which will bar all reasonable and normal access. The notice shall further
provide that in the event such owner shall fail to abate such nuisance,
the Town of Seneca Falls may cause such nuisance to be abated and the
reasonable cost thereof shall be charged against the owner of the land on
which such nuisance exists. The costs thereof will be a lien on such lands
and will be assessed thereon and collected in the same manner as local
municipal taxes are collected.
§ 285-61 SENECA FALLS CODE § 290-5
1:358
§ 290-5. Abatement of nuisance by Town; costs to be lien.
In the event of the failure of the owner of the land upon which such public
nuisance exists to abate the nuisance and said nuisance is abated by the
Town of Seneca Falls, then the costs of such abatement shall be a lien on
such lands and shall be assessed thereon and collected in the same manner
as local municipal taxes are collected.
§ 290-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any landowner violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, in addition to his or her lands being liable to a lien as
hereinabove set forth, be subject for each offense to a fine of not more
than $500 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both. Each
day during which any of the aforesaid public nuisances shall exist, after
such notice as hereinabove set forth is given, shall constitute a single and
separate violation of this chapter.
Chapter 300
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 131.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 158.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 173.
Sewers — See Ch. 230.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 255.
Water — See Ch. 285.
§ 290-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-6
1:359

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 300-1. Title.
This chapter is known as and officially referred to as the "Town of Seneca
Falls Zoning Local Law."
§ 300-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to establish comprehensive controls for the
orderly development of land in the Town of Seneca Falls, based on the
Comprehensive Plan for the Town and enacted in order to promote and
protect the health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the
people.
§ 300-3. Purpose.
These regulations shall be designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to
minimize risks from fire, flood, panic or other dangers; to promote health
and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent
overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to make
provision for, so far as conditions may permit, the accommodation of solar
energy, systems and equipment and access to sunlight necessary therefor;
and to facilitate the provision of public requirements, such as
transportation, water, schools, parks, sewage, etc. These regulations shall
be reasonable, assist in conserving the value of buildings and encourage the
most appropriate use of land throughout the Town.
§ 300-4. Interpretation of provisions.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, morals, safety or general welfare. This chapter is not intended
to interfere with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or
ordinances, provided that, whenever the requirements of this chapter are
at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing the highest
standards shall govern.
§ 300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-4
1:361

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 300-5. Word usage and interpretation.
In the interpretation of this chapter, the following rules apply:
§ 300-6. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure subordinate to
the principal use of a building on the same lot and serving a purpose
customarily incidental to the use of the principal building. No accessory
structure shall have an area larger than 50% of the square footage of the
principal structure on the lot.
ADULT BOOKSTORE —
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B. The singular includes the plural.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
D. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel."
E. The term "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or structure shall
be construed to include the words "intended," "arranged" or "designed
to be used or occupied."
F. The words "he" and "she" include the opposite gender and in both
instances include the word "it."
G. Any land use that meets the criteria of more than one definition herein
shall be considered to be each such separate defined land use, and each
use shall be subject to each land use's applicable zoning provisions.
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one
or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, motion pictures, videocassettes or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict
or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or
(1)
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
(2)
A.
A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
B.
§ 300-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-6
1:363
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment that features:
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or adult
video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt
such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult
bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal business
purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified
materials that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas. A "principal business purpose" shall mean more than
1/4 of the business is devoted to the sale, rental, or display of such
materials as determined by any of the following:
The number of different titles of printed, visual or audio materials
of any kind that are characterized by their emphasis on the
description or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities;
(1)
The number of copies of printed, visual or audio materials of any
kind which are characterized by their emphasis on the description
or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities;
(2)
The amount of floor space devoted to the sale and display of
printed, visual or audio materials of any kind which are
characterized by their emphasis on the description or depiction of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
(3)
The dollar amount of sales of printed, visual or audio materials
of any kind which are characterized by their emphasis on the
description or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities; or
(4)
The amount of on-site advertising which can be viewed by
passersby, or the amount or cost of advertising in print or
broadcast media devoted to printed, visual or audio materials of
any kind which are characterized by their emphasis on the
description or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities.
(5)
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity; or
Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
B.
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
C.
§ 300-6 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-6
1:364
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown that are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
ADULT USES — Adult arcades, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult
motels, adult motion-picture theaters, adult theaters, adult video stores,
escort agencies, nude model studios and sexual encounter centers.
ADULT VIDEO STORE — An "adult bookstore."
ANTENNA — A bipole or monopole wire device designed to transmit or
receive electromagnetic radiation in the radio frequencies.
AUTOMOBILE SALESROOM or AUTOMOBILE DEALER — A local retail
business which displays for sale and/or sells and/or leases automobiles and
which is not used or designed to be used for the sale of gasoline, oil or other
motor vehicle fuels to the public.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including
improvements and structures thereon, used or designed to be used as a
local retail business for the sale of gasoline, oil or other motor vehicle fuels
to the public, and which may include facilities for lubricating, washing,
cleaning or otherwise servicing motor vehicles; however, this term shall not
include a facility used or intended to be used primarily for repairing and/or
painting motor vehicles.
AUTO REPAIR AND SERVICE — A facility used or intended to be used
primarily for repairing and/or painting motor vehicles and which is not used
or designed to be used for the sale of gasoline, oil or other motor vehicle
fuels to the public.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A residential lodging facility in an owneroccupied
dwelling offering from one bedroom to seven bedrooms without a
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign
visible from the public right-of-way that advertises the availability of
this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
A.
Offers sleeping rooms for rent for a period of time that is less than 10
hours; or
B.
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
C.
§ 300-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-6
1:365
kitchen, but may include kitchen privileges, and housing transient guests
for periods not to exceed 14 consecutive days, serving breakfast.
BUFFER or BUFFERING — A strip of land, generally adjacent to a property
line and at least five feet wide, unless otherwise specified in this chapter, in
which a solid fence or a screen of plantings is installed and maintained by
the owner of the property. Such a screen shall be planted with deciduous
and evergreen trees in any appropriate combination which will provide an
effective visual buffer between properties.
BUILDING — A structure, wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls
or within exterior and party walls and a roof, affording shelter to persons,
animals or property.
BUILDING AREA — The area of a lot covered by buildings or roofed areas,
but excluding incidental projecting eaves, balconies, decks/ground-level
paving, landscaping, open recreational facilities and similar features.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the mean level
of the ground surrounding the building to a point midway between the
highest and lowest point of the roof, but not including chimneys, spires,
towers, tanks and similar projections.
BUILDING LINE — The line of that face of the building nearest the front line
of the lot and extended to the side lot lines. Corner lots have two building
lines, one for each side facing a street.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A structure in which is conducted the principal
use of the site on which it is situated. A dwelling in a residential district
shall be deemed to be the principal building on its lot.
CAMPER — Any construction used or arranged for temporary living or
sleeping purposes and mounted on or attached to a vehicle and capable of
being removed from such vehicle.
CAMPGROUND — A parcel of land intended to be used or rented for
occupancy by campers or recreational vehicles. See also the definition of
"recreational vehicle park."
CAMPING TRAILER — Any vehicle used or arranged for temporary living
or sleeping purposes, mounted on wheels and drawn by a power-driven
vehicle.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A subdivision of one-family dwellings
comprising 10 or more acres, the minimum lot area and dimensions for a
unit of which may be reduced, provided that the total number of units in
the cluster does not exceed the number that would be permitted with the
larger dimensions and provided that the residual land gained by the smaller
lot size is used for common recreation and open space.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The materials, written and/or graphic,
including but not limited to maps, charts, studies, resolutions, reports and
other descriptive material, that identify the goals, objectives, principles,
guidelines, policies, standards, devices and instruments for the immediate
§ 300-6 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-6
1:366
and long-range protection, enhancement, growth and development of the
Town.
COVERAGE — That percentage of the plot or land area covered by the
building area.
DISH ANTENNA — An antenna with a parabolic or spherical dish used to
focus the electromagnetic radiation onto the antenna element.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively
as the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons, except a mobile
home, trailer or recreational vehicle (RV).
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building containing three or more dwelling
units regulated by the provisions of the New York State Multiple Residence
Law.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, including cooking facilities and
sanitary facilities in a dwelling structure, designed as a unit for occupancy
by not more than one family for living and sleeping purposes.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who or which
furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — A public service requiring the erection,
construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or Town or other
governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical or water
transmission or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains,
sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate
service by such public utilities or Town or other governmental agencies
or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including
buildings.
LARGE SATELLITE DISHES — These are usually eight feet to 12 feet
in diameter for residential models and larger for commercial models,
receiving low-power signals in the four-gigahertz band (C band) from
geostationary satellites.
A.
DIRECT BROADCAST SATELLITES (DBS) — These dishes are smaller
dishes, usually 18 inches to 36 inches in diameter, receiving mediumto
high-power signals in the twelve-gigahertz band (K band) from
geostationary satellites.
B.
MULTIPOINT DISTRIBUTION SERVICE (MDS) — These dishes are
smaller dishes, usually 18 inches to 30 inches in diameter, receiving
signals in the microwave band from a ground source. (A substitute for
cable television systems.)
C.
§ 300-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-6
1:367
ESTABLISHMENT — Any of the following:
FAMILY —
A. The opening or commencement of any new business.
B. The conversion of an existing business to any other use.
C. The relocation of any use.
Means:
(1) An individual; or
Two or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, related by
blood, marriage, or legal adoption, living and cooking together as a
single housekeeping unit; or
(2)
Two unrelated persons, occupying a single dwelling unit, living and
cooking together as a single housekeeping unit.
(3)
A.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A(3) of this definition,
a group of unrelated persons numbering more than two shall be
considered a family upon a determination by the Zoning Board of
Appeals that the group is a functional equivalent of a family pursuant to
the standards enumerated in Subsection D herein.
B.
Before making a determination whether a group of more than two
unrelated persons constitutes a family for the purpose of occupying a
dwelling unit, as provided for in Subsection B of this definition, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing, after public notice,
as is normally required for obtaining a variance. The fee for such an
application shall be the same as is required for an application for a
variance. Said application shall be on a form provided by the Zoning
Board of Appeals or Zoning Officer.
C.
In making a determination under Subsection B, the Board of Appeals
shall find:
The group is one which in theory, size, appearance and structure
resembles a traditional family unit.
(1)
The group is one which will live and cook together as a single
housekeeping unit.
(2)
The group is of a permanent nature and is neither merely a
framework for transient or seasonal (including as "seasonal" a
period of an academic year or less) living, nor merely an
association or relationship which is transient or seasonal in nature.
In making this finding, the Zoning Board of Appeals may consider,
among other factors, the following:
Whether expenses for preparing food, rent or ownership costs,
utilities, and other household expenses are shared and
(a)
(3)
D.
§ 300-6 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-6
1:368
whether the preparation, storage and consumption of food is
shared.
Whether different members of the household have the same
address for the purposes of:
[1] Voter registration.
[2] Driver's licenses.
[3] Motor vehicle registration.
[4] Summer or other residences.
[5] Filing of taxes.
(b)
Whether furniture and appliances are owned in common by all
members of the household.
(c)
(d) Whether any children are enrolled in local schools.
(e) Whether householders are employed in the local area.
Whether the group has been living together as a unit for an
extended period of time, whether in the current dwelling unit
or other dwelling units.
(f)
Any other factor reasonably related to whether the group of
persons is the functional equivalent of a traditional family.
(g)
In making determinations under this definition, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall not be required to consider the matters set forth in
§ 300-46, Special permit uses, of this chapter.
(4)
Lesser permitted number.
Notwithstanding the provisions elsewhere provided herein, if the
following limitations result in a lesser permitted number of
occupants than would be permitted under the definition of "family"
set forth above and the regulations of each zone set forth later in
this chapter, the number of occupants, related or otherwise, shall
not exceed the maximum numbers determined on the basis of the
habitable space of each dwelling unit as follows:
A minimum of 150 square feet of habitable space for the first
occupant; and
(a)
Eighty square feet of habitable space for each additional
person in each dwelling unit.
(b)
(1)
In no case shall the enclosed floor area be less than 600 square
feet.
(2)
E.
§ 300-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-6
1:369
FARM or FARMING — Any parcel of land containing at least five acres
which is used in the gainful raising of agricultural products, common
domestic farm animals, poultry and dairy products, including all necessary
farm structures.
FENCE — A structure designed to separate one portion of land from
another for privacy, security or demarcation of property lines. For the
purpose of this chapter, fences shall also include walls and screens and shall
be further defined as:
HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION — The Town of Seneca Falls Historic
District Commission.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any home occupation or business use carried on
in a dwelling unit by the residents which is incidental to its principal
residential function, provided that such use is clearly not detrimental to the
residential character of the neighborhood. Such a use must comply with
§ 300-50 of this chapter.
HOUSE TRAILER — Any portable structure or vehicle so constructed and
designed as to permit occupancy thereof for dwelling or sleeping purposes,
or the conduct of any business, profession, occupation or trade.
JUNK — Any old, worn-out, cast-off, discarded or unused waste iron or
other metal or substance, glass, paper, used lumber, rags, machine parts,
accessories, discarded machinery or discarded machines, either mechanical
or semimechanical, in whole or in part, unregistered motor vehicles which
are unfit for reconditioning or for sale for highway transportation, or which
cannot be readily moved at any time under their own power, used parts of
motor vehicles and any material commonly known and generally referred to
as "junk" in the ordinary meaning of the word.
JUNKYARD — An area of land, with or without buildings, primarily used for
the storage outside of a completely enclosed building of used and discarded
materials, including but not limited to wastepaper, rags, metal, building
materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, including
junk as defined in this article, with or without the dismantling, processing,
salvage, sale or other use or disposition of the same. The deposit or storage
of two or more unlicensed, wrecked or broken motor vehicles for a period of
two months or longer, or the major parts of two or more such vehicles, shall
be deemed to make the lot a junkyard.
Areas utilized for kitchenettes, bath, toilet, storage, utility space,
closets, and other service or maintenance space shall be excluded
in determining habitable space.
(3)
SECURITY FENCE — A fence which provides limited or controlled
ingress to and egress from the lot or a portion thereof.
A.
PRIVACY FENCE — A fence which provides personal privacy and does
not necessarily limit or control ingress or egress.
B.
PRIVACY SHIELD — A fence attached to the wall of a building and
extending perpendicular to that wall.
C.
§ 300-6 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-6
1:370
KENNEL — Any building or lot on which at least three or more dogs or
cats not owned by the property owner are trained or boarded (but not bred
or sold) for commercial purposes. This definition shall not apply to any
facility operated by or under contract for the state, a county, a municipal
corporation, or any other political subdivision of the state for the purpose of
impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted
dogs, cats, and other animals; any veterinary hospital or clinic operated by
a veterinarian or veterinarians which operates for such purpose in addition
to its customary purposes; and any facility operated, owned, or maintained
by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, or other
nonprofit organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the
welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals.
LICENSEE — A person in whose name a license to operate an adult
entertainment business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as
an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee,
a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment
in an adult entertainment business.
LOT — A parcel of land having frontage on a public street, occupied by
a principal building or group of buildings (which may have accessory
structures) or having a principal use (along with incidental accessory uses),
including such open spaces as are required by this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A manufactured home which is constructed in
conformity with 24 CFR Part 3280 of the Manufactured Home Construction
and Safety Standards compiled by the United States Department of Housing
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior
angle of less than 135°. The point of intersection of the street lot lines
is the corner.
A.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.
B.
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line separating the lot from a street rightof-
way line.
(1)
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line.
(2)
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A
side lot line separating a lot from a street is called a "side street lot
line."
(3)
(4) LOT LINE, STREET — A lot line separating the lot from a street.
C.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the two side lot lines measured at
the required setback line.
D.
§ 300-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-6
1:371
and Urban Development (HUD 1976). See also "residential designed
manufactured home."
MARINA — A lakeshore business whose purpose includes the sale of boats,
supplies and fuel; rental of boats, marine equipment, dock and mooring
space; winter storage; service of boats and marine equipment; and/or
provisions for boat access to the lake or canal.
MINING — The extraction of overburden and minerals from the earth;
the preparation and processing of minerals, including any activities or
processes or parts thereof for the extraction or removal of minerals from
their original location and the preparation, washing, cleaning, crushing,
sorting, stockpiling or other processing of minerals at the mine location so
as to make them suitable for commercial, industrial, or construction use;
the removal of such materials through sale or exchange, or for commercial,
industrial or municipal use; and the disposition of overburden, tailings and
waste at the mine location; or any one of the above activities. Mining shall
not include the excavation, removal and disposition of minerals from the
site of, and incidental to, a construction project, or excavations incidental
to bona fide agricultural activities; provided, however, such excavations,
removal or disposition are subject to obtaining fill permits if required as set
forth in this chapter. For the purpose of this definition:
MINISTORAGE — An enclosed warehouse which is divided into rooms
which are rented or leased to persons for the storage of items.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single detached dwelling for one family
suitable for year-round occupancy and containing the same water supply,
waste disposal and electrical conveniences as immobile housing. A mobile
home is designed and built to be towed on its own chassis, comprised of
a frame and wheels, and is connected to utilities and designed without a
permanent foundation for year-round living. A unit may contain parts that
may be folded, collapsed or telescoped when being towed and expanded
later to provide additional cubic capacity. A mobile home is not to be
confused with a travel trailer, which is towed by an automobile, can be
operated independently of utility connections and is limited in width to
eight feet; or with a self-contained motor home, custom van or pickup truck
camper inserts.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Land which has been planned and improved for
the placement of two or more mobile homes.
MINERALS — Any naturally formed, usually inorganic, solid material
located on or below the surface of the earth. "Minerals" include, but are
not limited to, peat, topsoil, gravel, and stone.
A.
OVERBURDEN — All of the earth, vegetation and other solid materials
which lie above or alongside a mineral deposit.
B.
SPOIL and TAILINGS — Have the meanings given to them by Article 23
of the New York State Environmental Conservation Law or any similar
or successor statute.
C.
§ 300-6 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-6
1:372
MODULAR HOME — A housing unit constructed off site consisting of more
than one segment designed to be permanently anchored on a foundation to
become a fixed part of the real estate.
MOTOR HOME — Any self-propelled vehicle designed for or used as
temporary living accommodations and containing any of the following:
sleeping accommodations; cooking facilities; and toilet facilities.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in
connected units, containing transient and/or permanent lodging facilities
for transient guests. Accessory facilities, such as restaurants, meeting
rooms, retail business activities and other similar services, are included
in this definition. The term "motel" includes buildings designated as auto
cabins, auto courts, motor lodges, tourist courts, hotels and similar terms.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A dwelling used or designed for use as a multiple
dwelling as defined in the New York State Multiple Residence Law.
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Seneca Falls, New York.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any noise that:
NONCONFORMING USE, NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE or
NONCONFORMING LOT — A use or lot which was lawful or a building
or structure which was lawfully situated on a lot prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of a zoning local law but which fails to conform to
the requirements of the zone in which it is taking place or located by reason
of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears
seminude, in a state of nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas is
provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed,
or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration. "Nude model studio" shall not include a proprietary school
licensed by the State of New York or a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or
university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure that has no sign visible
from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates
a nude or seminude person is available for viewing; and where in order to
participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of
the class; and where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the
premises at any one time.
Endangers, damages, disturbs or injures the safety or health of humans
or animals or which causes damage to property or business;
A.
B. Is not required under usual circumstances; or
Is excessive or unusually loud and either annoys, disturbs, interferes
with, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, sleep, health, peace or
safety of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities or which causes
damage to property or business.
C.
§ 300-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-6
1:373
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less
than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
PET BREEDER —
PICKUP CAMPER — Any portable vehicle designed primarily to be mounted
on a pickup truck or other truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render
it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or
vacation use.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — A tract of land which is developed
as a unit for residential purposes or including a group of residential and
nonresidential buildings with all needed roadways, parking and loading
areas, accessory buildings and open spaces. A planned unit development
may be controlled by a partnership, corporation, cooperative group or
an individual and shall involve a detailed plan review and approval in
accordance with § 300-72 of this chapter.
Any building or lot on which any of the following occurs:
At least three or more dogs or cats at any one time are bred or sold
for commercial purposes; or
(1)
There is found at any one time more than three adult dogs and one
litter of pups under four months of age; or
(2)
There is found at any one time more than three adult cats and one
litter of kittens under four months of age; or
(3)
Any adult female dog or cat is bred more than once in any twelvemonth
period with the intent of selling or giving away said dog's or
cat's pups or kittens; or
(4)
More than two litters of pups or kittens are sold or given away in
any twelve-month period.
(5)
A.
These definitions shall not apply to any facility operated by or under
contract for the state, a county, a municipal corporation, or any other
political subdivision of the state for the purpose of impounding or
harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats,
and other animals; any veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a
veterinarian or veterinarians which operates for such purpose in
addition to its customary purposes; and any facility operated, owned,
or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare
society, or other nonprofit organization for the purpose of providing
for and promoting the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of
animals.
B.
§ 300-6 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-6
1:374
PLANNING BOARD — The Town of Seneca Falls Planning Board.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND USES — Any building or portion thereof
constructed or purchased wholly or partially with Town funds, whether tax
funds, funds obtained through bond issues or grants or loans under any
state law, to be used for Town purposes, including, but not limited to, any
Town Hall, police stations, fire stations, libraries, playgrounds, Town parks,
recreation facilities and/or Highway Department buildings.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewerage facility owned and operated by a public
agency, providing collection and at least secondary treatment of liquid
wastes. For the purpose of determining lot size under this chapter (see
Article IV), the Town Board may declare a privately owned sewerage system
to be the equivalent of a public sewer if said private system serves a large
area or is a large sewage producer and has received the approval of the
Seneca County Health Department.
PUBLIC WATER — A water supply, treatment and distribution system owned
and operated by a public agency. For the purpose of determining lot size
under this chapter (see Article IV), the Town Board may declare a largescale
privately owned water system to be the equivalent of a public system
if the system has received the approval of the Seneca County Health
Department.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE LOT — A parcel of land in a recreational vehicle
park for the occupancy of a single trailer and its towing vehicle.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK — A parcel of land on which two or more
spaces are provided for the occupancy of recreational vehicles. See also the
definition of "campground."
RESIDENTIAL DESIGNED MANUFACTURED HOME — A home that meets
the definition of a "manufactured home" and conforms to the requirements
set forth in § 300-32, Minimum building area for dwellings, of this chapter.
ROADSIDE STAND — An accessory building or structure, temporary or
permanent, used for the display and sale of products grown, produced
and/or processed on the same property, such as fruits, vegetables, eggs
and other products generally associated with agricultural, horticultural,
vinicultural or botanical activities conducted on the premises.
ROW HOUSE — See the definition of "townhouse."
SANITARY STATION — A facility used for disposing of sewage wastes from
recreational vehicle holding tanks.
SELF-CONTAINED RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAILER — One which
can operate independently of sewer, water and electrical connections. It
contains a water-flush toilet, lavatory and kitchen sink, all of which are
connected to water storage and sewage holding tanks located within the
unit.
SEMINUDE or IN A SEMINUDE CONDITION — The showing of the female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest
point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall
§ 300-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-6
1:375
include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not
include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited
by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel,
provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
SERVICE SINK — A sink for the disposal of nonsewage liquid wastes from
recreational vehicles.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
SIGN — Any visual display, printed, painted or represented directly or
indirectly upon a building or otherwise affixed to a frame, structure, a
building or surface, which directs attention to a product, place, person,
activity, organization or business but not including an official court or
public notice, or an official traffic control device, flag insignia or emblem
of a nation, state, county, municipality, school or religious group. However,
"sign" shall not include any display of official court or public office notices
nor any official traffic control device, nor shall it include the flag, emblem
or insignia of a nation, state, county, municipality, school or religious group.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A visual display directing attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment offered, sold or conducted at a location
different from that on which the sign is displayed.
SIGN AREA — The area within the shortest lines that can be drawn around
the outside perimeter of a sign, including all decorations and lights, but
excluding the supports if they are not used for advertising purposes. All
faces of the sign shall be counted in computing the sign area. Any neon
tube, string of lights or similar device shall be deemed to have a minimum
dimension of one foot.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any facility employed beyond
the initial solid waste collection process and managing solid waste,
including but not limited to storage areas of facilities; transfer stations;
rail-haul or barge-haul facilities; landfills; disposal facilities; landfill gas
recovery facilities; refuse-derived fuel processing facilities; pyrolysis
facilities; construction and demolition (C&D) debris processing facilities;
land application facilities; composting facilities; surface impoundments;
used oil storage, reprocessing and rerefining facilities; recyclables handling
and recovery facilities; waste tire storage facilities; and regulated medical
waste treatment facilities. The term includes all structures, appurtenances
and improvements on the land used for the management or disposal of solid
waste.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
B.
§ 300-6 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-6
1:376
SPECIAL USE — A land use which, because of its unique characteristics,
requires individual consideration in each case by the Zoning Board of
Appeals and the Planning Board before it may be permitted in the district
enumerated in this chapter.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks and female breasts below a
point immediately above the top of the areola.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
STATE OF NUDITY — See the definition of "nudity."
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed and requiring permanent attachment
to the ground or something thus permanently attached to the ground,
including carports, portable or stationary.
SWIMMING POOL — An artificial or semiartificial receptacle or other
container designed to hold water, located outdoors, used or intended to
be used for public, semipublic or private swimming by adults or children,
or both adults and children, whether or not any charge or fee is imposed
upon such adults or children, operated and maintained by any person
as herein defined, whether he be an owner, lessee, operator, licensee or
concessionaire.
TOWN BOARD — The Seneca Falls Town Board.
TOWNHOUSE — A row of attached single-family or two-family dwelling
units containing three or more units.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL — Includes any of the
following:
TRAVEL TRAILER — Any portable vehicle which is designed to be
transported on its own wheels; which is designed and intended to be used
for temporary living quarters for travel, recreation or vacation purposes;
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts;
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
B.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A and B above.
C.
A. The sale, lease, or sublease of any use;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in any
use, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of any use, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
§ 300-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-6
1:377
and which may or may not include all of the accommodations and facilities
included in a mobile home.
TRAVEL TRAILER PARK OR CAMP — See the definition of "recreational
vehicle park."
UNENCLOSED USE — Any use of land not conducted in a completely
enclosed building or group of buildings, such as outdoor storage and
junkyards, lumber and building materials and automobile salvaging and
wrecking operations. Not included are nurseries, commercial sales displays
of cars, trucks, bicycles, motorcycles or farm equipment.
UTILITY TRAILER — A small trailer, with or without sides or a roof,
designed for transporting cargo.
VARIANCE — Written authorization granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals
to deviate from or violate specific regulations of this chapter in accordance
with § 300-114.
VENDOR — A person who sells goods or services on a house-to-house basis
or from a vehicle in the street or from a temporary fixed location.
YARD (WITH BUILDING FACING ON ONLY ONE STREET) — An open space
which lies between the principal building or group of buildings and the
nearest surrounding lot lines and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward as herein permitted.
AREA VARIANCE — Authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for
the use of land in a manner which is not allowed by the dimensional or
physical requirements of the applicable zoning regulations.
A.
USE VARIANCE — Authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the
use of land for a purpose which is otherwise not allowed or is prohibited
by the applicable zoning regulations.
B.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending across the entire width of
the lot between the building line or front main wall of a building and
the front property line (street or right-of-way line) and into which space
there shall be no extension of building parts other than steps, open
porches, eaves, cornices and similar fixtures.
A.
YARD, REAR — An open space which extends the full width of the lot
between a principal building and the rear lot line and is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward.
B.
YARD, SIDE — An open unobstructed space on the same lot with a
principal building between the principal building and the side line of
the lot, extending through from the front yard to the rear yard, into
which space there shall be no extension of building parts other than the
eaves with an overhang of not more than two feet, rainwater leaders,
window sills and other such fixtures and open steps for a distance not
exceeding four feet.
C.
§ 300-6 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-6
1:378
YARD (OF A CORNER LOT) — An open space which lies between the
principal building or group of buildings and the front lot lines of each
intersecting street and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground up.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — The Board of Appeals of the Town of
Seneca Falls.
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this chapter. References to any Town "code
enforcement officer" shall refer to the Zoning Officer.
YARD, FRONT — An open space which lies between the principal
building or group of buildings and the front lot lines and is unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward.
A.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from either front lot line to the
nearest adjacent lot lines and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground up.
B.
§ 300-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-6
1:379

ARTICLE III
Districts; Map; Boundaries
§ 300-7. Districts established.
For the purposes of promoting the public health, safety and general welfare
of the Town of Seneca Falls, the Town is hereby divided into the following
types of land use control districts:
A-1 Agricultural District
A-2 Agricultural District
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Two-Family and Multiple Dwelling Residential District
R-3 Three- and Four-Family Residential District
M-R Multiple Dwelling Apartment Building District
C-1 Local Shopping District
C-2 Highway Commercial District
M-1 Industrial District
M-2 Refuse Disposal and Reclamation District
M-P Mobile Home Park District
L-C Land Conservation District
F-P Floodplain District
W Wetland Overlay District
§ 300-8. Zoning Map.23
All lands within the Town of Seneca Falls shall be included within at least
one of the established land use control districts as shown on the Zoning Map
and any overlay thereto. Said map and overlays, if any, and all notations and
references shown thereon are hereby incorporated into and made a part
of this chapter and are on file at the office of the Town Clerk, Municipal
Building, Seneca Falls, for inspection.
§ 300-9. District boundaries.
A. Designation of district boundaries. The district boundary lines are
intended generally to follow the center lines of streets, the center lines
of railroad rights-of-way, existing lot lines, the mean water level of
streams and other waterways or Town boundary lines, all as shown on
the Zoning Map; but where a district boundary line does not follow such
a line, its position is shown on said Zoning Map by a specific dimension
expressing its distance in feet from a street center line or other
boundary line as indicated.
23.Editor's Note: See the zoning maps included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9
1:381
B. Determination of location of boundaries. In case of uncertainty as to the
true location of a district boundary line in a particular instance, the
Zoning Officer shall request the Zoning Board of Appeals to render its
determination with respect thereto. See § 300-115.
§ 300-9 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-9
1:382
ARTICLE IV
District Regulations
§ 300-10. Schedules.
The restrictions and controls intended to regulate development in each
district are set forth in the schedules included as an attachment to this
chapter, which are supplemented by other sections of this chapter.
§ 300-11. General restrictions.
Except as hereinafter otherwise provided:
§ 300-12. A-1 Agricultural District.
A. No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved,
altered, repaired, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land or building
be designed, used or intended to be used for any purpose or in any
manner other than as permitted in the district in which such building or
land is located.
B. No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to
exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the district in
which such building is located.
C. No building shall be erected, no existing buildings shall be altered,
repaired, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any
building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in
conformity with the yard, lot area and building location regulations
hereinafter designated for the district in which such building or open
space is located.
D. No yard or other open space provided around any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building,
and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot.
E. Any land use activity not specifically permitted by the provisions of this
chapter is specifically prohibited.
A. Permitted uses in the A-1 Agricultural District are as follows:
(1) Churches.
(2) Essential services. (See §§ 300-46B and 300-48.)
(3) One-family dwellings.
(4) Primary and secondary schools.
(5) Public buildings.
B. Permitted accessory uses in the A-1 Agricultural District are as follows:
§ 300-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-12
1:383
§ 300-13. A-2 Agricultural District.
(1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to the principal
use.
(2) Private garages and parking areas.
C. Special conditions apply to the following uses in the A-1 Agricultural
District:
(1) Customary home occupations. (See § 300-50.)
(2) Nurseries, greenhouses, farms and customary farm occupations.
(See §§ 300-46B and 300-47.)
(3) Off-street parking and loading. (See § 300-56.)
(4) Outdoor recreation facilities. (See § 300-51.)
(5) Roadside stands. (See § 300-49.)
(6) Signs. (See § 300-54.)
D. Uses which require a special use permit in the A-1 Agricultural District
are as follows:
(1) Airports and related services. (See § 300-46B.)
(2) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(3) Electric power plants and transmission stations. (See § 300-46B.)
(4) Extraction of stone, sand and gravel. (See § 300-65.)
(5) Golf courses and driving ranges. (See § 300-46B.)
(6) Kennels. (See § 300-67.)
(7) Pet breeders. (See § 300-68.)
(8) Parks, athletic facilities and outdoor recreation facilities. (See
§ 300-46B.)
(9) Post-secondary schools. (See § 300-46B.)
(10) Vocational-technical schools. (See § 300-46B.)
(11) Mobile home parks. (See § 300-62.)
(12) Campgrounds. (See § 300-59.)
(13) Recreational vehicle parks. (See § 300-59.)
A. Permitted uses in the A-2 Agricultural District are as follows:
(1) Churches.
§ 300-12 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-13
1:384
(2) Essential services. (See §§ 300-46B and 300-48.)
(3) One-family dwellings.
(4) Primary and secondary schools.
(5) Public buildings.
B. Permitted accessory uses in the A-2 Agricultural District are as follows:
(1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to the principal
use.
(2) Private garages and parking areas.
C. Special conditions apply to the following uses in the A-2 Agricultural
District:
(1) Customary home occupations. (See § 300-50.)
(2) Nurseries, greenhouses, farms and customary farm occupations.
(See §§ 300-46B and 300-47.)
(3) Off-street parking and loading. (See § 300-56.)
(4) Outdoor recreation facilities. (See § 300-51.)
(5) Roadside stands. (See § 300-49.)
(6) Signs. (See § 300-54.)
D. Uses which require a special use permit in the A-2 Agricultural District
are as follows:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(2) Electric power plants and transmission stations. (See § 300-46B.)
(3) Extraction of stone, sand and gravel. (See § 300-65.)
(4) Golf courses and driving ranges. (See § 300-46B.)
(5) Mobile home parks. (See § 300-62.)
(6) Parks, athletic facilities and outdoor recreation facilities. (See
§ 300-46B.)
(7) Post-secondary schools. (See § 300-46B.)
(8) Vocational-technical schools. (See § 300-46B.)
(9) Campgrounds. (See § 300-59.)
(10) Recreational vehicle parks. (See § 300-59.)
(11)Kennels. (See § 300-67.)
§ 300-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-13
1:385
§ 300-14. R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
§ 300-15. R-2 Two-Family and Multiple Dwelling Residential
District.
(12) Pet breeders. (See § 300-68.)
A. Permitted uses in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District are as
follows:
(1) Churches.
(2) One-family dwellings.
(3) Primary and secondary schools.
(4) Public buildings, parks and playgrounds.
(5) Libraries and museums.
B. Permitted accessory uses in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District
are as follows:
(1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to the principal
use.
(2) Private garages and parking areas.
C. Special conditions apply to the following uses in the R-1 Single-Family
Residential District:
(1) Customary home occupations or professional offices. (See
§ 300-50.)
(2) Essential services. (See §§ 300-46B and 300-48.)
(3) Off-street parking and loading. (See § 300-56.)
(4) Signs. (See § 300-54.)
D. Uses which require a special use permit in the R-1 Single-Family
Residential District are as follows:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(2) Cluster development. (See § 300-73.)
(3) Planned unit developments. (See § 300-72.)
(4) Post-secondary schools. (See § 300-46B.)
A. Permitted uses in the R-2 Two-Family and Multiple Dwelling Residential
District are as follows:
(1) Churches.
§ 300-13 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-15
1:386
§ 300-16. R-3 Three- and Four-Family Residential District.
(2) One-family dwellings.
(3) Primary and secondary schools.
(4) Public buildings.
(5) Two-family structures.
B. Permitted accessory uses in the R-2 Two-Family and Multiple Dwelling
Residential District are as follows:
(1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to the principal
use.
(2) Private garages and parking areas.
C. Special conditions apply to the following uses in the R-2 Two-Family and
Multiple Dwelling Residential District:
(1) Customary home occupations. (See § 300-50.)
(2) Essential services. (See §§ 300-46B and 300-48.)
(3) Off-street parking and loading. (See § 300-56.)
(4) Signs. (See § 300-54.)
D. Uses which require a special use permit in the R-2 Two-Family and
Multiple Dwelling Residential District are as follows:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(2) Cluster development. (See § 300-73.)
(3) Multiple dwelling structures, including conversions. (See
§ 300-60.)
(4) Planned unit developments. (See § 300-72.)
(5) Post-secondary schools. (See § 300-46B.)
A. Permitted uses in the R-3 Three- and Four-Family Residential District
are as follows:
(1) Churches.
(2) One-family dwellings.
(3) Primary and secondary schools.
(4) Public buildings.
(5) Three- and four-family dwellings (conversions).
(6) Two-family structures.
§ 300-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-16
1:387
§ 300-17. M-R Multiple Dwelling Apartment Building District.
B. Permitted accessory uses in the R-3 Three- and Four-Family Residential
District are as follows:
(1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to the principal
use.
C. Uses which require a special use permit in the R-3 Three- and Four-
Family Residential District are as follows:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(2) Cluster development. (See § 300-73.)
(3) Multiple dwelling structures, including conversions. (See
§ 300-60.)
(4) Planned unit developments. (See § 300-72.)
(5) Post-secondary schools. (See § 300-46B.)
A. Permitted uses in the M-R Multiple Dwelling Apartment Building
District are as follows:
(1) Churches.
(2) One-family dwellings.
(3) Primary and secondary schools.
(4) Public buildings.
(5) Three- and four-family dwellings (conversions).
(6) Two-family structures.
B. Permitted accessory uses in the M-R Multifaily Apartment Building
District are as follows:
(1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to the principal
use.
C. Uses which require a special use permit in the M-R Multiple Dwelling
Apartment Building District are as follows:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(2) Cluster development. (See § 300-73.)
(3) Multiple dwelling structures, including conversions. (See
§ 300-60.)
(4) Planned unit developments. (See § 300-72.)
(5) Post-secondary schools. (See § 300-46B.)
§ 300-16 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-18
1:388
§ 300-18. C-1 Local Shopping District.
§ 300-19. C-2 Highway Commercial District.
A. Permitted uses in the C-1 Local Shopping District are as follows:
(1) Business and professional offices.
(2) Clothing stores.
(3) Drugstores.
(4) Eating and drinking establishments.
(5) Essential services. (See §§ 300-46B and 300-48.)
(6) Food stores.
(7) Hardware stores.
(8) Hotels and motels.
(9) Local retail businesses.
(10) Non-ground-floor dwellings (one residential dwelling per nonground
floor).
(11) Offices and banks.
(12) Personal services.
(13) Public buildings.
B. Permitted accessory uses in the C-1 Local Shopping District are as
follows:
(1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to the principal
use.
C. Special conditions apply to the following uses in the C-1 Local Shopping
District:
(1) Off-street parking and loading. (See § 300-56.)
(2) Signs. (See § 300-54.)
D. Uses which require a special use permit in the C-1 Local Shopping
District are as follows:
(1) Automobile service stations. (See § 300-64.)
(2) Funeral homes.
A. Permitted uses in the C-2 Highway Commercial District are as follows:
(1) Auto repair and service (not including automobile service stations).
§ 300-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-19
1:389
(2) Auto salesrooms.
(3) Eating and drinking establishments.
(4) Essential services. (See §§ 300-46B and 300-48.)
(5) Farm machinery sales.
(6) Highway-related business uses.
(7) Local retail businesses.
(8) Mobile home sales.
(9) Motels.
(10) Offices and banks.
(11) Personal services.
(12) Public buildings.
(13) Used car lots.
B. Permitted accessory uses in the C-2 Highway Commercial District are
as follows:
(1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to the principal
use.
C. Special conditions apply to the following uses in the C-2 Highway
Commercial District:
(1) Amusement centers, bowling alleys and similar enclosed places of
amusement. (See § 300-52.)
(2) Drive-in eating and drinking establishments. (See § 300-53.)
(3) Off-street parking and loading. (See § 300-56.)
(4) Outdoor recreation facilities. (See § 300-51.)
(5) Signs. (See § 300-54.)
D. Uses which require a special use permit in the C-2 Highway
Commercial District are as follows:
(1) Adult uses. (See § 300-66.)
(2) Automobile service stations. (See § 300-64.)
(3) Commercial amusements, such as drive-in theaters, amusement
centers, golf driving ranges and miniature golf. (See § 300-46B.)
(4) Large-scale developments.
§ 300-19 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-19
1:390
§ 300-20. M-1 Industrial District.
§ 300-21. M-2 Refuse Disposal and Reclamation District.
(5) Multiple dwelling structures, including conversions. (See
§ 300-60.)
(6) Small truck terminals, including a dock for one to three trucks and
with a building area not over 1,500 square feet; servicing is
permitted.
A. Permitted uses in the M-1 Industrial District are as follows:
(1) Enclosed warehousing.
(2) Essential services. (See §§ 300-46B and 300-48.)
(3) Lumber, building supplies and similar storage yards.
(4) Ministorage.
(5) Nurseries, greenhouses, farms and customary farm occupations.
(See §§ 300-46B and 300-47.)
(6) Public buildings.
(7) Railroad facilities.
(8) Wholesale businesses.
B. Permitted accessory uses in the M-1 Industrial District are as follows:
(1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to the principal
use.
C. Special conditions apply to the following uses in the M-1 Industrial
District:
(1) Manufacture, assembly or research. (See § 300-58.)
(2) Off-street parking and loading. (See § 300-56.)
(3) Signs. (See § 300-54.)
D. Uses which require a special use permit in the M-1 Industrial District
are as follows:
(1) Adult uses. (See § 300-66.)
(2) Coal yards and fuel supply depots. (See § 300-46B.)
(3) Electric power plants and transmission stations. (See § 300-46B.)
(4) Extraction of stone, sand and gravel. (See § 300-65.)
(5) Landfill gas recovery facilities.
§ 300-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-21
1:391
A. Permitted uses in the M-2 Refuse Disposal and Reclamation District are
as follows:
(1) Enclosed warehousing.
(2) Essential services. (See §§ 300-46B and 300-48.)
(3) Lumber, building supplies and similar storage yards.
(4) Ministorage.
(5) Nurseries, greenhouses, farms and customary farm occupations.
(See §§ 300-46B and 300-47.)
(6) Public buildings.
(7) Railroad facilities.
(8) Wholesale businesses.
B. Permitted accessory uses in the M-2 Refuse Disposal and Reclamation
District are as follows:
(1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to the principal
use.
C. Special conditions apply to the following uses in the M-2 Refuse
Disposal and Reclamation District:
(1) Manufacture, assembly or research. (See § 300-58.)
(2) Off-street parking and loading. (See § 300-56.)
(3) Signs. (See § 300-54.)
D. The following uses are permitted in the M-2 Refuse Disposal and
Reclamation District upon issuance of a special use permit:
(1) Coal yards and fuel supply depots. (See § 300-46B.)
(2) Electric power plants and transmission stations. (See § 300-46B.)
(3) Extraction of stone, sand and gravel. (See § 300-65.)
(4) Junkyards. (See § 300-46B.)
(5) Solid waste management facilities. (See § 300-46B.)
E. The existing M-2 Refuse Disposal and Reclamation District applicable
to solid waste management facilities as designated by the Town Code
will not be expanded beyond the district which is in effect as of June 6,
2000, nor will a new M-2 District be established for solid waste
management facilities. Notwithstanding this provision and the Town
Board's findings, in the event that a future Town Board determines that
it will consider expansion of the existing M-2 District or creation of a
new district for solid waste management facilities outside the current
§ 300-21 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-21
1:392
§ 300-22. M-P Mobile Home Park District.
§ 300-23. L-C Land Conservation District.
§ 300-24. F-P Floodplain District.
district, the Town Board will require preparation of an environmental
impact statement pursuant to the State Environmental Quality Review
Act, Article 8 of the New York State Environmental Conservation Law.
A. Permitted uses in the M-P Mobile Home Park District are as follows:
(1) Mobile home parks.
B. Permitted accessory uses in the M-P Mobile Home Park District are as
follows:
(1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to a permitted
use.
A. There are no permitted uses, accessory uses, or uses subject to special
conditions in the L-C District.
B. Uses which require a special use permit in the L-C Land Conservation
District are as follows:
(1) Essential services. (See §§ 300-46B and 300-48.)
(2) Nurseries, greenhouses, farms and customary farm occupations.
(See §§ 300-46B and 300-47.)
(3) Parks, athletic facilities and outdoor recreation facilities. (See
§ 300-46B.)
A. Permitted uses in the F-P Floodplain District are as follows:
(1) Nurseries, greenhouses, farms and customary farm occupations.
(See §§ 300-46B and 300-47.)
B. No accessory uses are permitted in the F-P Floodplain District.
C. Special conditions apply to the following uses in the F-P Floodplain
District:
(1) Roadside stands. (See § 300-49.)
D. Uses which require a special use permit in the F-P Floodplain District
are as follows:
(1) Essential services. (See §§ 300-46B and 300-48.)
(2) Extraction of stone, sand and gravel. (See § 300-65.)
(3) Parks, athletic facilities and outdoor recreation facilities. (See
§ 300-46B.)
§ 300-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-24
1:393

ARTICLE V
Supplementary Regulations
§ 300-25. Wetlands.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, and particularly Article IV,
to the contrary, use of all wetlands in the Town of Seneca Falls, as delineated
on any wetlands map that may be adopted and duly filed by the Town Board
or Seneca County or the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation pursuant to Article 24 of the State Environmental
Conservation Law, shall be subject to all relevant requirements of state and/
or federal wetlands regulations and the provisions of this § 300-25.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these wetland regulations is to preserve,
protect and conserve designated wetland areas in the Town of Seneca
Falls in order to protect downstream water resources from siltation and
pollution; ensure the continuation of the natural flow pattern of
watercourses; reduce the potential for flooding; retain essential
breeding, nesting and feeding grounds as well as predator escape cover
for wildlife; and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by
ensuring that wetland resources will be maintained in their naturally
functioning state.
B. Wetland areas. Wetland areas are those areas so designated on any
wetlands map for the Town of Seneca Falls and determined by data
developed by the Town, by Seneca County or by the State Department
of Environmental Conservation. Where there is uncertainty as to
whether a specific area is located within a designated wetland, a final
determination shall be made by the Town Board.
C. Permitted uses. Within a designated wetland, the following uses are
permitted, subject to the provisions of Subsection E of this section:
(1) Depositing or removal of natural products of the wetland by
recreational or sport fishing, aquaculture, hunting and trapping,
where these activities are otherwise legally permitted and
regulated.
(2) Grazing and watering of livestock.
(3) Growing agricultural products.
(4) Harvesting natural products of the wetland.
(5) Selectively cutting timber and draining the wetland for the purpose
of growing agricultural products, except that any structures which
are not directly related to enhancement of agricultural productivity
or which involve filling the wetland shall be considered a special
use. (See Subsection D.)
(6) Activities related to public health and orders and regulations of the
Department of Health.
§ 300-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-25
1:395
§ 300-26. Performance standards.
All land uses and activities in all zoning districts in the Town of Seneca Falls
shall comply with the following:
(7) Development in accordance with planned unit development
provisions, where wetlands are to be maintained as open space and
where the Town Board determines that such development will not
despoil said wetlands.
D. Special uses. Within a designated wetland, the following special uses
are permitted, subject to the provisions of § 300-46 of this chapter:
(1) Any form of draining, dredging or excavation of the wetland except
as may be provided for in Subsection C(5).
(2) Construction or reconstruction of any structures or roads that
might otherwise be permitted in the zoning district in which the
wetland is located.
(3) The driving of piles or placement of any obstructions for any
purposes.
E. Procedure. Each landowner or farmer who intends to conduct a
permitted use in a wetland as set forth in Subsection C shall notify the
Zoning Officer of his or her intention, stating the location and
approximate acreage to be affected, the intended use for such land and
the methods to be employed. The Zoning Officer shall be satisfied that
the intended use is permitted. Any question of compliance or
interpretation shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
determination in accordance with § 300-115 of this chapter.
A. Noise.
(1) No use shall emit a measurable noise which shall be unreasonably
loud or disturbing to surrounding property owners and/or users.
The standards for determining whether a noise is unreasonably
loud or disturbing shall be as follows:
(a) No noise measured at a property line of an industrially zoned
property shall exceed 70 decibels during the period between
6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. or 60 decibels during the period
between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The decibel limits shall be
decreased by five decibels for any industrially zoned property
adjacent to a residentially zoned property.
(b) Sound-pressure levels in decibels shall be measured on the Aweighted
response scale with the meter set to the slow
response mode. Sound-level meters used shall have the
characteristics defined in the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) Publication 1.4 1971 (R. 1983), and
§ 300-25 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-26
1:396
measurements shall be conducted in accordance with ANSI-36,
1979, as such standards may be amended from time to time.
(c) The sound level may not exceed the established sound levels by
more than six decibels for a period of more than six minutes
during any sixty-minute continuous period.
(d) As measured at the property line, noise shall not be
objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency, high
frequency or other disturbing characteristics. For noises that
the Zoning Officer determines to be impulsive in character (for
example, hammering) or objectionable for any of the other
above-noted characteristics, the standards cited in Subsection
A(1) above shall be reduced by five decibels. Sounds of short
duration, such as impact noises, shall be measured with either
an impact analyzer or a sound-level meter having a
standardized I (impulse) characteristic.
(2) No person shall make, continue to cause or permit to be made or
continued any noise disturbance as defined in § 300-6 of this
chapter.
(a) Standards to be considered in determining whether a noise
disturbance exists shall include but not be limited to the
following:
[1] The volume of the noise.
[2] The intensity of the noise.
[3] Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.
[4] Whether the origin of the noise is usual or unusual.
[5] The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any.
[6] The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.
[7] The time of day or night the noise occurs.
[8] The time of duration of the noise.
[9] Whether the noise source is temporary.
[10] Whether the noise is continuous or impulsive in character,
such as hammer blows, gunshots, etc.
(b) The following are declared to be noise disturbances:
[1] Noise reproduction and noise production.
[a] Operating, playing, producing or permitting the
operating, production or playing of any radio,
television, compact disc player, tape player,
phonograph, drum, musical instrument, engine, motor
§ 300-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-26
1:397
or any other device which reproduces or amplifies
noise:
[i] Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day in such a manner as to be audible
across a real property lot line.
[ii] Any time from a motor vehicle on a public street
in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet or more from the vehicle or
from a motor vehicle on private property in such a
manner as to be plainly audible beyond the real
property lot line. For the purpose of this
subsection, "plainly audible" means any noise
which can be heard by a person having
unimpaired auditory senses based on a direct line
of sight of 50 feet or more, whether or not words
or phrases are discernible, and including bass
reverberation.
[2] Loudspeakers and public address systems.
[a] Using or operating for any noncommercial purpose
any loudspeaker, public address system or similar
device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
the following day in such a manner as to be audible
across a residential real property lot line.
[b] Using or operating for any commercial purpose any
loudspeaker, public address system or similar device
in such a manner as to be audible across any
residential real property lot line.
[3] Animals and fowl. Noise resulting from the keeping or
harboring, or permitting the keeping or harboring of any
animal or fowl in such a manner as to be audible across
any real property lot line.
[4] Street sales. Offering for sale or selling anything by
shouting or outcry within any residential or commercial
area of the Town except between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m. of the same day.
[5] Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening,
closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers,
building materials or similar objects between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a
manner as to be audible across a residential real property
line.
[6] Motor vehicle and engine repairs and testing. Repairing,
rebuilding, modifying or testing any motor vehicle or
§ 300-26 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-26
1:398
engine in such a manner as to be audible across a
residential real property lot line.
[7] Construction. Operating or permitting the operation of any
tools, equipment or other similar devices used in
construction, drilling or demolition work between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such
a manner that the noise created thereby is audible across a
residential real property lot line.
[8] Places of entertainment. Operating, playing or permitting
the operation or playing of any noise-reproduction system,
loudspeaker, public address system or noise-producing
device or system in any place of entertainment in such a
manner as to be audible across a residential real property
line.
[9] Refuse compacting motor vehicle or equipment. Operating
or permitting the operation of any motor vehicle or
equipment capable of collecting and/or compacting refuse
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the
following day.
[10] The operation, including the stationary idling, of any
motor vehicle, including any automobile, motorcycle, trail
bike, mini-bike, snowmobile, bus, vehicle, truck, all-terrain
vehicle, motor-driven equipment or motor-driven vehicle,
in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance for more
than 15 minutes in any four-hour period.
(3) Exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from
the noise level regulations:
(a) Noises emanating from temporary construction and
maintenance activities between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
(b) The noises of safety signals, warning devices, emergency
pressure-relief valves, other emergency warning signals or
noise otherwise created by emergency work.
(c) Noise created by municipalities or public utilities in carrying
out their operations or emergency repairs.
(d) Transient noises of moving sources such as automobiles,
trucks, airplanes and railroads. Uses requiring regular
deliveries by truck may be required by the board with
appropriate jurisdiction to reduce noise levels to an approved
level based on proximity to residential uses.
(e) The production of music, the ringing of bells or carillons,
sounding of gongs, firing any armament or blowing any
whistle, horn or signaling device in connection with any
§ 300-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-26
1:399
military or civic ceremony, authorized parade, funeral
procession or religious ceremony.
(f) Any musical performance or special event authorized by the
Town Board.
(g) The noise created by any police, fire or emergency apparatus
or any police, fire or emergency headquarters or station.
(h) Noise connected with sporting and educational events of
public or private schools, noncommercial public speaking and
public assembly activities conducted on any public space or
public right-of-way, or noise connected with an event permitted
by the Town Board, which permit shall specify the dates and
times during which such event is permitted.
B. Odor. No use within any district shall emit an odor that is unreasonably
offensive as measured at the property line of the use.
C. Dirt, dust, heat, toxic emissions and radiation interference. No use
within any district shall create or emit dust, heat, dirt or other
particulate matter, radiation, toxic emissions or electronic or radio
interference which shall adversely affect uses on adjacent or
neighboring properties.
D. Storage. No goods, materials, waste, trash, garbage, or other matter
shall be stored outside of a building without being fully enclosed to
provide screening, security and containment. Any exception to this type
of storage, such as storage of bulk or raw materials, shall be granted by
the appropriate board during site plan review. This storage approval
may be revoked if a change of ownership or use occurs or if the storage
results in an adverse impact on adjacent properties.
E. Vibration.
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
FREQUENCY — The number of oscillations per second of a
vibration.
IMPACT VIBRATIONS — Earthborne oscillations occurring in
discrete pulses at or less than 100 per minute.
STEADY-STATE VIBRATIONS — Continuous earthborne
oscillations; discrete pulses that occur more than 100 times per
minute.
(2) A three-component measuring system such as a seismometer or
seismograph for recording the intensity of a vibration in three
mutually perpendicular directions shall be utilized for recording
the intensity of vibration.
§ 300-26 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-26
1:400
(3) Permissible vibration displacement. No person shall operate or
cause to be operated any source of vibrations which exceeds the
limits set forth below when measured at or beyond the lot line or
property line of its source if on private property or at 50 feet from
the source if on a public space or public right-of-way.
Maximum Permitted Impact and Steady-State Vibration
Displacement
Vibration Displacement
(inches)
Frequency
(cycles per second) Impact Steady-State
Under 10 0.0010 0.0005
10-19 0.0008 0.0004
20-29 0.0006 0.0003
30-39 0.0004 0.0002
Over 39 0.0002 0.0001
F. Glare. No illumination shall cause direct light rays to cross any property
line in any district. All permanent outdoor lights, such as those used for
area lighting or building floodlighting, shall be steady, stationary,
shielded sources directed to avoid causing a hazard to motorists or
pedestrians, or causing direct light rays on other properties. The
marginal increase in light as measured at any property line other than a
street line shall not exceed one footcandle; only a marginal increase in
light of 0.5 footcandle shall be permitted at any property line which is
also a residential district line.
G. Toxic or noxious matter. No discharge beyond lot lines of any toxic or
noxious matter in such quantity as to be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, comfort or welfare, or cause injury or damage to
property or business, shall be permitted.
H. Emission of particulate matter. No solid or liquid particles shall be
emitted in such quantity as to be readily detectable at any point along
lot lines or so as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond lot
lines.
I. Smoke. No smoke shall be emitted in such quantity as to become a
nuisance.
J. Procedure.
(1) New application.
(a) In the case of any application for the establishment of a new
use subject to these performance standards, the appropriate
review board may require the applicant, at his or her own
§ 300-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-26
1:401
expense, to provide such evidence as it deems necessary to
determine whether the proposed use will conform to the above
standards.
(b) If the appropriate review board deems it necessary, expert
advice may be obtained, with the cost of such advice paid for in
advance by the applicant as a condition of further
consideration of its application. The report of any expert
consultants shall be promptly furnished to the applicant.
(c) During the course of either site plan or special use permit
review, the appropriate board shall determine whether the
applicant's proposal will conform to the above-noted
performance standards, and this determination shall be a
necessary, though not exclusive, condition of granting the
appropriate board approval.
(2) Industries which are subject to these performance standards.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall investigate any purported violation of
these performance standards by existing industries which are
not exempt from these standards because of a legal,
nonconforming status. If there are reasonable grounds for
assuming that there is a violation of these performance
standards, the Zoning Officer shall notify those responsible for
the alleged violation. Such notice shall describe the particulars
of the alleged violation and shall require a written response or
corrective action to the alleged violation within a reasonable
time limit set by the Zoning Officer, but not to exceed 180 days.
The notice shall state, and it is hereby declared, that failure to
reply or to correct the alleged violation to the satisfaction of
the Zoning Officer within the time limit set shall constitute an
admission of violation. The notice shall state that, upon request
of those to whom it is directed, technical determinations can be
made by experts mutually agreeable to the Zoning Officer and
to those responsible for the alleged violation; in the event of an
inability to select a mutually agreeable expert, the Zoning
Officer shall select the expert. If the expert determines that the
violation alleged is true, then costs of these determinations
shall be charged against those responsible, in addition to any
penalties as may be appropriate upon terms of this chapter;
however, if it is determined that no violation exists, the costs of
the determination shall be paid by the Town.
(b) If there is no reply to the notice within the time limit set and/or
the alleged violation is not corrected to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Officer within the time limit set, then the Zoning Officer
shall take such actions as may be appropriate under this
chapter to enforce the provisions hereof and/or to cause the
violation to be remedied.
§ 300-26 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-27
1:402
§ 300-27. Individual mobile homes and modular homes.
A. A mobile home not located in a mobile home park must meet the
following criteria:
(1) Such mobile home must meet the definition of "residential designed
manufactured home." (See § 300-6.)
(2) The mobile home owner must comply with all of the area
regulations (lot size, setback, building area, etc.) for a conventional
single-family residence in the district in which said mobile home is
sought to be located.
(3) The mobile home must be provided with potable water and a safe
and adequate sewage disposal system approved by the Seneca
County Health Department.
(4) Any construction of storage space, additional rooms or enclosed
patios or carports shall have a finished exterior appearance. No
exposed building paper, wallboard or other structural material will
be permitted.
(5) The mobile home, if manufactured after January 15, 1974, shall
bear the seal required by the State of New York or an equivalent
acceptable to the State of New York.
B. A modular home must meet the following criteria:
(1) Such modular home must meet the definition of "residential
designed manufactured home." (See § 300-6.)
(2) The modular home owner must comply with all of the area
regulations (lot size, setback, building area, etc.) for a conventional
single-family residence in the district in which said modular home
is sought to be located.
(3) The modular home must be provided with potable water and a safe
and adequate sewage disposal system approved by the Seneca
County Health Department.
(4) Any construction of storage space, additional rooms or enclosed
patios or carports shall have a finished exterior appearance. No
exposed building paper, wallboard or other structural material will
be permitted.
(5) The modular home, if manufactured after January 15, 1974, shall
bear any seal required by the State of New York or an equivalent
acceptable to the State of New York.
C. Such mobile home or modular home will not be occupied until a
certificate of zoning compliance has been issued in accordance with
§ 300-106 of this chapter.
§ 300-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-28
1:403
§ 300-28. Lots.
§ 300-29. Height.
A. Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be measured along the
minimum building setback line as required for the district in which it is
located.
B. Corner lots. At all street intersections, no obstructions to vision (other
than an existing building or pole) exceeding 30 inches in height above
the established grade of the street at the property line shall be erected
or maintained on any lot within the triangle formed by the street lot
lines and a line drawn between the points along such street lot lines 30
feet distant from their point of intersection.
C. Required area or space cannot be reduced. The area or dimension of
any lot, yard, parking area or other space shall not be reduced to less
than the minimum required by this chapter except as provided in this
chapter. If already less than the minimum required by this chapter, said
area or dimension may be continued but shall not be further reduced.
D. Lot in two districts. When a lot is divided by a district boundary, the
regulations and requirements of either district may be extended, at the
lot owner's discretion, for a distance of 100 feet into the other district.
E. Area measurements. Measurements for minimum lot size and front
yards shall be made from the property line.
A. General application. No building or structure shall have a greater
number of stories nor have an aggregate height of a greater number of
feet than is permitted in the district in which such building or structure
is located, except as noted elsewhere in this chapter.
B. The following structures are exempt from the height regulation and are
intended as illustrations, but not limitations, of the types of structures
for which exemptions to height regulations may be granted:
(1) Chimneys, cooling towers, agricultural buildings, flagpoles,
elevators, bulkheads, fire towers, gas tanks, grain elevators,
steeples, water towers, ornamental towers or spires, electric poles
and electric towers, communications, radio or television towers or
necessary mechanical appurtenances may exceed the height
regulations of this chapter but shall comply with other applicable
existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the Town of Seneca
Falls.
(2) No sign, nameplate, display or advertising device of any kind
whatsoever shall be inscribed upon or attached to any chimney,
tower, tank or other structure which extends above the height
limitations without the consent of the Town Board.
§ 300-28 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-30
1:404
§ 300-30. Yards.
Every part of a required yard must be open to the sky and unobstructed
except for accessory buildings in a rear or side yard and the ordinary
projection of open porches, balconies, steps, sills, belt courses and cornices.
A. Side yards.
(1) Side yard width may be varied. Where the side wall of a building is
not parallel with the side lot line or is broken or otherwise
irregular, the side yard may be varied. In such cases, the average
width of the side yard shall not be less than the otherwise required
minimum width; provided, however, that such side yard shall not be
narrower at any one point than 1/2 the otherwise required
minimum width.
(2) Side yard of corner lot. The side yard of any corner lot of record at
the time of the adoption of this chapter shall have a width equal to
not less than 1/2 the required minimum front yard setback of any
adjoining lot fronting on the side street. Any corner lot delineated
by subdivision after the adoption of this chapter shall have a side
yard equal in width to the minimum front yard setback of any
adjoining lot fronting on the side street.
B. Transition yard requirements.
(1) Where a residential district abuts a nonresidential district on a
street line, a front yard at least equal in depth to that required in
the residential district shall be provided in the nonresidential
district for a distance of 300 feet from the district boundary line.
(2) Where the side or rear yard in a residential district abuts a side or
rear yard in a nonresidential district, a side or rear yard at least
equal in depth to that required in the residential district shall be
provided along such abutting line or lines. In no case, however,
shall the abutting side yard be less than 20 feet and the abutting
rear yard be less than 20 feet.
C. Line of setback. The line of setback of all buildings and structures
hereafter erected, constructed or built within an existing residential
use district shall be not less than the average setback of all buildings for
a distance of 300 feet on each side of such building. In case of a building
erected or built on a corner lot in an existing residential district, the
line of setback of the street on which the narrow frontage of the lot
faces, and in case such corner lot has equal frontage on both streets,
the line of setback of the street having the greatest line of setback shall
govern, but so far as possible the building shall conform to the line of
setback of the other street also.
§ 300-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-31
1:405
§ 300-31. Maximum lot coverage.
The lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings or structures in each
district shall not be greater than is permitted in the district in which such
principal and accessory buildings or structures are located, as set forth
in Zoning Schedule I or Zoning Schedule II, depending on lot location,
included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-32. Minimum building area for dwellings.
Except for mobile homes located in mobile home parks, no dwelling shall be
constructed or placed in the Town of Seneca Falls unless it meets or exceeds
the following criteria:
§ 300-33. Accessory structures.
A. A minimum width of 20 feet, excluding garages and/or other accessory
buildings and/or accessory structures.
B. A minimum square footage of 1,100 feet, excluding garages and/or
other accessory buildings and/or accessory structures.
C. The roof has a type of shingle, metal, rubber or slate commonly used in
residential construction.
D. The exterior siding is of a type of material commonly used in residential
construction.
E. Any/All towing devices, wheels, axles and/or hitches are removed.
F. The dwelling is installed on a permanent foundation as described in the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, to be a
fixed part of the real estate.
G. The material used to skirt the home must be cement block or brick.
A. Unattached accessory structures in R-1, R-2, R-3, A-1, A-2, M-R and M-P
Districts. Accessory structures which are not attached to a principal
structure may be erected in accordance with the following
requirements:
(1) An accessory building may not exceed 15 feet in height nor occupy
more than 30% of a required rear yard.
(2) No accessory structure shall be located within five feet of side or
rear lot lines or within three feet of side or rear lot lines within the
former Village boundary. Accessory structures shall have a
minimum side yard of 10 feet if adjacent to a street.
(3) No accessory structure shall be located closer to the street than the
front yard setback required for a principal structure in the district
in which such accessory structure may be located.
§ 300-31 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-33
1:406
§ 300-34. Landscaping; tree maintenance and removal.
(4) For corner lots, the setback from the side street shall be the same
for accessory buildings as for principal buildings.
(5) No more than two accessory structures are permitted on any lot.
B. Attached accessory structures in R-1, R-2, R-3, A-1, A-2, M-R and M-P
Districts. When an accessory structure is attached to the principal
building, it shall comply in all respects with the yard requirements of
this chapter applicable to the principal building.
C. Accessory structures in other districts. Except for roadside stands and
school bus stations, accessory structures shall comply with front and
side yard requirements for the principal structure to which they are
accessory and shall be not closer than five feet to any rear property line.
D. No accessory structure shall be occupied or used for human habitation,
including but not limited to sleeping, eating or resting.
A. Unenclosed uses.
(1) If an unenclosed use of land is required to be landscaped in
accordance with this subsection, a fence, screen or other
landscaping must be provided to obscure from view any materials
or structures otherwise visible to abutting R Districts or public
rights-of-way.
(2) Uses not conducted within a completely enclosed building (an auto
salvage and wrecking operation, outdoor storage, a junkyard or a
lumber and building materials yard) shall be enclosed by a natural
hedge or fence at least six feet in height, which is to be kept in good
repair. The use should not be located nearer than 100 feet to any
residential or commercial district, shall permit no storage outside
the fence and shall be no nearer than 50 feet to any public right-ofway.
This subsection shall not apply to commercial displays for
sales purposes, such as nurseries, new or used cars and trucks,
bicycles, motorcycles or farm equipment. Such uses must not be
closer than 10 feet to the nearest lot line.
B. Approval by the Planning Board. Plans and site design for the
installation of required fences or landscaping shall be reviewed by the
Planning Board prior to issuance of a zoning permit for such uses as are
required by this chapter.
C. Tree maintenance and removal.
(1) Removal of dangerous trees or limbs.
(a) It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of land to trim
or remove any tree, including its stump, or any limb or branch
of a tree situated on said land or in front thereof which is likely
to fall on or across any public way or place.
§ 300-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-34
1:407
§ 300-35. Stripping of topsoil; grading and filling.
(b) For failure, upon notice by the Zoning Officer of not less than
48 hours, to trim or remove any tree, including its stump, or
any branch or limb of a tree as specified as to place and
manner, the Town Board may cause the same to be done and
assess the expense thereof upon the adjoining land.
(2) Tree removal.
(a) The tree trunk, limbs, stump and any roots remaining above
grade shall be completely removed.
(b) All persons who remove trees or cause trees to be removed
shall restore the area by backfilling all holes and by creating an
acceptable grade and covering, replanting and/or reseeding.
(c) All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed at least
below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump
shall not project above the surface of the ground.
D. Maintenance. Any fencing or landscaping installed in accordance with
this section shall be maintained in good order to achieve the objectives
of this section. Failure to maintain fencing or to replace dead or
diseased landscaping shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
Repairs shall be made within 60 days after official notice.
A. No person or business shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove topsoil
for sale or for use other than on the premises from which taken until the
Planning Board has approved a plan for landscaping and proper
drainage and issued a permit to implement the same.
B. Grading and filling.
(1) No person shall grade or fill land which is greater than 50% of the
area of an R-1 residential lot or import 40 or more yards of fill onto
any parcel without first obtaining a permit from the Town.
(2) Such permit will require:
(a) A written application to the Zoning Officer.
(b) Certification of the source of the fill and certification that there
are no toxic or hazardous materials in the fill.
(c) A drainage plan which adequately addresses the drainage in a
manner so as to avoid surface water runoff on adjacent lots and
which will divert water away from buildings, prevent standing
water and soil saturation detrimental to structures and lot use,
preserve desirable natural features such as trees, provide
grades for access and which conforms to the general storm
drainage pattern of the area. Such plan will be in conformance
with the Town-wide drainage district law and regulations.
§ 300-34 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-36
1:408
§ 300-36. Covering of excavations.
§ 300-37. Drainage strips.
In all districts, no permanent structures shall be permitted within 50 feet of
the edge of the bank of any streams or existing natural drainage channel.
§ 300-38. Property maintenance.
A. Within a year after the excavation of a building has begun, the owner
shall have it covered or filled to normal grade. Any excavation or cellar
hole resulting from the demolition or removal of a building shall be
fenced immediately and filled (as above) within one year.
B. If, after 30 days' notice by the Zoning Officer, the owner fails to cover or
fill such excavation, the Town Board may order this work to be done and
shall charge the property owner any costs incurred.
A. Maintenance required; purpose. Every dwelling and every structure
shall be kept in good condition and repair by the owner or agent and fit
for human habitation if a dwelling and, if some other structure, in such
a condition that it will not likely injure or damage persons or property of
others. All exterior surfaces shall be protected from the elements and
decay by painting or other approved protective finish. The roof and
sides, doors and windows of dwellings and structures shall be
maintained so as not to leak, and all rainwater shall be collected so as
not to cause dampness, decay and deterioration in the walls and
ceilings. All grounds and areas around dwellings and structures shall be
maintained, and all rubbish and debris shall be removed. Whenever a
building is removed or destroyed by fire beyond repair, the rubble and
debris shall be removed.
B. Prohibited acts. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any owner or
other occupant of real property in the Town of Seneca Falls, or for any
person having control of real property in the Town of Seneca Falls
charged with the maintenance of the property, to deposit, abandon,
maintain, keep or allow the accumulation on his or her real property,
outside of any building, of any personal property, junk, trash, rubbish,
garbage, refuse, debris, discarded materials, bulk items, and/or any
other material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends
to create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare, or creates
degradation through unsightliness or noisomeness, or which creates a
public or private nuisance.
(1) Examples of such materials are as follows (Such list of examples is
not exclusive and is not in limitation of the prohibition contained in
this section.):
(a) Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food,
except for composted materials placed inside an enclosure and
§ 300-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-38
1:409
located at least three feet from a property line, or composted
materials located at least 10 feet from a property line if not
placed inside an enclosure.
(b) Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), such as garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings,
dead animals, and solid market and industrial wastes.
(c) Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible or
noncombustible wastes, such as felled or cut trees or limbs
stored within three feet of the property line, lumber or
construction materials not actively and presently being used to
construct or repair a building or make any other improvement
on the premises, broken glass, discarded bedding, broken
crockery, discarded furniture or toys, accumulation of items
(including but not limited to magazines and other paper goods,
tools and parts, paints, varnishes and lacquers, containers,
boxes and jars), and similar materials or parts thereof, whether
mixed together or otherwise, and in any amount.
(d) Any boat, snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle, or other such device
which is in a state of disrepair or is otherwise dilapidated,
broken, or abandoned.
(e) Abandoned, discarded, broken, or inoperable refrigerators,
washing machines or other machinery or parts thereof. Any
such items stored on any yard or lot for a period of more than
60 days shall be presumed to be abandoned.
(f) Any automobile, truck, or other vehicle originally intended for
use on the public highways which is no longer intended or in
condition for legal use on the public highways, including such
vehicles which are in a state of disrepair or otherwise
dilapidated, broken, or abandoned.
[1] For the purpose of this subsection, a vehicle shall be
presumed to be no longer intended or in condition for legal
use on the public highways if any of the following apply:
[a] It does not bear and display upon such vehicle, in a
location prescribed by the Commissioner of Motor
Vehicles, a current registration from the State of New
York or other recognized registering jurisdiction; or
[b] It does not bear and display upon such vehicle, in a
location prescribed by the Commissioner of Motor
Vehicles, an inspection certificate issued within the
last 12 months in accordance with the laws of the
State of New York or the laws of any other recognized
inspecting jurisdiction if required for use on public
highways; or
§ 300-38 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-38
1:410
[c] Such vehicle is not able to be moved by its own power.
[2] Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following vehicles are
allowed to be kept outside a building:
[a] Farm vehicles that meet criteria [1][a] and/or [c]
above, provided they have been registered within the
last 12 months; and
[b] A private vehicle meeting criteria [1][a], [b] and/or [c]
above that is offered for sale for no longer than a
ninety-day period, provided that no more than one
private vehicle meeting criteria [1][a], [b] and/or [c]
above may be offered for sale on any parcel within any
twelve-month period.
(2) Except to the extent that a health, safety or fire hazard is found to
exist, or if the storage of such items would constitute a nuisance, it
shall not be a violation of this chapter to maintain on real property
items of the kind and nature set forth in Subsection A above if such
items are stored inside a building or if they are stored in such a
manner that they are not visible to neighboring properties or from
a highway.
C. Notice of violation.
(1) Whenever a complaint is received or the Zoning Officer otherwise
become aware of a potential violation of this section, the Zoning
Officer shall investigate the same and take steps deemed necessary
to provide for compliance with Subsection A, including at least one
written warning in which to abate the violation.
(2) As needed, the Zoning Officer may call upon the State Building
Code Enforcement Officer or Health Department to assist in
performing the duties herein described.
(3) The property directly in front of any lot to the roadway is to be
maintained in the same manner as described in Subsection A.
D. Correction of condition by Town.
(1) In the event that the property owner does not correct the condition,
as ordered, within the time set forth or, if the time is extended,
within the extended time, then the Town Board may cause the order
to be executed, and the expense of such order being executed shall
be assessed against the real property and added to the tax roll next
due. Five days before executing the order, the Town Board shall
cause to be mailed to the property owner and mortgagees, if any
can be found after reasonable search, a letter notifying them that
the Town is to execute the order and assess the costs of executing
said order against the real property. A notice shall also be posted on
the premises five days before the order is to be executed.
§ 300-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-38
1:411
§ 300-39. Brush, grass and weeds.
(2) When a structure is unoccupied and there is reasonable likelihood
that it may be entered by humans or animals and the owners of said
property cannot be promptly located with due diligence for the
purpose of their preventing accessibility to said structure, under
such exigency the Zoning Officer or his or her designated
representative may direct that the structure be secured and access
prevented, and the cost of such securing shall be assessed against
the real property, all without notice to the owner of the property.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to control the unattended
growth of brush, long grass, noxious weeds and other rank growth on
private properties within the Town of Seneca Falls, to prevent the
unsightly appearance such growth presents to the public, to prevent the
blight such uncared-for properties inflict upon otherwise maintained
neighborhoods and to forestall the havens such unattended properties
afford for vermin and other undesirable animal and insect life and to
reduce the danger of fire associated therewith.
B. Prohibitions. The owner of any property who permits brush, grass,
noxious weeds or other rank growth to proliferate on his or her
property to a height greater than five inches shall be deemed to be in
violation of this chapter.
C. Procedure upon report of violation.
(1) Upon a report of such a violation to the Zoning Officer, the Zoning
Officer, in the cases of a report made for the first time respecting
such property, shall issue a notice to such property owner of
record, advising him or her that, if such violation is not corrected
within five days, the Town will cause such corrections to be made
and that the actual costs of making such corrections will be billed
to the property owner and that, upon his or her failure to pay such
billing, the same shall be added to the next real property tax bill of
such property owner.
(2) The notice provided for in Subsection C(1) above shall be by
ordinary, first class mail and, in the case of a property owner having
an out-of-Town address, the Zoning Officer shall add three days to
the notice's five-day period before enforcing the within provisions.
(3) In the case of a property owner who has once received the notice
provided for in Subsection C(1) above, subsequent written notice
need not be given by the Zoning Officer for subsequently reported
violations of this section.
(4) Upon the expiration of the notice period provided for in Subsection
C(2) and (3) above or upon notification of a subsequent violation,
pursuant to Subsection C(3) above, if the property owner has failed
to take remedial action and the violation continues, the Zoning
§ 300-38 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-39
1:412
§ 300-40. Towers and antennas.
In addition to other applicable provisions of this Code, towers and antennas
attached thereto that exceed 50 feet in height shall be subject to the
following requirements:
Officer shall assign Town workers or contract with private
individuals to correct the violation, and, upon the completion of
such corrective work, he or she shall promptly bill the property
owner at his or her address as shown on the tax rolls. Any charges
remaining unpaid at the time Town tax notices are prepared are to
be added as charges on such Town tax notices.
A. A tower may not be located within 1,500 feet of another tower
(measured in a straight line and not by street distance).
B. The base of the tower shall be set back from the street right-of-way line
and every lot boundary line a distance not less than the height of the
tower.
C. Lighting, if any, shall not exceed the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) minimum. To the extent permitted by the FAA, strobe lights shall
be prohibited. All lights shall be oriented so as not to project directly
onto surrounding residential property, consistent with FAA
requirements. Prior to issuance of a zoning permit, the applicant shall
be required to submit documentation from the FAA that lighting is the
minimum required.
D. Towers and antennas shall be constructed and operated so as not to
disturb or interfere with the use or operation of adjoining or nearby
properties of radios, televisions, telephones or similar equipment.
E. Commercial messages may not be displayed on any tower.
F. The output from the tower may not exceed federally approved levels for
exposure for electromagnetic fields (EMF). The applicant shall be
required to submit documentation with the application verifying
compliance with the standard.
G. For towers up to 180 feet in height, the tower shall be engineered and
constructed to accommodate at least two additional
telecommunications users. If the tower exceeds 180 feet in height, it
shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at least three
additional telecommunications users.
H. The base of the tower and each guy anchor, if any, shall be surrounded
by a fence or wall at least eight feet in height and constructed of a
material that cannot easily be climbed or penetrated, unless the tower
and all guy wires are mounted entirely on a building or structure at
least eight feet in height.
§ 300-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-40
1:413
I. The base of the tower, and any guy wires, and any associated
structures, walls or fences shall be screened from adjacent residential
properties and public rights-of-way.
J. Outdoor storage shall be prohibited at tower sites.
K. In addition to other information that must be submitted with the
application, the tower application must include:
(1) Identification of the intended user(s) of the tower.
(2) Documentation provided by a registered engineer that the tower
has sufficient structural integrity to accommodate at least the
number of users required by Subsection G.
(3) Documentation that no suitable existing facilities within the
coverage area are available to the applicant. Documentation may
include maps, letters from adjacent tower owners, or calculations.
Facilities include other towers, buildings or structures.
(4) A statement indicating the tower owner's intent to allowed shared
use of the tower and how other users can be accommodated.
(5) Evidence of compliance with all other CFR requirements
(Telecommunications Act).
L. If the tower ceases to be used for a period of six months, then the tower
shall be removed by the owner within 90 days thereafter. A statement of
financial responsibility and performance security shall be posted for
each tower to guarantee compliance with this requirement.
M. In any residential zone, no building located on the same lot and owned
or used by the applicant or any co-users of the tower shall be used as an
employment center for any worker. This subsection does not prohibit
periodic maintenance or monitoring of instruments and equipment.
N. The tower shall be constructed with a grounding system that provides
adequate protection from destruction or damage by lightning.
O. The proposed addition of another user's antenna to a preexisting tower
or any substantial change in the previously approved tower shall
constitute modification of any existing permit and shall require
approval from the appropriate board.
P. In addition to the considerations for special use permits found in
§ 300-46, the Zoning Board of Appeals, in determining whether a tower
is in harmony with the area and in determining the impact of the
proposed tower on the value of adjoining or abutting properties, may
consider the aesthetic effects of the tower as well as mitigating factors
concerning aesthetics and may disapprove a tower on the grounds that
such aesthetic effects are unacceptable. Factors relevant to aesthetic
effects are the protection of the view in sensitive or particularly scenic
areas and areas specially designated in adopted plans such as unique
§ 300-40 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-40
1:414
§ 300-41. Dish antennas.
natural features, scenic roadways and historic sites; the concentration
of towers in the proposed areas; and whether the height, design,
placement or other characteristics of the proposed tower could be
modified to have a less intrusive impact.
A. Findings and purpose. The Town Board has become concerned about
the appearance and impact of dish antennas. The Board finds that,
unless regulated, dish antennas can be installed in an aesthetically
unpleasant manner with an adverse impact on surrounding property
values and the enjoyment and use of surrounding properties. The intent
and purpose of this section is to establish a procedure and criteria to
avoid the adverse impacts of the installation of dish antennas and to
preserve the character, beauty and general welfare of the municipality.
B. Applicability. Dish antennas shall be accessory uses according to this
chapter, with a maximum number of one per lot.
C. Applications and permits. Application for a permit shall be made to the
Zoning Officer. Plans and sketches shall be submitted by the owner only.
Said plan shall show the location of all physical improvements on the
subject premises and the proposed location of the dish antenna.
Proposed new landscaping shall be depicted. The applicant shall
present documentation of the possession of any required license by any
federal, state or local agency. The Zoning Officer shall be empowered to
issue a permit for any dish antenna meeting the criteria established in
Subsection D of this section. Any applicant denied a permit shall be
afforded an opportunity to be heard on appeal before the Zoning Board
of Appeals in accordance with § 300-118 of this chapter.
D. Factors to be considered. The Zoning Officer, in considering an
application, shall find that the proposed dish antennas will have a
harmonious relationship with surrounding property uses and shall be
located so as not to diminish the value or use of surrounding properties.
The Zoning Officer shall consider, among other things, the following
criteria:
(1) The dish antennas shall be located on the ground whenever and
wherever feasible and must be screened from the roadway and
adjoining property owners with foliage of such height and density
as to reasonably screen said satellite antenna from the road and
adjoining property owners during the entire year.
(2) The dish antenna shall not be located on any trailer or portable
device.
(3) The dish antenna shall be located in rear yards only and shall be an
accessory structure requiring compliance with all minimum yard
requirements according to this chapter. When a backyard is not
accessible or does not meet building specifications and a side yard
§ 300-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-41
1:415
§ 300-42. Fences.
meets the requirements of this chapter, a dish antenna may be
located in the side yard. If said side yard borders on a street, a
screen of foliage shall be provided so as to reasonably shield said
satellite antenna from the street and adjoining properties during
the entire year.
(4) All side and rear lot line measurements shall be made from the dish
edge or the base, whichever is nearest the lot line.
(5) Dishes shall be grounded against a strike of lightning and shall not
be illuminated or carry any form of advertising, lettering or
renderings.
(6) Dishes shall not exceed 7 1/2 feet in diameter.
E. Roof- and wall-mounted dishes.
(1) No dish antenna larger than 36 inches' diameter may be mounted
on a roof or a wall without a certification from a New York State
licensed engineer that the antenna mounts and the roof or wall
structure, as required in the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, will be able to withstand wind loads
and snow loads and such other stresses as may be reasonably
anticipated.
(2) Dish antennas of 36 inches or less may be mounted on walls, with
the exception of front walls on residential buildings. They must be
painted a color which blends with the area in which mounted and
must be mounted a minimum of 10 feet above ground level if
overhanging a driveway or walkway.
(3) Roof-mounted dish antennas may protrude above the maximum
allowable building height, and wall-mounted dish antennas of 36
inches or less may protrude into required yards.
F. Penalties for offenses. Where a violation of this section is determined to
exist, the Zoning Officer shall serve, by registered mail or personally, on
the owner, agent or contractor of the subject premises or on the lessee
or tenant of the subject premises a notice of violation requiring the
removal of the violation within 24 hours after service of the notice. If
the person or persons notified shall fail to remove the violations within
the allotted time period, the Zoning Officer shall proceed pursuant to
§ 300-110 of this chapter. The municipality may take any appropriate
action or proceeding in addition to the aforesaid remedy, including
proceeding by any available remedy. Any person who shall violate any
provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
§ 300-109.
A. Lake shore. No fence of any type may exceed 42 inches in height if
located within 100 feet of any navigable waterway.
§ 300-41 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-42
1:416
B. Trees and shrubs. In all districts, trees and shrubs and other plantings
are permitted in any portion of the lot.
C. Farms. A fence of up to four feet in height may be placed around
farmland. Barbed wire and electric wire may be used for the purpose of
animal control.
D. Residential property.
(1) Any fence of any description, as long as it meets the requirements
of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code,
may be constructed within the boundaries set by the building lines
of the principal structure up to and including the property line.
(2) A front-yard fence may be erected not to exceed four feet in height
and with a maximum closed-to-open ratio of 1:1.
(3) A security fence or privacy fence may be erected not to exceed six
feet in height. The fence may be erected only within the rear or side
yards or on the property lines thereof.
(4) All swimming pools must be enclosed as required by § 300-43 of
this chapter.
(5) The finished side of the fence shall face the neighbors.
(6) In residential zones, in no case shall the construction of a barrier
more than four feet in height be permitted between the established
line of setback for homes and the property line. Fences are not
permitted to be constructed between the sidewalk and curb or
within rights-of-way of any street.
(7) The location of electronic fences shall not threaten or impede
persons traveling the sidewalk right-of-way, including access to the
entrance door, mailbox, etc. Signs shall clearly indicate the
perimeter of invisible fences every 15 feet.
E. Schools, playgrounds and parks. A security fence not to exceed 10 feet
in height may be erected.
F. Business offices; professional, commercial or service businesses. A
fence not to exceed eight feet in height may be erected on property
lines except if located within a residential district, where the rules for
residential properties shall apply.
G. Industrial properties. A fence may be erected on property lines,
provided that it does not exceed 10 feet in height. Barbed wire may be
used at the top of a ten-foot fence.
H. Design standards.
(1) Any fence which is an integral part of the historical or architectural
nature of any designated historical or architecturally significant
§ 300-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-42
1:417
property may be maintained or restored to its original design even
if that design does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) All fences shall be constructed and maintained to withstand a wind
load of no less than 15 pounds per square foot.
(3) All materials shall be treated against infestation and corrosion.
(4) No fence shall be constructed with barbed wire, electrified wire,
razor ribbon, broken glass or other similar high-risk injury-causing
material on any surface, except as noted above.
(5) All fences shall be maintained by the property owner so as to meet
the original design specifications.
I. Height near street intersections. On a corner lot in any residential
district, no fence, wall, hedge or other structure or planting more than
30 inches in height shall be erected, placed or maintained within the
triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight
line joining such street line at points which are 30 feet distant from the
point of intersection, measured along such street line.
J. Permit required.
(1) No fence, wall or any other structure intended as a fence, barrier or
wall, including electronic animal control and dense vegetation,
shall be installed or maintained in the Town without obtaining a
zoning permit and conforming to the provisions of this chapter.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to determine, in his or her
discretion, whether or not such fence of the particular type and size
desired can be properly constructed in that location without being
detrimental to the public interest. In making such determination,
he or she shall consider the following:
(a) The proper safeguarding of road visibility.
(b) The safety of pedestrians.
(c) Whether such a structure will damage property values or the
essential character of the neighborhood. In this regard, no
barbed wire fences shall be permitted in residential zones. If a
picket fence is built, the pickets must be placed on the outside,
facing away from the property on which the fence is built; and
in other cases where one side of the fence or barrier is
considered relatively unattractive, the more decorative side
shall face away from the property on which the fence or barrier
is built.
(d) The effect such a barrier may have on the removal of snow and
leaves from public passageways.
§ 300-42 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-42
1:418
§ 300-43. Swimming pools.
K. Appeals. If relief from this section is sought, the applicant may appeal
to the Board of Appeals. If the Zoning Officer prefers, he or she may
refer an application to the Board of Appeals, rather than making the
decision himself or herself. In such case, he or she must notify the
applicant that he or she has done so. If the Board of Appeals considers
that the grounds upon which an application was refused are not
sufficient, it may grant the application. Any such appeal must be in
writing and the applicant must show cause why the decision should be
reversed.
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to establish regulations for the
construction, use and maintenance of swimming pools within the Town
of Seneca Falls.
B. Zoning permit required.
(1) No person shall construct a swimming pool within the Town of
Seneca Falls until he or she has obtained a zoning permit for the
erection thereof in accordance with and pursuant to this chapter,
and such swimming pools shall be permitted only in the rear yard of
residential lots and shall comply with all the applicable accessory
building and use regulations as contained in this chapter.
(2) A separate zoning permit, unless included in the swimming pool
permit, shall be required for any pump house, filter house or any
other structure erected in conjunction with said swimming pool.
C. Regulations. No zoning permit for the construction of a swimming pool
within the Town of Seneca Falls shall be issued except upon compliance
with the following regulations:
(1) Fences. Every swimming pool shall be enclosed by a fence
conforming to the requirements of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(2) Artificial lighting shall not be directed at neighboring property.
(3) No swimming pool water shall be discharged into any public
sanitary sewer or over, into or upon a public street or highway or
over, into or upon the land of another.
(4) The water of such pool shall be maintained at all times in a sanitary
condition.
(5) There shall be no physical connection between a potable public or
private water supply and the contents of a swimming pool which
would permit the contents of said pool to be discharged or
siphoned into said potable water supply.
§ 300-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-43
1:419
§ 300-44. Dumpsters.
All trash dumpsters must be kept in an enclosed, screened area.
D. Variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals may vary or adapt the strict
application of any of the requirements of this section pursuant to and in
accordance with Article XI of this chapter.
E. Certificate of zoning compliance required.
(1) No swimming pool constructed after the effective date of this
chapter shall be used or maintained within the Town of Seneca
Falls unless a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been
issued by the County Zoning Officer, stating that the swimming
pool complies with the provisions of this section.
(2) No existing swimming pool within the Town of Seneca Falls, New
York, shall be used or maintained unless, within 180 days following
the effective date of this chapter, a certificate of zoning compliance
shall have been issued by the County Zoning Officer, stating that
the swimming pool complies with the provisions of this section.
F. Complaints. Whenever a violation of this section occurs, any person
may file a complaint in regard thereto. All such complaints must be in
writing and shall be filed with the Zoning Officer, who shall properly
record such complaints and immediately investigate and report thereon
to the governing body.
G. Abatement of violations. In case any swimming pool is constructed,
used or maintained in violation of this section, the governing body or,
with its approval, the Zoning Officer, in addition to any other remedies,
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such
unlawful construction, use or maintenance or to restrain, correct or
abate such violation.
§ 300-43 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-44
1:420
ARTICLE VI
Special Conditions and Special Permit Uses
§ 300-45. Compliance required.
No zoning permit shall be issued for the following land uses or activities
until the special conditions and special use regulations set forth in this
Article VI have been complied with or a variance has been granted. See also
Article IV, District Regulations, for details regarding uses in the particular
districts to which special conditions apply and those that require a special
use permit.
§ 300-46. Special permit uses.
A. Permits for special uses, as defined in § 300-6, shall be issued only upon
authorization by the Zoning Board of Appeals after review by the
Planning Board, provided that such uses shall be found by the Zoning
Board of Appeals to comply with the following general requirements
and any other applicable requirements for certain special uses and
activities as set forth in this chapter:
(1) The use shall be so designed, located and proposed to be operated
that the public health, safety, welfare and convenience will be
protected.
(2) The use will not cause substantial injury to the value of other
property in the neighborhood in which it is to be located.
(3) The use will be compatible with adjoining development and the
proposed character of the zone district in which it is to be located.
(4) Adequate landscaping and screening shall be provided as required
herein.
(5) Adequate off-street parking and loading shall be provided and
ingress and egress shall be so designed as to cause minimum
interference with traffic on abutting streets.
(6) The use shall conform to all applicable regulations governing the
district in which it is located, except as may otherwise be set forth
elsewhere in this Article VI.
B. An application seeking the issuance of a special use permit shall
provide the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the lot to be affected by such
proposed change or use.
(3) A brief description and the location of the lot to be affected by such
proposed change or use.
§ 300-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-46
1:421
§ 300-47. Farms and customary farm occupations.
No enclosed storage area for manure or other materials creating dust or
odor shall be permitted within 100 feet of any street or residential property
line.
§ 300-48. Essential services.
(4) A statement of the present zoning classification of the lot in
question, the improvements thereof and the present use thereof.
(5) An accurate description of the present improvements and the
additions or changes intended to be made under this application,
indicating the size of such proposed improvements, material and
general construction thereof. In addition, there shall be attached a
sketch plan of the real property to be affected, indicating the
location and size of the lot and the size of any improvements
thereon or proposed to be erected thereon.
(6) A draft short-form environmental assessment form (EAF) pursuant
to the New York State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
If, upon a review of the short-form EAF, the Town (or its attorney)
determines that a full EAF is warranted, the applicant shall submit
same.
A. Enclosed or permanent structures. In R Districts, essential services
shall be permitted with a special use permit pursuant to § 300-46 and,
in addition, shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Such facility shall not be located on a residential street, unless no
other site is available, and shall be so located as to draw a minimum
of vehicular traffic to and through such streets.
(2) The location, design and operation of such facility shall not
adversely affect the character of the surrounding residential area.
The architectural design shall be harmonious with surrounding
development.
(3) Adequate fences, barriers and other safety devices shall be
provided and shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions
of § 300-34.
B. Open services. Such uses shall be limited to the erection, construction,
alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical,
steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection,
communications, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police
call boxes, traffic signs, hydrants and other similar equipment and
accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or
other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or
§ 300-46 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-48
1:422
§ 300-49. Roadside stands.
§ 300-50. Home occupations.
A permitted home occupation may be operated only if it complies with the
standards set forth in § 300-46B and the following conditions are met:
general welfare, but not including buildings. Where applicable, the
landscaping regulations of § 300-34 shall apply.
A. Roadside stands shall only be allowed in connection with a farm
operation for the purpose of display and sale of products raised on such
farm at the farm location.
B. All structures associated with a roadside stand, whether permanent or
temporary, shall be set back at least 25 feet from the edge of the road
right-of-way.
C. Before a roadside stand is constructed on any state road, the owner of
the stand must verify the required setback with the New York State
Department of Transportation.
A. Where permitted. A permitted home occupation shall be permitted
within a single-family dwelling unit or in a building accessory to such a
dwelling unit.
B. Operator. The home occupation shall be operated by the person or
persons living in the dwelling in which the home occupation is located
and no more than one additional person.
C. Evidence of use. The outside of the building shall not display or create
any evidence of the home occupation, except for one sign in accordance
with § 300-54 below.
D. Extent of use. The home occupation shall not use more than 30% of the
gross floor area of the dwelling unit, except a permitted day-care use.
E. Permitted uses. A home occupation shall not use more than one of the
following uses, provided that such uses are clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the property by the property owner as a
dwelling unit for the property owner's residential purposes. Provided
that the Zoning Officer issues a permit, any of the following uses is
permitted:
(1) Medical and dental offices in accordance with provisions for offstreet
parking as required herein, with not more than one
nonresident assistant.
(2) Other professional offices, including lawyer, engineer, architect and
realtor.
(3) Custom dressmaking, tailoring, teaching, carpentry and computer.
§ 300-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-50
1:423
§ 300-51. Outdoor recreation facilities.
(4) An artist or musician.
(5) Day care for not more than four children simultaneously.
(6) Beauty and barber shops.
(7) Craft shops for crafts made in the home.
(8) Ceramic shops for ceramics made in the home.
(9) Dog and cat grooming shops.
F. There shall be adequate parking for the intended use.
G. Permits.
(1) The Zoning Officer is hereby empowered to issue a revocable
permit for any occupation to be pursued in a home upon a finding
by the Zoning Officer that Subsections A through F above will be
complied with and, further, that said occupation will have no
measurable impact on off-street parking or traffic flow in the
neighborhood.
(2) Upon the Zoning Officer receiving a written complaint from two or
more owners of separate parcels situated within a five-hundredfoot
distance of the home occupation, the Zoning Officer shall
schedule a revocation hearing, pursuant to the method contained in
§ 300-119 of this chapter.
(3) Application to operate a home occupation shall be made to the
Zoning Officer in writing and shall be accompanied by an
application fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Town
Board.
A. Outdoor recreation facility uses shall include miniature golf, ice skating
rinks and tennis courts, but not race tracks or go-cart tracks.
B. In any district in which they are permitted, retail sales which are clearly
secondary to the principal use are permissible.
C. Such facilities shall be located not less than 50 feet from any property
line and shall be effectively screened from adjoining residential uses in
accordance with the provisions in § 300-34.
D. Illuminated signs and other lights shall be directed away or shielded
from adjoining residential properties in such a way as not to disturb the
occupants thereof.
E. No public address system shall be permitted except where such system
is inaudible at any property line.
§ 300-50 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-51
1:424
§ 300-52. Amusement centers, bowling alleys and enclosed places
of amusement.
§ 300-53. Drive-in eating and drinking establishments.
Buildings in which persons are served in automobiles shall be not closer
than 200 feet to an R District and shall provide ingress and egress so as
to minimize traffic congestion. The number and location of curb cuts shall
be subject to the approval of the Town Board based upon a review and
recommendation of the Planning Board and Highway Superintendent.
§ 300-54. Signs.
Signs may be erected and maintained only when in compliance with the
following provisions:
F. Unenclosed recreational facilities shall be located not less than 25 feet
from any property line except where greater distances are otherwise
required herein and shall be effectively screened from adjoining
residential uses in accordance with the provisions of § 300-34.
A. Amusement centers, bowling alleys and similar places of amusement
shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure.
B. Off-street parking areas shall be screened from preexisting adjoining
residential properties in accordance with § 300-34.
C. A principal structure shall be not less than 50 feet from any property
line.
A. Signs in residential districts. The following types of nonilluminated
signs are permitted in all R Districts:
(1) Institutional signs on a school, church or other institution
permitted in a R District not larger than 20 square feet in area.
(2) Temporary development signs. Such signs must be removed within
60 days after the development is occupied.
(3) Advertising and commercial signs.
(a) Such signs shall not exceed three in number for each property.
(b) The maximum combined area of all signs on any lot shall not
exceed 10 square feet. In the case of a two-sided sign on which
each side is identical, only one side will be counted in the
combined area.
B. Signs in commercial and manufacturing districts. Business and
advertising signs are permitted in commercial and manufacturing
districts as follows:
§ 300-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-54
1:425
(1) Such signs shall be located on the same premises as the land use or
activity they advertise or identify.
(2) Such signs shall not exceed two in number for each property.
(3) The maximum combined area shall not exceed 100 square feet. In
the case of a two-sided sign on which each side is identical, only
one side will be counted in the combined area.
(4) Such signs shall not be located on a public right-of-way.
(5) Such signs shall not be higher than the height limit in the district in
which such sign is located, nor shall any sign be located upon the
roof of any building.
(6) Lighted signs shall not be flashing.
(7) The following standards shall guide the regulation of all window
signs located in these districts:
(a) Window signs shall cover no more than 25% of the total
window area. In addition, window signs shall not exceed five
square feet per window space.
(b) Each tenant may have two window signs. In no event, however,
shall a window sign be permitted where there is a buildingmounted
identification sign.
(c) A window space is considered to be the total area of any single
window pane or series of window panes with a width of 12
inches or less separated by mullions.
C. Outdoor advertising signs (billboards) shall be permitted only in A-1,
A-2, L-C and M-1 Districts as follows:
(1) Such signs will be given a temporary permit only. If they are not
maintained in good condition, the temporary permit may be
withdrawn by the Town Board and the owner so notified. Such signs
will then be removed by their owner or, after 30 days, removed by
the Town at the owner's expense.
(2) The maximum area of a single sign shall not exceed 200 square
feet.
(3) All freestanding signs shall conform to the minimum yard
requirements of the district in which they are located.
(4) No sign shall be permitted within 200 feet of any property in an R
District, nor shall any sign be permitted within 200 feet of a public
or parochial school, library, church, hospital or similar institutional
use.
(5) Signs fronting on a public way shall be no closer to one another
than 500 feet.
§ 300-54 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-54
1:426
(6) No signs, including portable signs and signs affixed to any
nondisabled vehicle or trailer placed at a location for advertising
purposes which remains on the lot for more than 24 consecutive
hours, shall be permitted within 660 feet of the right-of-way of a
federally aided primary highway.
D. Home occupation signs. One nonanimated, nonilluminated yard or
window sign having an area of not more than two square feet (12 inches
by 24 inches) shall be permitted on each street front of the lot on which
the building containing the permitted home occupation is situated.
E. No trailer or mobile unit shall be placed in an R-1 zone for
advertisement purposes. No signage placed upon such trailer or mobile
unit shall be allowed.
F. General regulations. The following regulations shall apply to all
permitted sign uses, unless specifically modified by Subsections A
through E above:
(1) Signs shall be located on the same premises as the land use or
activity they advertise or identify.
(2) Signs must be constructed of durable materials and maintained in
good condition. If a sign becomes dilapidated, then the sign's
owner shall repair or remove such sign within 30 days of receipt of
a notice from the Zoning Officer. Upon the owner's failure to repair
or remove the sign, the Town Board may, after a public hearing
upon written notice to the owner of its intent to do so, adopt a
resolution ordering removal of the sign and assessing the cost of
such removal as a charge on the property.
(3) Signs, other than an official traffic sign, shall not be erected within
the right-of-way lines of any street.
(4) A permit shall not be required for the erection, alteration or
maintenance of any signs permitted in an R District.
(5) A permit shall be required for the erection, alteration or
reconstruction of any business or advertising sign.
(6) All temporary signs erected for a special event shall be removed by
the property owner or the individual requesting the placement of
such signs when the circumstances leading to their erection no
longer apply.
(7) A permit shall be required for the erection of any business or
advertising sign at a cost to be set from time to time by resolution
of the Town Board.
G. Signs in Historic District. Signs in the Historic District, whether
temporary or permanent and whether exterior or interior, legible from
the exterior but not the interior, shall be subject to the regulations of
the Historic District Commission.
§ 300-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-55
1:427
§ 300-55. Motels.
§ 300-56. Off-street parking and loading.
A. Each rental unit in a motel shall have a minimum area of 150 square
feet of space, exclusive of bathroom facilities.
B. Each rentable unit in a motel shall include a minimum of one bedroom
and a shower or bathroom with toilet.
C. Illuminated signs and other lights shall be directed away from or
shielded from adjoining residential properties and highways in such a
way as not to disturb the occupants thereof.
A. Parking required. Whenever a building or structure is erected or
converted in any district involving manufacturing, business,
institutional, recreational, residential or other use, off-street parking
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements below. Provision
of such off-street parking shall be a condition of any permit issued by
the Zoning Officer.
B. Size and access. Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not
less than 180 square feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles, and shall
be of usable shape and condition. Except in the case of dwellings, no
parking area provided hereunder shall be established for fewer than
three spaces.
C. Number of parking spaces required. The number of off-street parking
spaces required shall be as set forth below. In the case of any building,
structure or premises, the use of which is not specifically mentioned
below, the provisions for a use which is mentioned and to which said use
is similar, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, shall apply.
Land Use or Activity
Minimum Number of Parking
Spaces Required
1- and 2-family dwelling unit, for
each dwelling unit
2
Multiple dwelling units, for each
dwelling unit
2
Conversion to multiple dwelling,
for each dwelling unit
2
Individual mobile home 2
Boardinghouse and rooming house,
for each 2 rooms let for profit
2
Bed-and-breakfast, for each
lodging unit, in addition to existing
spaces required for dwelling
1
Motels, for each unit 1
§ 300-55 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-56
1:428
Land Use or Activity
Minimum Number of Parking
Spaces Required
Church, assembly hall, sports area
or similar place of public assembly,
for each 4 persons to be
accommodated in largest meeting
space
1
School:
For each teaching station 1
Plus, for visitors 10
Public building or social
organization:
For each 200 square feet of
gross floor area
1
Plus, for each 5 occupants,
average
1
Medical or dental clinic or office,
for each doctor or dentist
4
Office, general, for each 600
square feet of floor area
1
Retail store, store group, shop,
etc.:
For each 100 square feet of
gross floor area in C-1 District
1
For each 200 square feet of
gross floor area in C-2 District
1
Supermarket or shopping center,
for each 1,000 square feet of gross
leasable area
5
Restaurant, bar or nightclub:
For each 100 square feet of
gross floor area
1.00
Drive-in restaurant:
For each 4 seats 1
Minimum 24
Bowling alley, for each alley 3
Manufacturing, research or testing
laboratories, for each 500 square
feet of gross floor area or for each
2 employees, whichever is greater
1
Wholesaling or warehouse, for
each employee on the largest shift
1
§ 300-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-56
1:429
D. Appropriate use. No required off-street parking space shall be used for
storage, servicing or dismantling of automobiles or other vehicles.
E. Landscaping. Parking lots for more than 10 cars shall be provided with
landscaped areas equal to an aggregate minimum of 5% of the total
paved area of the parking lot. Landscaping plans for such areas shall be
shown when a zoning permit is applied for.
F. Arrangement of parking space.
(1) No off-street parking space shall be used or designed, arranged, or
constructed to be used in a manner that will obstruct or interfere
with the free use of any street, alley, driveway or adjoining
property.
(2) No permanent parking shall take place nor shall any excavation
take place between the sidewalk and curb nor shall any like
improvement be made within the right-of-way of a Town street for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this section.
G. Construction of parking space. The parking spaces, along with their
necessary access roads and driveways, shall be constructed with an
adequate base of crusher-run stone, paved with approved topping
material to eliminate dust and mud problems and provided with
adequate drainage to eliminate water pockets and prevent early
deterioration of the paving itself. Plans for such parking facilities shall
be reviewed by the Planning Board. If satisfactory, the Zoning Officer
will issue the necessary construction permit.
H. Maintenance of parking areas. All parking areas shall be kept free of
obstructions, trash and other unsightly material and bare earth.
I. Off-street loading.
(1) Any building in any district which is to be occupied and used by
manufacturing or commercial uses or other uses requiring the
receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise and
which has a gross floor area of 4,000 square feet or more shall be
provided with a minimum of off-street loading space as follows:
(a) For building with gross floor space between 4,000 square feet
and 50,000 square feet, one space.
(b) For each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor space or
major fraction thereof, one space.
(2) The loading berth required in each instance shall be not less than
12 feet in width, 60 feet in length and 14 feet in height and may
occupy all or any part of any required yard.
§ 300-56 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-57
1:430
§ 300-57. Parking and storage of recreational vehicles, trailers and
boats.
The following restrictions apply in any residential district in the Town:
A. No automobile, trailer, house trailer, camper, van, truck, pickup truck,
recreational vehicle, boat, portable storage container or other mobile
equipment (whether or not motorized and regardless of registration)
may be parked or stored:
(1) Upon the front yard lawn area or street side yard of any corner lot.
All such vehicles located in the front of a residence must be parked
inside a garage. In any case, no vehicle with a gross vehicle weight
in excess of six tons may be parked or stored in a residential
district.
(2) Closer than five feet to any side or rear lot line or 10 feet to the lot
line if a corner lot.
B. No stored or parked recreational vehicle shall be occupied or used for
human habitation, including but not limited to sleeping, eating or
resting.
C. No recreational vehicle, as defined herein, or unmounted boat or
snowmobile shall be stored or parked in any front driveway or front
yard in a residential zone. It may, however, be stored or parked in the
rear of such lot or parcel of property in the residential zone but in no
event closer than five feet to any building or structure or to any lot or
parcel or property line.
D. No vehicle bearing a taxi, trailer, tractor-trailer, bus, school bus, livery
or camper registration, or used for any of such purposes, shall be
parked on or in any road, driveway or parking area, except:
(1) Such vehicles may stand for a period up to 1/2 hour.
(2) Such vehicles or vans may park in the driveway of a residential unit
during such periods of time as the operator thereof is engaged in
performing repairs or maintenance at said unit.
E. Travel trailers and boats.
(1) A travel trailer or boat may be parked in the rear yard of any
residential lot behind the rear house foundation.
(2) No more than one travel trailer or boat may be parked on any
residential lot.
(3) No travel trailer or boat may be parked closer than five feet to any
lot line.
(4) No travel trailer may be used as living or sleeping quarters within
the Town.
§ 300-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-57
1:431
§ 300-58. Manufacture, assembly or research.
Manufacture, assembly or research operations must be able to meet the
performance standards set forth in § 300-26.
§ 300-59. Recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds.
(5) Travel trailers may only be parked as described above if they have a
current license and are no longer than 28 feet.
F. Exception. Within the Town limits outside of the limits of the former
Village of Seneca Falls boundary, an automobile, trailer, house trailer,
camper, van, truck, pickup truck, recreational vehicle, boat, portable
storage container or other mobile equipment taking up less than 10% of
the established driveway may be parked or stored in the driveway.
A. Permit required. No person who is the owner of any land within the
Town of Seneca Falls shall use or allow the use of such land for a
recreational vehicle park or campground unless a zoning permit and
certificate of zoning compliance and an annual operating permit have
been obtained as provided in this chapter.
B. Application for permit.
(1) An application for a zoning permit and a certificate of zoning
compliance for a recreational vehicle park or campground shall be
filed with the Zoning Officer as required in Article X of this chapter.
In addition, an application shall be made for an annual operating
permit for an additional annual fee as set by the Town Board of the
Town of Seneca Falls. The operating permit issued shall be for a
period of one year and must be renewed annually. The application
for an operating permit or the renewal thereof shall be made on
forms prescribed by the Town of Seneca Falls and shall include the
name and address of the owner of the property, if different from the
applicant.
(2) Each operating permit or renewal thereof shall expire on the 31st
day of December following the issuance thereof. If the original
operating permit is granted on or after July 1, the applicant shall be
required to pay 1/2 the annual operating permit fee for the period
expiring December 31.
(3) Before a zoning permit may be issued by the Town Zoning Officer,
there must be approval by a majority of the Planning Board of the
Town of Seneca Falls, after a public hearing. Building and site plans
must be in compliance with all the provisions of this chapter and all
other applicable ordinances of the Town of Seneca Falls. All water
and sewage system plans must be approved by the Seneca County
Health Department.
(4) Any applicant for a recreational vehicle park or campground zoning
permit shall state that he or she, as owner or operator, shall be
§ 300-57 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-59
1:432
responsible for the proper maintenance and upkeep of the
proposed park and shall further submit a park plan containing but
not limited to the following information:
(a) The boundaries and areas of the plot.
(b) The entrances, exits, roadways and walkways.
(c) The layout of lots.
(d) The perimeter planting of trees and shrubs to provide a screen
for adjoining highways and adjacent property.
(e) The number and location of service buildings and the number
of facilities therein.
(f) The plan of the sewer system and disposal arrangements.
(g) The method and plan of garbage and refuse disposal, including
recycling.
(h) The water supply.
(i) The electric power distribution and general lighting.
(j) The means of providing for surface water runoff.
(k) The owner's and operator's name, address and telephone
numbers.
(l) Certificates of approval from the Seneca County Health
Department.
(m) A list of the owner's campground regulations.
(n) The telephone available to the public.
C. Park requirements.
(1) The minimum tract size shall be 20 acres. Such tract shall have at
least 50 feet of frontage on a public street, with access considered
adequate by the appropriate highway authority and the Town
Planning Board.
(2) A front setback of 100 feet and a side and rear yard setback of 20
feet shall be maintained from the right-of-way line of any public
road bordering the tract and property lines of properties adjoining
any recreational vehicle in the park.
(3) All interior two-way roads shall be 20 feet wide, and one-way roads
shall be 12 feet wide.
(4) Entrances and exits shall be located to provide a minimum sight
distance on the adjacent public road in both directions from the
§ 300-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-59
1:433
interior road of not less than 300 feet at a point not less than 10
feet from the intersection.
(5) The recreational vehicle park shall set aside a portion of the total
acreage as open space and recreation area, including but not
limited to one active recreation area, which shall be easily
accessible from all camping spaces. The size of such active
recreation area shall be not less than 5% of the gross site area or
two acres, whichever is greater.
(6) It is recommended that consideration in each instance be given to
the construction of all utilities underground.
(7) Auxiliary parking areas are to be provided for parking trucks,
maintenance equipment, boat trailers, utility trailers, incapacitated
or unregistered vehicles and similar such equipment and vehicles.
Such areas are to be a minimum of 200 feet from the boundary of
any public highway and a minimum of 50 feet from any lot line.
(8) Recreational vehicle sales. No lot or plot for the display of
recreational vehicles for sale or rent or for the conduct of a sales
agency for recreational vehicles shall be permitted within any
recreational vehicle park or campground.
(9) Conditions of soil and topography shall be suitable for the use, and
surface drainage shall be provided to prevent accumulation of
surface water.
(10) The density shall not exceed 20 self-contained recreational vehicle
lots per acre of the area assigned to them.
D. Water supply. An adequate, safe and potable water supply shall be
provided in the park. When such public supply is not available, a private
water supply system may be developed and used as approved by the
Seneca County Health Department.
E. Service buildings. Service buildings housing sanitation, laundry or
other facilities shall be permanent structures complying with the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, New York State
Sanitary Code and any other applicable ordinances and statutes
regulating buildings, electrical installations and plumbing and
sanitation systems.
F. Refuse disposal. Ample garbage cans with tight-fitting covers shall be
provided. The cans shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times. It
shall be the responsibility of the park operator to ensure that the
garbage and refuse shall be collected and properly disposed of outside
the park as frequently as may be necessary to ensure that garbage cans
do not overflow. In addition, adequate containers shall be provided for
recyclable materials collected in the area.
G. Lot requirements. Each lot shall face on an interior street.
§ 300-59 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-59
1:434
§ 300-60. Multiple dwellings and conversions.
H. Maintenance.
(1) The entire park shall be policed to preclude the accumulation of
litter, trash, discarded items or other debris.
(2) Provision shall be made for the regular and continuing
maintenance of the landscaping which was required as a condition
of initial approval and of all portions of lots and other areas within
the park which are not surfaced, covered by buildings or otherwise
improved.
I. Supervision. The operator of the park or a duly authorized attendant
shall be in responsible charge at all times to keep the park, its facilities
and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The attendant
shall be answerable, with the permittee, for any violation of this chapter
to which the permittee is subject.
J. Inspection. Upon the construction of a new recreational vehicle park or
campground, the Zoning Officer shall make inspections of the premises
to determine that all requirements of this chapter have been met. Prior
to issuing any annual permit, the applicant shall have any private water
or sewerage systems inspected by the Seneca County Health
Department and all buildings inspected by the Seneca County Building
Code Enforcement Officer for proper maintenance under the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
K. Length of stay. Camping space may be rented by the day, week or
season or may be leased. The occupant of a camping space may remain
in the same camping area in permanent residence for not more than
five consecutive months.
L. Revocation or suspension of operating permits.
(1) The Town Zoning Officer shall have the authority to enter and
inspect any recreational vehicle park or campground at any time
for purposes of health, safety and sanitation.
(2) If, upon inspection by the Zoning Officer, it shall be found that the
operator has violated any provisions of this chapter, the Planning
Board shall have the power to revoke or suspend the permit and
order the recreational vehicles removed or the recreational vehicle
park or campground closed after notice and an opportunity for the
owner/operator to be heard.
A. Multiple dwellings. Applications for multiple dwellings shall require the
submission of a site development plan to the Planning Board showing
all structures, roadways, pathways, parking areas, recreation areas,
utility and exterior lighting installations and landscaping on the site, all
existing structures and usages within 200 feet of the site boundaries
§ 300-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-60
1:435
and any other elements as may be deemed essential by the Planning
Board.
(1) In its review of the site plan, the Planning Board shall make
findings with respect to the following:
(a) Traffic access. All proposed site traffic accessways are
adequate but not excessive in number, adequate in grade,
width, alignment and visibility and not located too near street
corners, entrances to schools or places of public assembly and
other similar considerations.
(b) Circulation and parking. The interior circulation system is
adequate and all required parking spaces are provided and are
easily accessible. No driveway or parking lot should be closer
than 25 feet to the front of any building nor 10 feet to the side
or rear of any building. In the case of an enclosed garage or
carport provided as a part of the primary structure, the
distance requirements for driveways providing access to these
accommodations shall not apply.
(c) Recreation and open space. An area is provided on the site or
public space is located within 1,000 feet of such development
which is devoted to the joint recreational use of the residents
thereof. Such recreation space shall consist of not less than
400 square feet of space per dwelling unit. Each such
recreation space shall be developed with passive and active
recreation facilities. Responsibility for the maintenance and
upkeep of recreation areas and open space shall be adequately
provided for.
(d) Arrangement of buildings. Adequate provision has been made
for light, air, access and privacy in the arrangement of the
buildings to each other. Each dwelling unit shall have a
minimum of two exterior exposures. The front or rear of any
building shall be no closer than 40 feet to the front or rear of
another building. The side of any building shall be no closer
than 30 feet to the side, front or rear of any other building.
(e) Proper landscaping. The proposed site is properly landscaped,
the purpose of which is to further enhance the natural qualities
of the land. Trees and shrubs shall be provided along all walks
and streets around recreation areas and along the outer
property line of the site. Where adjacent land use dictates,
proper screening and buffer zones may be required.
(f) Laundry facilities. Laundry facilities, including washing
machines and clothes dryers, shall be available on the
premises for use by all occupants of the premises. Exterior
clothes lines shall not be permitted.
§ 300-60 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-60
1:436
§ 300-61. Determination of number of dwelling units.
(2) No certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued for any such
building or buildings unless the same conform in all respects to
such site plans and unless all facilities included in the site plans
have been installed in accordance therewith.
B. Conversions. Conversions to multiple dwellings shall be permitted in
accordance with the following provisions:
(1) There shall not be a greater density than is normally permitted in
the district in which the conversion property is located.
(2) Such conversions may be permitted on lots of not less than the
minimum required for the district in which situated.
(3) Off-street parking shall be provided as set forth in § 300-56.
(4) All provisions of the State Multiple Residence Law are met.
A. In the event there is a need to establish that a particular property is a
one-family dwelling and not a two-family or multiple dwelling and the
building contains separate areas, each of which meets the technical
definition of a dwelling unit, the following procedures shall be followed:
(1) Any evidence of a kitchen facility (e.g., sink, stove, or refrigerator)
or, in the alternative, any evidence of a bathroom (e.g., toilet, tub,
shower or sink) shall be removed from the area under
consideration so that there would no longer be complete living
facilities for one family.
(2) The Zoning Officer may inspect the premises to confirm such
removal.
(3) The owner of the property shall sign an affidavit and certification in
form satisfactory to the Zoning Officer to the effect that:
(a) The facilities referred to above have been removed;
(b) Said facilities will not be reinstalled without seeking a zoning
permit or other approval from the Zoning Officer; and
(c) The area from which the facilities were removed will not be
used as a separate dwelling unit until the Zoning Officer is
notified and any required approvals, permits or other
certificates, including a certificate of zoning compliance, are
obtained from the Zoning Officer.
(4) Such affidavit shall be recorded, at the expense of the homeowner,
in the County Clerk's office and indexed against the name of the
then owner of the property.
B. The Zoning Officer shall have discretion to deviate in whole or in part
from the procedure set forth above in those circumstances where the
§ 300-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-61
1:437
§ 300-62. Mobile home parks.
Zoning Officer is satisfied that the objectives sought to be obtained
by the foregoing procedures and compliance with this chapter may be
assured in some other manner.
A. Conditions. A mobile home park will be permitted in the Town of Seneca
Falls only with a special use permit granted pursuant to § 300-46 and
under the following conditions:
(1) Such mobile home park is to be located in an A-1, A-2 or MP
District.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals has authorized the issuance of a
special use permit in accordance with § 300-46B of this chapter. In
reviewing the request for such a special use permit, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall determine that the provisions of Subsection
E have been complied with.
B. Permit application. Two copies of a written application for a permit will
be filed with the Town Clerk and will include the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the land upon which the park
is to be located.
(3) A survey map showing how the park relates to the existing road
system.
(4) A plan of the park showing how the overall design is in accordance
with the provisions of Subsection E of this section.
(5) Provisions for water supply and sewage disposal, including a
statement of requirements from the Seneca County Health
Department if public water and sewage disposal systems are not to
be provided.
(6) The topography and soils of the site, including all areas which are
wet or subject to flooding. Topography maps from the County
Planning Department shall be adequate.
(7) The proposed cross-section design of park roadways.
(8) A statement of all rules, regulations, restrictions and covenants
applying in the park, including entrance requirements,
management and tenant responsibilities, entrance or exit fees,
utility connection fees and security deposits.
(9) Any additional information which the developer feels will help the
Zoning Board of Appeals in its review of the proposed park.
(10) A draft short-form environmental assessment form (EAF) pursuant
to the New York State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
§ 300-61 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-62
1:438
If, upon a review of the short-form EAF, the Town (or its attorney)
determines that a full EAF is warranted, the applicant shall submit
same.
(11) An application fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
Town Board.
C. Procedure.
(1) The Town Clerk shall refer one copy of the application to the
Planning Board for site plan review. Planning Board comments
shall be available at a public hearing on the proposed mobile home
park to be held by the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board
of Appeals shall conditionally approve or disapprove the
application within 62 days from the public hearing.
(2) Upon conditional approval of the application by the Zoning Board
of Appeals, the applicant shall proceed with final plans,
incorporating any conditions attached to said conditional approval.
(3) Final site plans for the proposed mobile home park, or a portion of
it if construction is to be staged, shall be submitted to the Planning
Board for approval within one year from the date of conditional
approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals or such conditional
approval may be withdrawn by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(4) Upon final site plan approval by the Planning Board, a zoning
permit for construction shall be issued by the Zoning Officer.
(5) When construction is completed in accordance with the final plan
as approved by the Planning Board, a certificate of zoning
compliance shall be issued by the Zoning Officer.
D. Renewal of operating permit. Renewal of the mobile home park
operating permit shall be applied for every year on January 1.
Application for renewal shall be filed with the Town Clerk, accompanied
by an application fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Town
Board. The Town Clerk shall renew the operating permit only if the
Zoning Officer has certified, in writing, that no violations of this chapter
or the conditions of the zoning permit have been found. If such
violations or unapproved changes have occurred, the operating permit
will not be renewed until said mobile home park has been brought into
compliance. In such case, the Zoning Officer shall serve an order upon
the holder of the operating permit in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection G of this section.
E. Environmental standards.
(1) Density and lot size. The density of development in a mobile home
park shall not exceed five units per gross acre. Mobile home lots
shall have a minimum area of 8,000 square feet and a minimum
width of 55 feet.
§ 300-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-62
1:439
(2) Separation. Mobile home units may be positioned in a variety of
ways within parks, provided that a separation of at least 30 feet is
maintained between units.
(3) Setback. No mobile home shall be located less than 25 feet from the
pavement edge of a private street or 15 feet from the right-of-way
of any public street within the mobile home park. A minimum of 25
feet shall be maintained between mobile home units and all park
boundary lines except that at least 50 feet shall be maintained
between all units and any park boundary abutting an existing
public road or highway.
(4) Road layout and construction. A drawing of the proposed park
layout, showing connections to be made to existing roads, shall be
included as part of the mobile home park plans. Variety and visual
interest in the road layout should be provided, avoiding long
straight stretches and gridiron systems when possible. The paved
surface of all roads within a mobile home park shall be at least 20
feet wide, and construction specifications shall be approved by the
Town Highway Superintendent.
(5) Parking.
(a) Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile
home site. Such spaces may be located on individual lots or
grouped to serve two or more mobile home sites. Off-street
parking spaces shall be constructed of at least a four-inch
gravel base with a one-inch hard surface material.
(b) A supplemental parking area shall be provided for the storage
or temporary parking of travel trailers, campers, boats,
snowmobiles or similar auxiliary vehicles.
(6) Recreation and open space. Usable and easily accessible recreation
areas shall be provided for park occupants. At least 400 square feet
of open space per mobile home unit shall be included in the plan,
with a total minimum requirement of 10,000 square feet. Part or all
of such open space shall be in the form of developed recreation
areas located, designed and developed so as to be used for active
recreation purposes.
(7) Mobile home stand. Each mobile home site shall be provided with a
stand of concrete or compacted gravel, which will give a firm base
and adequate support for the mobile home. Such stand shall have a
dimension approximating the width and length of the home and any
expansions thereof or extensions thereto. Well-anchored tie-downs
shall be provided at least on each corner of the stand.
(8) Patio. Each mobile home site shall be provided with a concrete
patio with a minimum width of 10 feet and a total area of at least
120 square feet.
§ 300-62 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-62
1:440
(9) Walkways. Each mobile home site shall be provided with a walkway
from the stand or patio to the street or to a driveway or parking
area connecting to the street. Such walkway shall be at least two
feet wide and four inches deep, constructed with a crushed-stone
base and a hard surface.
(10) Landscaping. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of a mobile
home park shall be paved and surfaced with crushed stone or other
solid material or protected with grass or plant material to prevent
erosion and reduce dust. At least one suitable tree shall be planted
on each mobile home lot if no such tree already exists. Planted
trees shall have a caliper of at least two inches three feet above the
ground.
(11) Mobile home installation. At the time of installation of the mobile
home, the tires and wheels and the hitch shall be removed and the
unit shall be securely blocked, leveled, tied down and connected to
the required utility systems and support services. The mobile home
shall be completely skirted with masonry block prior to occupancy.
No exposed wallboard, building paper or similar unfinished
material will be permitted.
(12)Water supply. If a public water system is within 500 feet, the mobile
home park must be hooked to such system. When a public water
supply is not available, an approved private supply and system shall
be established. Private systems shall provide at least 150 gallons
per unit per day and be adequate to supply at least six gallons per
minute at a pressure of 20 pounds per square inch to each mobile
home stand. Water connections shall follow details of the
Manufactured Housing Institute.
(13) Sewage disposal. If a public sewerage system is within 500 feet,
the mobile home park must be hooked to such system. When public
sewage disposal is not available, an approved private system shall
be established. The design and construction of all components of
such system shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the
Seneca County Health Department.
(14) Solid waste disposal. Provisions shall be made and approved for the
storage, collection and disposal of solid waste in a manner that will
cause no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas,
fire hazards or air pollution. Storage areas for solid waste
containers shall be enclosed or otherwise screened from public
view.
(15) Lighting. Mobile home parks shall be provided with lighting
sufficient to illuminate streets, driveways and walkways.
Decorative lighting fixtures shall be used.
(16) Electricity and telephone. The distribution system for electrical and
telephone service shall be installed underground and shall comply
with the requirements of the utility and telephone companies.
§ 300-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-62
1:441
(17) Fuel systems. Mobile home parks shall be provided with facilities
for the safe storage of necessary fuels. Natural gas installations
shall be planned and installed so that components and
workmanship comply with the requirements of the American Gas
Association, Inc. Fuel oil systems shall be designed, constructed,
inspected and maintained in conformance with the provisions of
the National Fire Protection Association, Standard 30. Liquefied
petroleum gas systems shall be selected, installed and maintained
in compliance with the requirements of the National Fire
Protection Association, Standard 58.
(18) Fire protection. If a mobile home park is located in a public water
district, fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the district.
(19) Mail service. Mailbox location shall provide safe and easy access
for the pickup and delivery of mail. Mailboxes grouped for cluster
delivery shall be located so that stopping for pickup and delivery
will not occur on the public right-of-way.
F. Park operation and maintenance.
(1) Occupancy. No space shall be rented in any mobile home park for
the placement and use of a mobile home for residential purposes,
except for periods in excess of 60 days. No mobile home
manufactured after January 15, 1974, shall be admitted to any park
unless it bears the seal issued by the State of New York and
required by the state code for construction and installation of
mobile homes.
(2) Responsibilities of park operator. The person to whom a permit for
a mobile home park is issued shall be responsible for operation of
the park in compliance with this chapter and shall provide
adequate supervision to maintain the park, its common grounds,
streets, facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and
sanitary condition. The park operator shall maintain a register
containing the names of all occupants and the make, year and seal
serial number, if any, of each mobile home. Such register shall be
available to any authorized person inspecting the park.
(3) Responsibility of park occupants. Each park occupant shall be
responsible for the maintenance of his or her mobile home and any
appurtenances thereto and shall keep all yard space on his or her
site in a neat and sanitary condition.
(4) A list of owner and occupant responsibilities shall be posted in the
park rental office.
G. Inspection and enforcement.
(1) Inspection. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to make the
inspections required for annual renewal of park occupancy
§ 300-62 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-62
1:442
permits. Such inspection shall be carried out at reasonable times
after prior notice to the park operator, and in emergencies
whenever necessary to protect the public interest.
(2) Upon determination by the Zoning Officer that there has been a
violation of any provisions of this chapter, he or she shall serve
upon the holder of the permit for such mobile home park an initial
order, in writing, directing that the conditions therein specified be
corrected within a time period to be specified by the Zoning Officer
but in no case more than 90 days after the date of delivery of such
order. The order shall also contain an outline of remedial action
which, if taken, will effect compliance.
(3) If, after the expiration of such time period, such violations are not
corrected, the Zoning Officer, if so authorized by the Zoning Board
of Appeals, shall serve a notice, in writing, upon such mobile home
park operator requiring the holder of the park permit to appear
before the Zoning Board of Appeals at a time to be specified in such
notice, to show cause as to why the mobile home park certificate of
zoning compliance should not be revoked. Such hearing before the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall occur not less than 48 hours nor
more than 10 days after the date of service of said notice by the
Zoning Officer.
(4) Within 10 days after the hearing at which the testimony of the
Zoning Officer and the holder of the mobile home park certificate of
zoning compliance shall be heard, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall make a determination sustaining, modifying or withdrawing
the order issued by the Zoning Officer. Failure to abide by any
Zoning Board of Appeals determination to sustain or modify the
initial order and take corrective action accordingly shall be cause
for the revocation of the certificate of zoning compliance affected
by such order and determination.
H. Existing mobile home parks.
(1) The owner of any mobile home park existing at the time this
chapter is adopted shall apply to the Town Clerk for a certificate of
zoning compliance within 12 months from the date of adoption and
shall renew such certificate annually. Applications shall be
accompanied by a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
Town Board. The Zoning Officer shall prepare a written notice of
any violations which are found in an existing mobile home park,
and such violations shall be corrected within 45 days from the date
of such notice or the special use permit compliance shall be
withdrawn. Upon appeal, the Town Board may grant any relief to
this section that it finds to be appropriate.
(2) No mobile home removed from a park shall be replaced unless the
replacement conforms to the current requirements of this chapter.
§ 300-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-62
1:443
§ 300-63. Mobile homes, house trailers, camping trailers and tents.
Regulations regarding mobile homes, house trailers, camping trailers and
tents shall be as follows:
§ 300-64. Automobile service stations.
(3) If a park closes for more than six months, the park will be subject to
the current requirements of this chapter.
A. Restrictions on parking.
(1) It shall be unlawful within the limits of the Town of Seneca Falls for
any person to park any mobile home, house trailer or camper
trailer on any street, alley, highway or other public place between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(2) No person who is the owner or user of any mobile home, house
trailer, camper trailer or tent shall park or otherwise locate said
trailer equipment or tent upon any premises within the Town of
Seneca Falls for the purpose of using the same for living, sleeping
or eating quarters, nor shall any such person use or occupy any
such trailer equipment for living, sleeping or eating therein except
in a duly authorized mobile home park and except as hereinafter
provided.
B. Restrictions on use of land for mobile home parks or trailer parks. No
person who is the owner or occupant of any land or premises within the
Town of Seneca Falls shall use or permit the use of such land or
premises for:
(1) The establishment or maintenance of a mobile home park or trailer
park except as hereinafter provided.
(2) The parking of any mobile home, house trailer or camper trailer
except as hereinafter provided.
A. Location of exits and entrances. No automobile service station or repair
shop shall have an entrance or exit for vehicles within 200 feet, as
measured along the public street, from an existing school, public
playground, church, chapel, convent, hospital or public library. No
entrance or exit shall be closer than 40 feet to the intersection of any
two street lot lines nor greater than 30 feet in width.
B. Location of pumps. No pump island shall be located less than 30 feet
from any property line.
C. Landscaping. A landscaped area 10 feet wide shall be provided along all
property lines and shall be planted with trees and shrubs.
D. Outside storage. There shall be no outside equipment or parts storage
or display of accessories or portable signs unless a service station is
open for business.
§ 300-62 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-65
1:444
§ 300-65. Extraction of stone, sand or gravel.
The extraction of stone, sand and gravel shall be in accordance with
applicable statutory provisions.
§ 300-66. Adult uses.
A. Adult uses shall only be located in a C-2 Highway Commercial District
(§ 300-19) or an M-1 Industrial District (§ 300-20), subject to the annual
issuance of a special use permit (§ 300-46B), renewable as set forth
herein, provided that:
(1) An adult use may not be operated within 200 feet of a dwelling, a
church or other place of worship, a nursery, elementary, secondary
or vocational school, a hospital, nursing home or convalescent
home, a library or museum, a cemetery, the boundary of a
residential district, or a public park, playground or recreation area.
(2) An adult use may not be operated within 200 feet of another adult
use, or on the same lot or parcel of land.
(3) An adult use may not be operated in the same building structure, or
portion thereof, containing another adult use.
(4) For the purposes of this section, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of
the premises in which an adult use is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the premises of a dwelling, a church or other place
of worship, a nursery, elementary, secondary, or vocational school,
a hospital, nursing home or convalescent home, a library or
museum, a cemetery, the boundary of a rural residential or
medium-density residential district, or a public park, playground or
recreation area.
(5) For the purposes of this section, the distance between any two
adult uses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of
the structure in which each business is located.
(6) All adult uses shall be conducted in an enclosed building.
Regardless of location or distance, no one who is passing by an
enclosed building having a use governed by this section shall be
able to see any specified anatomical area or any specified sexual
activity by virtue of any display that depicts or shows that area or
activity. This requirement shall apply to any display, decoration,
sign, window or other opening.
B. Inspection requirement.
(1) As heretofore provided, a person may operate an adult use in the
Town of Seneca Falls only with a special use permit.
§ 300-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-66
1:445
§ 300-67. Kennels.
(2) Prior to the commencement of any adult use or upon any transfer of
ownership or control of an adult use, the premises must be
inspected by the Zoning Officer and found to be in compliance with
all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to the use and
occupancy for an adult use and in compliance with the Seneca Falls
Town Code and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code.
(3) All zoning officers shall complete their certification that the
premises is in compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of
the inspection of the premises by such officials.
(4) Any owner and/or operator, employee of the owner and/or operator,
or agent of the owner and/or operator shall permit representatives
of the Town Zoning Officer, the Seneca County Health Department,
the Seneca County Sheriffs' Department, the New York State
Police, the State Health Department, or any other Town, county or
state department or agency that has permitting authority
regarding the use of the premises to inspect the premises of an
adult use for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter
at any time it is occupied or open for business.
C. The duration of any special use permit shall be for a maximum period of
one year. Any special use permit for uses under this section shall expire
on December 31 of each year unless stated. The special use permit shall
run for the calendar year if so renewed by the Zoning Board of Appeals
of the Town of Seneca Falls. An application for renewal of any permit
must be made no more than 90 calendar days and no less than 60
calendar days prior to the expiration of such permit.
D. In addition to the other provisions of the Town Code, it shall be deemed
a violation of this chapter if the owner and/or operator, an employee of
the owner and/or operator or an agent of the owner and/or operator:
(1) Has violated or is not in compliance with any section of the Town
Code.
(2) Has refused to allow any inspection of the adult use as authorized
by this section.
(3) Has had any illegal gambling take place on the adult use premises.
(4) Has had the possession, use, or sale of a controlled substance occur
on the premises.
(5) Has had prostitution occur on the premises.
(6) Has had any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation, or other sexual conduct occur on the premises.
§ 300-66 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-67
1:446
A. Conditions. A kennel will be permitted in the Town of Seneca Falls only
under the following conditions:
(1) All animals shall be kept in clean and sanitary premises, structures
or enclosures.
(2) The ambient temperature shall be consistent with the requirements
of the specific pet animals. Heating shall be deemed necessary
when the inside ambient temperature of the facility falls below 50°
F. for a period of four consecutive hours, and cooling shall be
required when the temperature of the facility rises above 85° F.
(3) All facilities shall be adequately ventilated with fresh or filtered air
to minimize drafts, odors and moisture condensation and to provide
for the health and comfort of the animals at all times. Ventilation
shall be provided by either natural or mechanical means. The
necessary equipment or comparable means shall be provided to
exhaust the air from the animal area to the outside of the building.
(4) Uniformly distributed natural and/or artificial lighting shall be
provided to permit routine inspection and facilitate routine
cleaning and the proper care and maintenance of the animals.
Lighting shall be so arranged as to protect each animal from
excessive illumination.
(5) One inside pen shall be provided for each dog or cat boarded or
kept.
(a) For dogs, any inside pen shall have a minimum measurement of
three feet wide by four feet in length for all dogs except for
giant breeds, which inside pens will be a minimum of three feet
by five feet in area size. Any pen shall be of sufficient height for
the dog to stand fully erect on all four legs with at least six
inches of headroom.
(b) For cats, any inside pen shall have a minimum measurement of
two feet wide by two feet in length for all cats. Any pen shall be
of sufficient height for the cat to stand fully erect on all four
legs with at least three inches of headroom.
(6) For every three dog pens there shall be a minimum of one outside
run. Each outside run shall:
(a) Have a concrete base.
(b) Be enclosed by a minimum six-foot-high chain link fence with
shelter and with secure gates.
(c) Be three feet in width and 10 feet in length. There shall be at
least one run with a four-foot width and ten-foot length for a
giant breed dog.
§ 300-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-67
1:447
(7) Sewage and waste shall be disposed of by connection of drains to a
sanitary sewer or a state, county or locally approved sewage
disposal system. Drainage systems shall be provided with backflow
prevention devices on submersible inlets and hair traps, if required
by law, on all plumbing lines in animal areas where hoses may be
attached for cleaning of the facility.
(8) A kennel can only be established on at least five acres of property
located at least 100 yards from any adjoining property lines. A
kennel cannot be established within a one-mile radius of the
property boundary of any existing kennel.
B. Inspection requirements.
(1) As heretofore provided, a person may operate a kennel in the Town
of Seneca Falls only with a special use permit.
(2) Prior to the commencement of any use as a kennel or upon any
transfer of ownership or control of a kennel, the premises must be
inspected by the Zoning Officer, together with the local dog control
officer, and found to be in compliance with all laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations applicable to the use and occupancy for a
kennel and in compliance with the Seneca Falls Town Code, the
New York State Agriculture and Markets Law, the New York State
General Business Law and the Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code.
(3) All zoning officers shall complete their certification that the
premises is in compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of
the inspection of the premises by such officials.
(4) Any owner and/or operator, employee of the owner and/or operator,
or agent of the owner and/or operator shall permit representatives
of the Town Zoning Officer, the Town Dog Control Officer, the
Seneca County Health Department, the Seneca County Sheriffs'
Department, the New York State Police, the State Health
Department, or any other Town, county or state department or
agency that has permitting authority regarding the use of the
premises to inspect the premises of a kennel for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with this chapter at any time it is occupied or
open for business.
C. If, upon inspection as described above, it shall be found that the
operator has violated any provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall have the power to revoke or suspend the permit and
order the animals removed or kennels closed after notice and an
opportunity for the owner/operator to be heard.
D. In addition to the other provisions of the Town Code, it shall be deemed
a violation of this chapter if the owner and/or operator, an employee of
the owner and/or operator or an agent of the owner and/or operator:
§ 300-67 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-67
1:448
§ 300-68. Pet breeders.
(1) Has violated or is not in compliance with any section of the Town
Code, the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law, the New
York State General Business Law and/or any section of the New
York State Penal Law relating to mistreatment of animals; or
(2) Has refused to allow any inspection of the kennel as authorized by
this section.
E. Any existing kennel shall have 90 days from the filing of this chapter
with the Secretary of State within which to comply with the
specifications of this section.
A. Conditions. A pet breeder will be permitted in the Town of Seneca Falls
only under the following conditions:
(1) All animals shall be kept in clean and sanitary premises, structures
or enclosures.
(2) The ambient temperature shall be consistent with the requirements
of the specific pet animals. Heating shall be deemed necessary
when the inside ambient temperature of the facility falls below 50°
F. for a period of four consecutive hours, and cooling shall be
required when the temperature of the facility rises above 85° F.
(3) All facilities shall be adequately ventilated with fresh or filtered air
to minimize drafts, odors and moisture condensation and to provide
for the health and comfort of the animals at all times. Ventilation
shall be provided by either natural or mechanical means. The
necessary equipment or comparable means shall be provided to
exhaust the air from the animal area to the outside of the building.
(4) Uniformly distributed natural and/or artificial lighting shall be
provided to permit routine inspection and facilitate routine
cleaning and the proper care and maintenance of the animals.
Lighting shall be so arranged as to protect each animal from
excessive illumination.
(5) One inside pen shall be provided for each dog or cat boarded or
kept.
(a) For dogs, any inside pen shall have a minimum measurement of
three feet wide by four feet in length for all dogs, except for
giant breeds, which inside pens will be a minimum of three feet
by five feet in area size. Any pen shall be of sufficient height for
the dog to stand fully erect on all four legs with at least six
inches of headroom.
(b) For cats, any inside pen shall have a minimum measurement of
two feet wide by two feet in length for all cats. Any pen shall be
§ 300-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-68
1:449
of sufficient height for the cat to stand fully erect on all four
legs with at least three inches of headroom.
(6) For every three dog pens there shall be a minimum of one outside
run. Each outside run shall:
(a) Have a concrete base.
(b) Be enclosed by a minimum six-foot-high chain link fence with
shelter and with secure gates.
(c) Be three feet in width and 10 feet in length. There shall be at
least one run with four-foot width and ten-foot length for a
giant breed dog.
(7) Sewage and waste shall be disposed of by connection of drains to a
sanitary sewer or a state, county or locally approved sewage
disposal system. Drainage systems shall be provided with backflow
prevention devices on submersible inlets and hair traps, if required
by law, on all plumbing lines in animal areas where hoses may be
attached for cleaning of the facility.
(8) A pet breeder can only be established on at least five acres of
property located at least 100 yards from any adjoining property
lines. A pet breeder cannot be established within a one-mile radius
of the property boundary of any existing pet breeder.
B. Inspection requirement.
(1) As heretofore provided, a person may operate as a pet breeder in
the Town of Seneca Falls only with a special use permit.
(2) Prior to the commencement of any use as a pet breeder or upon any
transfer of ownership or control of a pet breeder, the premises
must be inspected by the Zoning Officer, together with the local
dog control officer, and found to be in compliance with all laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to the use and
occupancy for a pet breeder and in compliance with the Seneca
Falls Town Code, the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law,
the New York State General Business Law and the Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
(3) All zoning officers shall complete their certification that the
premises is in compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of
the inspection of the premises by such officials.
(4) Any owner and/or operator, employee of the owner and/or operator,
or agent of the owner and/or operator shall permit representatives
of the Town Zoning Officer, the Town Dog Control Officer, the
Seneca County Health Department, the Seneca County Sheriffs'
Department, the New York State Police, the State Health
Department, or any other Town, county or state department or
agency that has permitting authority regarding the use of the
§ 300-68 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-68
1:450
§ 300-69. Outdoor storage areas, including junkyards and
automobile wrecking.
Regulations concerning outdoor storage areas, including junkyards and
automobile wrecking, shall be as follows.
premises to inspect the premises of a pet breeder for the purpose
of ensuring compliance with this chapter at any time it is occupied
or open for business.
C. The duration of any special use permit shall be for a maximum period of
one year. Any special use permit for uses under this section shall expire
on December 31 of each year unless stated. The special use permit shall
run for the calendar year if so renewed by the Zoning Board of Appeals
of the Town of Seneca Falls. An application for renewal of any permit
must be made no more than 90 calendar days and no less than 60
calendar days prior to the expiration of such permit.
D. If, upon inspection as described above, it shall be found that the
operator has violated any provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall have the power to revoke or suspend the permit and
order the animals removed or pet breeders closed after notice and an
opportunity for the owner/operator to be heard.
E. In addition to the other provisions of the Town Code, it shall be deemed
a violation of this chapter if the owner and/or operator, an employee of
the owner and/or operator or an agent of the owner and/or operator:
(1) Has violated or is not in compliance with any section of the Town
Code, the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law, the New
York State General Business Law and/or any section of the New
York State Penal Law relating to mistreatment of animals; or
(2) Has refused to allow any inspection of the pet breeder as
authorized by this chapter; or
(3) Operates with an expired special use permit.
F. Any existing pet breeder shall have 90 days from the filing of this
chapter with the Secretary of State within which to comply with the
specifications of this section.
A. Such uses shall not be located within 200 feet from the nearest R
District, and the operation thereof shall be governed by the following
provisions and any other conditions as may be required by the Board to
protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare and especially with regard to abutting properties and the
occupants thereof.
B. Storage of flammable liquids.
(1) The storage of alcohol, crude oil, gasoline, benzene, kerosene or
any other highly flammable liquid in aboveground tanks planned
§ 300-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-69
1:451
§ 300-70. Junkyards.
for future construction is prohibited. Any existing aboveground
storage tanks containing any of the above flammable liquids shall
be surrounded with a diked area with a capacity equal to 1 1/2
times the total tank capacity involved.
(2) Tanks or drums of fuel of a capacity not over 550 gallons that are
directly connected to heating devices or appliances located on the
same premises as the tanks or drum of fuel are excluded from this
provision.
C. Fencing and setbacks. All outdoor storage facilities shall be enclosed by
a fence or wall adequate to conceal such facilities and the contents
thereof from adjacent property.
D. Deposit of wastes. No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any
premises in such form or manner that they may be transferred off such
premises by natural causes or forces.
E. Other hazardous materials. All materials or wastes which might cause
fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible
by or otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored
outdoors and only in closed containers.
A. License and certificate of approval required. No person or corporation
shall operate, establish or maintain a junkyard until he, she or it shall
have obtained a license to operate a junkyard business and have
obtained a certificate of zoning compliance for the location of such
junkyard.
B. Application for license and certificate of zoning compliance. Application
for the license and the certificate of zoning compliance shall be made,
in writing, to the Town Board. Said application shall be accompanied by
a certificate from the Town Zoning Board that a proposed location is not
within an established district restricted against such uses or otherwise
contrary to the prohibitions of this chapter. The application shall
contain a description of the land to be included within the junkyard.
C. Hearing. A hearing on the application shall be held within the Town of
Seneca Falls not less than two weeks nor more than four weeks from
the date of the receipt of the application by the Town Board. Notice of
the hearing shall be given to the applicant by mail, postage prepaid, to
the address given in the application and shall be published once in a
newspaper having a circulation within the Town of Seneca Falls, which
publication shall be not less than seven days before the date of the
hearing.
D. License requirements. At the time and place set for the hearing, the
Town Board shall hear the applicant and all other persons wishing to be
heard on the application for a license to operate, establish or maintain
the junkyard. In considering such application, the Town Board shall
§ 300-69 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-70
1:452
take into consideration the suitability of the applicant with reference
to his or her ability to comply with the fencing requirements or other
reasonable regulations governing the proposed junkyard, to any record
of convictions for any type of larceny or receiving of stolen goods and
to any other matter within the purpose of this section.
E. Location requirements. At the time and place set for the hearing, the
Town Board shall hear the applicant and all other persons wishing to be
heard on the application for a certificate of approval for the location of a
junkyard. In passing upon the same, the Town Board shall take into
account, after proof of legal ownership or right to such use of the
property for the license period by the applicant, the nature and
development of surrounding property, such as the proximity of
churches, schools, hospitals, public buildings or other places of public
gathering, and whether or not the proposed location can be reasonably
protected from affecting the public health and safety by reason of
offensive or unhealthy odors or smoke or of other causes.
F. Aesthetic considerations. At the hearing regarding location of the
junkyard, the Town Board may also take into account the clean,
wholesome and attractive environment which has been declared to be
of vital importance to the continued general welfare of its citizens by
considering whether or not the proposed location can be reasonably
protected from having an unfavorable effect thereon. In this
connection, the Town Board may consider collectively the type of road
servicing the junkyard or from which the junkyard may be seen, the
natural or artificial barriers protecting the junkyard from view, the
proximity of the proposed junkyard to established residential and
recreational areas or main access routes thereto, as well as the
reasonable availability of other suitable sites for the junkyard.
G. Grant or denial of application; appeal. After the hearing, the Town
Board shall, within two weeks, make a finding as to whether or not the
application should be granted, giving notice of its finding to the
applicant by mail, postage prepaid, to the address given on the
application. If approved, the license, including a certificate of zoning
compliance, shall be forthwith issued to remain in effect until the
following April 1. Approval shall be personal to the applicant and not
assignable. Licenses shall be renewed thereafter upon payment of the
annual license fee without hearing, provided that all provisions of this
section are complied with during the license period, the junkyard does
not become a public nuisance under the common law and the applicant
is not convicted of any type of larceny or the receiving of stolen goods.
The determination of the Town Board may be reviewed under Article 78
of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
H. Fees. The annual license fee shall be set from time to time by resolution
of the Town Board, to be paid at the time the application is made and
annually thereafter in the event of renewal. In the event that the
application is not granted, the fee shall be returned to the applicant.
The Town Board, in addition to the license fee, may assess the applicant
§ 300-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-70
1:453
§ 300-71. Slaughterhouses.
No slaughterhouse shall be erected, used or maintained within the former
Village of Seneca Falls boundary; nor shall any cattle be slaughtered within
the former Village limits. Theses uses are restricted to the A-1 and A-2
Agricultural Districts.
§ 300-72. Planned unit developments.
with the costs of advertising such application and such other
reasonable costs incident to the hearing as are clearly attributable
thereto and may make the license conditional upon the payment of the
same.
I. Fencing. A junkyard shall be completely surrounded with a fence at
least eight feet in height which substantially screens the use and with a
suitable gate which shall be closed and locked except during the
working hours of such junkyard or when the applicant or its agent shall
be within. Such fence shall be erected not nearer than 50 feet to a
public highway. All motor vehicles and parts thereof stored or deposited
by the applicant shall be kept within the enclosure of the junkyard
except as removal shall be necessary for the transportation of the same
in the reasonable course of the business. All wrecking and other work
on such motor vehicles and parts and all burning of the same within the
vicinity of the junkyard shall be accomplished within the enclosure.
J. Established junkyards. For the purpose of this section, the location of
junkyards already established shall be considered approved by the
Town Board of the municipality in which located and the owner thereof
deemed suitable for the issuance of a license. Within 60 days from the
passage of this section, however, the owner shall furnish the Town Clerk
with information as to the location which is required in an application,
together with the license fee, and the Town Board shall issue a license
valid until the next January 1, at which time such owner may apply for
renewal as herein provided. Such owner shall comply with all other
provisions of this chapter, including the fencing requirements set forth
in Subsection I of this section.
K. Proximity to public buildings. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing
provisions of this section, no junkyard hereafter established shall be
licensed to operate such yard or any part thereof within 500 feet of a
church, school, hospital, public building or place of public assembly.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of planned unit development (PUD) regulations is to
encourage flexibility in the design and development of land in order
to promote its most appropriate use; to facilitate the adequate and
economical provision of streets, utilities and public spaces; and to
preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open areas.
§ 300-70 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-72
1:454
(2) The PUD provisions are intended to permit diversification in the
location of structures and improve circulation facilities and other
site qualities while ensuring adequate standards relating to public
health, safety, welfare and convenience in the use and occupancy of
buildings and facilities in planned groups.
B. Regulations governing planned unit developments.
(1) Minimum area. A planned unit development shall include at least
five contiguous acres of land.
(2) Open space. A minimum of 25% of gross site area devoted to
residential purposes shall be developed as public open space.
Parking areas and roads shall not be considered in calculating open
space.
(3) Residential density. The overall density of any residential area
should be no more than three dwelling units per gross acre of the
overall area to be developed. Wetlands, steep slopes and similar
land that would not normally be usable should not be included in
gross acreage for the purpose of calculating residential density, at
the Town Board's discretion.
(4) Land use. Proposed land uses shall not adversely affect
surrounding development and shall be in accordance with the
objectives and principles of the Comprehensive Plan.
C. Standards for reviewing planned unit developments. In reviewing
proposed planned unit developments, the Planning Board shall apply
the following standards, and the Town Board shall approve such PUD
only when it determines that said standards have been reasonably
satisfied:
(1) The PUD shall provide for an effective and unified treatment of the
development possibilities on the project site, making appropriate
provision for the preservation of scenic features and amenities of
the site and the surrounding areas.
(2) The PUD shall be planned and developed to harmonize with any
existing or proposed development in the area surrounding the
project site.
(3) All buildings in the layout and design shall be an integral part of the
development and have convenient access to and from adjacent uses
and blocks.
(4) Individual buildings shall be related to each other in design, mass,
materials, placement and connections to provide a visually and
physically integrated development.
(5) Treatment of the sides and rear of all buildings within the PUD
shall be comparable in amenity and appearance to the treatment
given to street frontage of these same buildings.
§ 300-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-72
1:455
(6) The design of buildings and the parking facilities shall take
advantage of the topography of the project site, where appropriate,
to provide separate levels of access.
(7) All building walls shall be so oriented as to ensure adequate light
and air exposures to the rooms within.
(8) All buildings shall be arranged so as to avoid undue exposure to
concentrated loading or parking facilities, wherever possible, and
shall be so oriented as to preserve visual and audible privacy
between adjacent buildings.
(9) All buildings shall be arranged so as to be accessible to emergency
vehicles.
(10) Landscape treatment for open spaces, roads, paths and service and
parking areas shall be designed as an integral part of a coordinated
landscape design for the entire project area.
(11) Primary landscape treatment shall consist of shrubs, ground cover
and street trees and shall combine with appropriate walks and
street surfaces to provide an attractive development pattern.
(12) Whenever appropriate, existing trees shall be conserved and
integrated into the landscape design plan.
(13) All streets bordering the project area shall be planted at
appropriate intervals with street trees.
(14) There shall be an adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of
pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, off-street
parking and loading space. All such facilities shall be designed to
Town specifications.
(15) Health Department approval of utility support systems (water and
sewage disposal) shall be required. Electric distribution and
telephone lines shall be installed underground.
(16) A complete storm drainage system shall be provided for the
proposed PUD, which will include adequate provisions to protect
the surrounding area from adverse stormwater runoff.
(17) Landscaped, paved and comfortably graded pedestrian walks shall
be provided along the lines of the most intense use, particularly
from building entrances to streets, parking areas and adjacent
buildings.
(18) Materials and design of paving, lighting fixtures, retaining walls,
fences, curbs, benches, etc., shall be of good appearance, easily
maintained and indicative of their function.
§ 300-72 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-72
1:456
(19) Parking facilities shall be landscaped and screened from public
view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness and
monotony of parked cars.
(20) Parking facilities shall be designed with careful regard to orderly
arrangement, topography, landscaping and ease of access and shall
be developed as an integral part of an overall site design.
(21) An above-grade loading facility should be screened from public
view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness.
D. Procedure for reviewing planned unit developments.
(1) An applicant wishing approval for a PUD shall submit two copies of
a request to the Town Clerk in the form of a proposal, which shall
include:
(a) A sketch plan showing existing and proposed land use and the
approximate location of proposed buildings, existing
topographic characteristics, approximate location of existing
and proposed streets and easements and existing land uses
immediately adjacent to the proposed PUD.
(b) A written explanation of the character and purpose of the PUD,
including the type and density of any housing proposed, the
type and nature of any nonresidential development proposed,
open space to be provided, the water and sewage disposal and
stormwater drainage system proposed, a general statement of
proposed financing and an indication of the expected timetable
for development.
(c) A draft short-form environmental assessment form (EAF)
pursuant to the New York State Environmental Quality Review
Act (SEQRA). If, upon a review of the short-form EAF, the Town
(or its attorney) determines that a full EAF is warranted, the
applicant shall submit same.
(2) The Town Clerk shall immediately transmit one copy of the request
to the Town Board and one to the Planning Board. The Planning
Board shall hold a conference with the applicant to jointly review
the proposed PUD and consider the conditions and specifications
upon which a Planning Board recommendation for approval would
be forthcoming.
(3) The Planning Board shall forward to the Town Board its
recommendation on the proposed PUD, including any conditions
and specifications related to such recommendation.
(4) Within 62 days after receipt of the Planning Board's report and
recommendation, the Town Board shall hold a public hearing on the
proposal and shall act to approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove the proposed PUD within 10 days from the date of such
§ 300-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-72
1:457
§ 300-73. Cluster development.
§ 300-74. Beekeeping.
public hearing. Approval or conditional approval shall be
authorization for the Zoning Officer to issue a zoning permit. The
Town Board may require additional, more detailed plans and
written explanation as a condition of approval.
(5) Upon completion of the PUD or any stage of it, the Town Board
shall authorize the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance
before such PUD shall be occupied and used.
A. Purpose. The purpose of cluster development regulations is to
encourage flexibility in the design and development of residential land
to make specific provision for public open space, public parks, public
school sites and other necessary functions of a public nature.
B. Approval. Cluster development shall be subject to the approval of the
Town Board based upon a review and recommendation by the Planning
Board.
C. Regulations governing cluster development.
(1) Permitted district. Cluster development shall only be permitted
within the R-1 and R-2 Residential Districts.
(2) Minimum development area. Cluster development shall apply to a
major subdivision of not less than 10 acres in area.
(3) Minimum lot area. The required minimum lot area may be reduced
by not more than 20% if 20% of the total area of usable land within
the subdivision is deeded to and accepted by the Town of Seneca
Falls for public purposes.
(4) Maximum density. The maximum density for the entire subdivision
shall be not more than the maximum density permitted in the
residential district in which the subdivision lies.
(5) Minimum lot frontage. The minimum frontage per individual lot
may be reduced by not more than 10%.
(6) Minimum lot depth. The minimum depth per individual lot may be
reduced by not more than 10%.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APIARY — A place where bee colonies are kept.
BEE — Any stage of the common domestic honey bee, apis mellifera
species.
§ 300-72 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-74
1:458
COLONY — A hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including
bees, comb, honey, pollen and brood.
HIVE — A structure intended for the housing of a bee colony.
TRACT — A contiguous parcel of land under common ownership.
B. Districts where permitted. Beekeeping may be permitted only in the A-1
or A-2 Agricultural Districts. Beekeeping is prohibited in all other
districts.
C. Prohibited conduct. Notwithstanding compliance with the various
requirements of this section, it shall be unlawful for any beekeeper to
keep any colony or colonies in such a manner or of such disposition as
to cause any unhealthy conditions or interfere with the normal use and
enjoyment of any public or private property, or to fail to comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
D. Hives. All hives must maintain a minimum ten-foot setback from the
designated side and rear property lines. No hives shall be permitted
within the front yard setback.
E. Colony densities. It shall be unlawful to keep more than the following
number of colonies on any tract or lot within the Town, based upon the
size or configuration of the tract or lot on which the apiary is situated:
(1) One-quarter acre or less: two colonies.
(2) More than 1/4 acre but less than 1/2 acre: four colonies.
(3) More than 1/2 acre but less than one acre: six colonies.
(4) One acre or larger: eight colonies.
(5) Regardless of tract or lot size, where all hives are situated at least
200 feet in any direction from all property lines of the tract on
which the apiary is situated, there shall be no limit to the number of
colonies.
F. Nuisances. The keeping of any bee colonies in the Town not in strict
compliance with this section is declared to be a menace to the health
and safety of the residents of the Town and is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. Any bee colony not residing in a hive structure intended for
beekeeping, or any swarm of bees, or any colony residing in a standard
or homemade hive which, by virtue of its condition, has obviously been
abandoned by the beekeeper, is hereby declared to be a menace to the
health and safety of the residents of the Town and is hereby declared to
be a nuisance. Any bee colonies kept in the Town not in compliance with
this section or otherwise declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this
subsection may be summarily destroyed or removed from the Town at
the direction of the Zoning Officer, or his or her designee.
§ 300-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-74
1:459

ARTICLE VII
Nonconforming Uses or Structures
§ 300-75. Nonconforming uses.
§ 300-76. Continuation of existing uses and structures.
A nonconforming building, structure or lot, as defined in § 300-6, may be
continued subsequent to the adoption of this chapter, provided that no such
building or use may be enlarged or altered except with a special use permit
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with § 300-46, and no
such building shall be enlarged or increased in such a way as to increase the
nonconformity or to create a new nonconformity without a variance from
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 300-77. Transfer of rights.
Nonconforming use rights, subject to the provisions of this article, remain
with the land when the title is transferred.
§ 300-78. Changes in use.
A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use only
upon approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals. No nonconforming use shall,
if once changed to a conforming use, be changed back to a nonconforming
use.
A. In any district, whenever a nonconforming use of land, premises, a
building or structure or any part or portion thereof has been
discontinued for a period of one year, such nonconforming use shall not
thereafter be reestablished, and all future uses shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. Such discontinuance of the active
and continuous operation of such nonconforming use or part or portion
thereof for such period of one year is hereby construed and considered
to be an abandonment of such nonconforming use, regardless of any
reservation of an intent not to abandon the same or of an intent to
resume active operations. If actual abandonment of the nonconforming
use of land and/or buildings is in fact evidenced by the removal of
buildings, structures, machinery, equipment or other evidences of such
nonconforming use, the abandonment shall be construed to be
completed, and all rights to reestablish or continue such nonconforming
use shall be terminated immediately.
B. The lawful use of any building or land existing at the time of the
enactment of this chapter may be continued; however, any change,
expansion, or modification of such use shall require Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Appeals review.
§ 300-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-79
1:461
§ 300-79. Effect on ongoing construction.
Except as noted otherwise in this chapter, to avoid undue hardship, nothing
in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans,
construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction
was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption of this chapter
or any amendment thereto and upon which actual building construction has
not been interrupted.
§ 300-80. Restoration and repair.
If a nonconforming building or land use activity or part thereof has been,
by any means, destroyed less than 50%, it may be rebuilt or restored as
a nonconforming building or use only if reconstructed or restored with
the same or less floor area and cubic content and with the same or an
improved general site layout as that of the original structure. Zoning Board
of Appeals approval of reconstruction or restoration plans shall be required,
and the Zoning Board of Appeals may impose conditions on such approval
if such conditions would improve an otherwise bad situation and bring the
nonconforming use or activity more in conformity with the regulations for
the district in which it is located. Application for Zoning Board of Appeals
approval for reconstruction or restoration shall be made within six months
from the date of damage or destruction and work commenced within six
months from the date of Zoning Board of Appeals approval. Failure to meet
these time limits shall terminate the nonconforming use, except that one
six-month extension to either or both time limits may be granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 300-81. Discontinuance.
Discontinuance of any nonconforming use or activity for a period of 12
consecutive months or for a total of 20 months in any three-year period
shall terminate such nonconforming use of the building and premises. No
such nonconforming use shall be reinstated, and any subsequent use of such
building and premises shall be in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter for the area in which such building or premises is located. The
date of discontinuance of a nonconforming use shall be determined by the
Zoning Officer, who shall send written notice of such action to the property
owner, with a copy to the Town Clerk. Extension of the termination date of
such nonconforming use for an additional six months may be granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals after a public hearing.
§ 300-82. Repair or removal of unsafe structures.
For provisions on the repair or removal of unsafe buildings and collapsed
structures, see Chapter 131, Buildings, Unsafe, of the Code of the Town of
Seneca Falls.
§ 300-79 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-82
1:462
ARTICLE VIII
Streets and Sidewalks
§ 300-83. Prior notification of defects.
No civil action shall be maintained against the Town for damages or injuries
to person or property sustained in consequence of any street, highway,
bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk being defective, out of repair, unsafe,
dangerous or obstructed or for damages or injuries to person or property
sustained solely in consequence of the existence of snow or ice upon any
sidewalk, crosswalk, street, highway, bridge or culvert unless written notice
of the defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition or of the
existence of the snow or ice, relating to the particular place, was actually
given to the Town Clerk and there was a failure or neglect within a
reasonable time after receipt of such notice to repair or remove the defect,
danger or obstruction complained of or to cause the snow or ice to be
removed or the place to otherwise be made reasonably safe.
§ 300-84. Excavations.
A. Permit required; emergencies. Unless acting under a contract with the
Town, it shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized
Town official or employee, in the course of his or her employment, to
make or cause or permit to be made any excavation or opening in or
under any sidewalk, or in or under any pavement of any street, alley or
other public place within the limits of the Town of Seneca Falls, without
first having obtained, or having in force, a permit to do so, as herein
provided. In an emergency arising outside of office hours, at night,
Sundays or holidays, when an immediate excavation may be necessary,
the same shall be immediately reported to the Town Highway
Superintendent, who shall grant permission to make the necessary
excavation upon the express condition that the application shall be
made in the manner herein provided, within the next 24 hours or by
12:00 noon the next business day, whichever is sooner.
B. Permit application requirements.
(1) Application for permit.
(a) Any person desiring to procure a permit as herein provided
shall file with the Town Highway Superintendent or his or her
designated representative, at least 24 hours before the time
proposed to begin such work, a written application on a form
provided by the Town Clerk.
(b) All applicants shall include the following information in the
application:
[1] Name, address and telephone number of applicant.
[2] The name of the road or highway upon which construction/
excavation is contemplated.
§ 300-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-84
1:463
[3] The type of road material proposed to be used.
[4] The purpose of excavation.
[5] The location of excavation, with sketch.
[6] The name and address of the business or residence for
which work is being performed.
[7] The proposed start date of excavation.
[8] Proposed completion date of excavation.
[9] The name of applicant's/project's liability insurance
company.
[10] The estimated cost of the construction for the project
requiring the excavation.
[11] The name of applicant's bond company.
[12] The amount of any performance bond obtained.
[13] Any other information requested by the Highway
Superintendent.
(c) Whenever required by the Town Highway Superintendent or
his or her designated representative, the application shall be
accompanied by a sketch or tracing showing the location,
character and dimensions of the proposed excavation or
opening.
(2) At the time the application is made, the Town Highway
Superintendent or his or her designated representative shall
estimate the cost of restoring the highway's final wearing surface
and foundation and shall require the applicant to deposit with the
Town Clerk sufficient cash or a performance bond, in a form
acceptable to the Highway Superintendent, sufficient to cover the
cost of restoration, inspection, examination and backfilling of the
highway. Any such cash deposits deposited with the Town Clerk
shall be kept in a separate pavement repair fund.
(3) For the purpose of calculating the cash or bond to be deposited or
posted, the Town Highway Superintendent shall prepare, as far as
possible, a schedule of costs, covering the various kinds of
acceptable pavements, as well as standard specifications for the
refilling of all trenches. The applicant shall abide by such
specifications and any additional directions that the Town Highway
Superintendent and/or his or her designated representative shall
make in refilling such trenches, preparatory to receiving the
foundation and wearing surface.
C. Indemnification of Town; liability insurance. In the permit granted,
every applicant shall agree to indemnify, hold harmless and protect the
§ 300-84 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-84
1:464
Town against all loss or damage by reason of any such excavation or
opening. Upon request of the Highway Superintendent, the applicant
shall provide proof of liability insurance sufficient for the applicant to
so indemnify and hold harmless.
D. Alterations in grade and line. No persons shall lay, pave or re-lay any
sidewalk, curb or gutter in any street without first having obtained the
grade and line thereof from the Town Highway Superintendent or his or
her designated representative, and the same shall be laid or relaid upon
such grade and line. No person shall, in repairing, altering or improving
any street, curb or gutter, change the grade therefor given by the Town
Highway Superintendent or his or her designated representative. In
case of any such alteration in street, curb or gutter, all the directions of
the Town Highway Superintendent or his or her designated
representative in regard to the grade, line, width and material shall be
followed. In case of any dispute or complaint as to any unreasonable
decision on the part of the Town Highway Superintendent or his or her
designated representative, final determination shall be made by the
Town Board.
E. Re-laying of final wearing surface and refilling of trenches. In all
excavations, the final wearing surface shall be relaid by the contractor
under the charge and direction of the Town Highway Superintendent or
his or her designated representative. Such re-laying shall consist of the
foundation and wearing surface in hard-surface pavement, such as
concrete, asphalt, bitulithic or brick, and the foundation and wearing
surface in macadam pavements. The Town Highway Superintendent
shall also prepare standard specifications for the refilling of all
trenches, and the applicant shall abide by such specifications, and any
additional directions that the Town Highway Superintendent or his or
her designated representative may make in refilling such trenches,
preparatory to receiving the foundation and wearing surface.
F. Authority of Highway Superintendent; completion of project.
(1) Authority of Town Highway Superintendent to cancel or alter
permit.
(a) The Town Highway Superintendent or his or her designated
representative shall have full authority and power at any time
to cancel, rescind or alter any such permit, or any of the terms
thereof, and to direct the manner in which the work shall be
conducted, including, but not limited to, whether said work
shall be performed through a punch or open trench method.
(b) For the purposes of this section, the term "punch" shall mean
the use of a mechanical drill and/or pneumatic torpedo to
tunnel under the roadway without disturbing the top wearing
surface or subbase; while the term "open trench" shall mean to
cut and dig through the top wearing surface and subbase.
§ 300-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-84
1:465
§ 300-85. Vehicles and animals on sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful to operate, drive, place or leave any motor vehicle or any
other vehicle upon or along any public sidewalk or footpath in the Town of
Seneca Falls so as to interfere with or obstruct travel thereon. This section,
however, does not apply to any person who necessarily drives such vehicle
across such public sidewalk or footpath to or from any adjoining premises
or to any person drawing, pushing or operating a vehicle commonly used to
carry children or infirm persons.
§ 300-86. Signs and advertisements.
No person shall place upon, fasten or affix to any utility pole, lamppost, tree
or fence any political sign, advertisement, placard, poster, letter or device
stating, referring to, advertising or intending to state, refer to or advertise
any meeting, sales, employment, business exhibition, dance or amusement
of any kind, or the sale or manufacture of any article or thing whatsoever.
§ 300-87. Deposit of waste matter and lawn clippings.
§ 300-88. Obstructions.
(2) All excavation and related work shall be expeditiously conducted
from the time the permit is granted until the desired repairs are
completed.
(3) Upon completion of the project, any unexpended balance to the
account of any applicant shall be returned to the applicant by the
Town, or any bond discharged, only upon the certification of the
Town Highway Superintendent, to be filed with the Town Clerk,
that the work was completed in a satisfactory manner.
A. No person shall deposit, place or throw or permit the same to be done,
any ashes, leaves, papers, glass, nails or other matter into or upon any
street, sidewalk, highway, traveled road or lane; or place in such street
any boxes, barrels or other receptacles containing such things.
B. No person shall mow his or her lawn so that the clippings from the lawn
mower shall fall upon any street, sidewalk, highway, gutter, traveled
road or lane.
A. No person shall place, hang out or suspend or suffer to be placed, hung
out or suspended any goods, wares or merchandise of any sort in any
street in front of his or her building or place of business.
B. No person shall suspend, hang, adjust, fix or place over or above any
street in front of his or her building any shed, board, roof, sign or cross
sign or other fixtures which shall extend or project from the wall or
front of such building into the street.
C. No person shall deposit, place or put, or suffer to be deposited, placed
or put, any goods, wares or merchandise or any chattel on any sidewalk
§ 300-84 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-88
1:466
§ 300-89. Removal of snow from streets.
No person shall remove snow from any street without removing it wholly
from such street or spreading it over and upon the traveled portion thereof
in such a manner as to leave a uniform and level surface. Under no
circumstances shall snow removed from such street be deposited in ridges
in such street, and suffered to remain, for a longer period of time than shall
be necessary to remove it wholly from such street and spread it uniformly.
§ 300-90. Restricted activities.
in front of his or her building or lot, except while actually removing the
same into or out of such building.
D. Hedges, trees, fences, etc. shall be placed and trimmed to maintain
pedestrian clearance of seven feet above the walk the full width of the
walk. All ornamental and shade trees standing within, or whose
branches or any part thereof extend over, any public street, or sidewalk,
in the Town of Seneca Falls shall be so trimmed that the lowest
branches shall be not less than seven feet from the ground; and it shall
be the duty of the owner or occupant of the premises upon which such
trees shall stand to so trim the same.
E. No awning shall be placed or constructed over any sidewalk unless
every part of such awning and the supports thereof shall be at least
seven feet above the sidewalk.
A. No person shall ride or use a bicycle, roller skates or a skateboard on
the following business district sidewalks: on both sides of Fall Street
between Clinton Street and Cayuga Street.
B. No person shall pitch a tent or camp on any Town property or road
right-of-way within the Town without prior permission of the Town
Board.
C. Any violation of Subsection B shall be punishable as follows:
(1) Upon the first offense, the person riding or using a bicycle,
rollerskates or skateboard in the restricted areas shall have the
above item(s) held by the Seneca Falls Police Department for 60
days.
(2) In the event of a second violation by the same individual, the
restricted item(s) will be held and not returned to the individual.
(3) In the event of a third violation by the same individual, the
restricted item(s) will be held and not returned to the individual.
(4) For the first and second violation, if no other violations of this
section have occurred, at the end of the time limit stated above, the
restricted item will be returned to its rightful owner.
§ 300-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-90
1:467
§ 300-91. Articles on windowsills.
No person shall place any box, flower pot or other article upon any
windowsill or projection of any building directly fronting on any public
street or sidewalk or any part thereof in the Town of Seneca Falls, unless
such article is suitably secured as not to fall.
§ 300-92. Alterations to streets and sidewalks.
No person shall lay, pave or re-lay any sidewalk, curb or gutter in any street
without first having obtained the grade and line thereof from the Town
Highway Superintendent or his or her designated representative, and the
same shall be laid or relaid upon such grade and line. No person shall,
in repairing, altering or improving any street, curb or gutter, change the
grade therefor given by the Town Highway Superintendent or his or her
designated representative. In case of any such alteration in the street,
curb or gutter, all the directions of the Town Highway Superintendent or
his or her designated representative in regard to the grade, line, width
and material shall be followed. Concrete or slate shall be used for all
sidewalk installations in the former Village of Seneca Falls. When paving
any driveway where sidewalks exist, pavement shall be allowed up to the
sidewalk on either side. Concrete sidewalks are not to be replaced with
blacktop or any other material. In case of any dispute or complaint as to
any unreasonable decision on the part of the Highway Superintendent or his
or her designated representative, final determination shall be made by the
Town Board.
§ 300-93. Duty of abutting landowners.
(5) If a violator of this section has no violations for a period of two
years from the date of the violation, all records of the violation shall
be removed, and the violator shall have a clean record.
A. The owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land, fronting or abutting
on any street, public highway, lane or alley shall keep the sidewalk and
the gutter along the same in front of such lot or parcel of land free from
ice, dirt, filth, weeds, papers, leaves, obstructions or encumbrances of
every kind, and so as to permit easy, safe and commodious use of such
sidewalk and to allow the free passage of water in the gutter. Every
such owner or occupant shall, after every fall of snow, cause the same to
be removed from such sidewalk so as to provide for a reasonably safe
and convenient passage of pedestrians.
B. Repair and/or replacement.
(1) The owner or occupant of every lot or parcel, fronting upon any
public street or traveled highway, in front of which parcel a
sidewalk, curbstone or gutter has been or shall be laid, shall, at all
times, maintain or keep such sidewalk, curb or gutter in good
repair and so as to be safe, easy and commodious for persons using
the highway. Any landowner who desires to replace or repair his or
§ 300-90 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-93
1:468
§ 300-94. Prevention of accumulation of snow, ice and water.
The owners of buildings adjacent to public streets and sidewalks shall
prevent the accumulation of snow, ice or water thereon, and shall prevent
the falling of snow, ice or water from such buildings upon such streets and
sidewalks.
her sidewalk and desires financial assistance from the Town must
file an application with the Town Clerk with an estimate of the
cost prior to beginning of any work. The Town will fund the project
on a first-come, first-served basis, and the Town shall reimburse
a portion of the project cost as determined from time to time by
the Town Board. Project costs for the concrete material cost only
or cost of the replacement slate are subject to this program unless
otherwise authorized by the Town Board. The Town reserves the
right to accept or reject any applications. Prior to construction,
the Highway Superintendent shall inspect the applicant's sidewalk
and determine if it is a public sidewalk and if the improvement
conforms with the general intention of the sidewalk program. For
work performed by a general contractor, an estimate for the total
cost, including length of sidewalk in feet, must accompany the
application. If the work is performed by a property owner, as
estimate for the total cost of materials, including length of sidewalk
in feet, must accompany the application. When the work is
completed, the property owner must contact the Town Clerk to
arrange for the Highway Superintendent to inspect the work.
(2) All sidewalk repairs or replacement must be at least four feet in
width, or conform to the preestablished width for the street, and
must conform to the specifications detailed in the Town's
Development Regulations, which must be obtained from the Town
Clerk.
(3) If the property owner has slate sidewalks which he or she desires to
replace, specifications must be submitted to the Highway
Superintendent for his or her approval. If the Highway
Superintendent approves the replacement, the property owner may
place slate sidewalks in accordance with the Highway
Superintendent's specifications.
(4) If the property is located in the Historic District, then approval
must be obtained from the Heritage Preservation Commission
when the application is submitted to the Town Clerk.
(5) This program is subject to funds being available in the budget.
C. Any filling or regrading of any Town lot which results in an alteration to
existing neighborhood drainage patterns to the harm of adjacent
landowners, further resulting in the casting of appreciable amounts of
stormwater to said adjacent landowner, will be deemed an offense
against the provisions of this chapter.
§ 300-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-95
1:469
§ 300-95. Removal of snow, ice and dirt from sidewalks.
§ 300-96. Cellarways and trapdoors.
No person, firm or corporation shall construct or use or permit to be
constructed or used any cellarway leading from any public street or
sidewalk in the Town of Seneca Falls, unless the same shall have trapdoors
so constructed as to be on a level with the sidewalk, or with the platform
in front of the building where such cellarway is located, so that it will be
entirely safe for persons to pass over the same; nor shall such trapdoor or
gate in any sidewalk in the Town be kept open, except while being in actual
use and then it must be properly guarded to prevent persons from walking
or falling into the same.
§ 300-97. Encroachments.
No person, firm or corporation shall erect or cause to be erected any
building, steps, fence or other structure or part thereof so as to encroach
upon any public street or sidewalk in the Town of Seneca Falls.
§ 300-98. Certain vehicles prohibited.
No person shall drive, draw or in any manner propel by power or otherwise
any traction engine, motor or other similar engine having wheels with
A. All snow, ice, dirt or other obstruction upon any public sidewalk in the
Town of Seneca Falls shall be removed by the owner or occupant of the
adjoining land immediately after the same is deposited thereon, except
as otherwise provided herein. Upon the failure of the owner or
occupant to remove the same, it shall be the duty of the Highway
Superintendent to remove the same, and the expense thereof shall be a
lien upon the adjoining premises and charged and assessed against the
same; and if the same is not paid within 30 days after it shall be due and
payable, it shall be certified to the Treasurer of the Town, who shall
place the same on the real property tax bill for that year with interest
and penalties allowed by law and be collected as other Town taxes are
collected.
B. It shall be the duty of every owner, tenant, occupant, or other person in
charge of any premises fronting on any public street or alley to remove
all snow and ice from sidewalks before 9:00 a.m. following the time of
the deposit.
C. Immediate removal impractical. When weather conditions make it
impractical to remove such snow and ice, the owner, tenant, occupant,
or other person having charge of any premises as aforesaid shall, within
the aforesaid specified time, cause the sidewalk abutting on such
premises to be covered with salt, sand, or some suitable material and
shall, as soon thereafter as the weather permits, thoroughly clean the
sidewalks.
§ 300-95 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-98
1:470
projecting spikes, crossbars, lugs, bolts or plate, in any manner whatever
upon or over any paved street in the Town of Seneca Falls.
§ 300-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-98
1:471

ARTICLE IX
Vector Control
§ 300-99. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Uniform Vector Control Ordinance."
§ 300-100. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and general
welfare by:
§ 300-101. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of vectors by eliminating
harborage areas, by removing food sources or making them inaccessible,
by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or any other legal vector
elimination method which is not injurious to human health or the safety of
domestic animals.
GARBAGE — Wastes from the preparation, cooking and consumption of
foods; market refuse; waste from handling, storage and sale of produce;
papers, excluding newspapers; cartons; wooden boxes and barrels; empty
glass bottles; small tin cans; rags and miscellaneous combustible household
trash.
INFESTATION — The presence of vectors within or contiguous to a
structure or premises.
INSPECTION OFFICER — The Zoning Officer and/or any other persons
authorized, in writing, by the governing body of the Town of Seneca Falls
to conduct inspections and administrative procedures to enforce the
provisions of this article.
OCCUPANT — Any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or actually
having possession of a dwelling unit or a rooming unit, except that in
dwelling units a temporary guest will not be considered an occupant.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
A. Preventing or controlling the spread of vector-borne disease.
B. Averting the blighting effects which the presence of vector infestation
places on an affected neighborhood, including undermining the
desirability of housing, causing a decline in property value and
contributing to the image of an environmentally unfit area.
C. Facilitating the services of Town code enforcement by making more
uniform municipal regulations concerning vector control.
Shall have legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
A.
§ 300-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-101
1:473
PREMISES — All areas of a property, including all interior, exterior, grounds
and yard spaces.
RUBBISH — Tree branches, leaves, grass and hedge clippings and similar
garden refuse; wood; furniture; bedding; metals; crockery; small stones;
dirt and other mineral refuse.
URBANIZED AREA — Any area which is located within 1,000 feet of either:
VECTOR — An organism which, either directly or indirectly, via
microorganisms which it carries, can transmit disease to people. For the
purposes of this article, the term "vector" shall ordinarily but not exclusively
refer to rodent, insect or vermin species.
VECTOR HARBORAGE or VECTOR SOURCE — Any area where vectors can
live, nest, breed or seek any form of shelter.
VECTORPROOF — A form of construction which prevents the ingress or
egress of vectors to and from a given space or structure or which prevents
vectors from gaining access to food, water or harborage.
§ 300-102. Inspection procedures.
Shall have charge, care or control of any premises, dwelling or dwelling
unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator,
trustee, assignee of rents or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any
such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to
comply with the provisions of this article to the same extent as if he or
she were the owner.
B.
Any structure which is designed for human occupancy for any purpose,
be it residential, business or leisure time, at any time of the day or
night; or
A.
B. A public or privately owned outdoor recreation site.
A. Inspection procedures shall be conducted by the Zoning Officer.
B. The Zoning Officer, or a contractor authorized by the Town Board, shall
be empowered to inspect any structure or premises in the Town of
Seneca Falls at any reasonable time.
C. The Zoning Officer, or a contractor authorized by the Town Board, shall
continue to inspect the premises periodically, as he or she deems
necessary, until he or she has certified that the violation has been
corrected.
D. The Zoning Officer, or a contractor authorized by the Town Board, shall
reinspect any premises which have previously been cited for violating
the terms of this article within 180 days of the date on which the
violation has been certified as having been corrected.
E. Any owner or occupant within the Town of Seneca Falls may issue a
complaint requesting action by the Zoning Officer. The complaint must
be signed and in writing. The identity of the complainant shall be kept
§ 300-101 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-102
1:474
§ 300-103. Notice of violation.
§ 300-104. Regulations and requirements.
confidential unless otherwise requested by the complainant or a court
of competent jurisdiction.
A. When the Zoning Officer has deemed any premises in violation of this
article, he or she shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner
and/or occupant, depending on the nature of the violation, and shall
require the owner and/or occupant to correct the cited violation.
B. The written notice of violation shall contain, at a minimum, the
following information:
(1) Indicate the address and/or location of the premises.
(2) Describe all violations, including the dates on which they were
observed, and indicating where on the premises the violations exist
or were practiced.
(3) Issue an order to correct and indicate the penalties for
noncompliance.
(4) Specify a period of time by which the violation must be corrected.
(5) Carry the signature or a facsimile of the signature of the Zoning
Officer.
(6) Indicate the name, office mailing address and office telephone
number of the Zoning Officer.
C. The notice of violation shall be served upon the owner of record or the
occupant of the structure by any one of the following methods:
(1) Delivering the notice directly to the hands of the owner or occupant
or responsible person in his or her household who will sign for him
or her; or
(2) Mailing the notice, or a copy thereof, by return-receipt mail to the
last known address of the owner or occupant; or
(3) If the letter is returned showing that it cannot be delivered, posting
a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on or about the cited
premises.
D. The Zoning Officer shall certify to the correction of the violation cited in
the notice. Such certification, at a minimum, shall consist of the Zoning
Officer's signature and the date on which the certification is made.
A. General requirements for all property owners.
(1) The interior and exterior of all premises shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition which shall prevent vector harborage.
§ 300-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-104
1:475
(2) Upon receipt of a notice of violation, proper techniques of
vectorproofing and/or extermination must be taken by the owner to
correct the identified violation. If continued reapplication is
necessary to correct the problem, the owner shall continue the
extermination techniques as determined by the Zoning Officer.
B. General requirements for occupants and lessees.
(1) Every occupant of a dwelling unit or a rooming unit and every
lessee of space of a commercial, office or industrial premises shall
be responsible to maintain said unit or space in a clean and sanitary
condition which shall prevent vector harborage.
(2) Every occupant and lessee shall dispose of all garbage and rubbish
in a safe, clean and sanitary manner. Garbage must be temporarily
stored prior to its collection for ultimate disposal in a tightly sealed,
metal or heavy plastic container designed specifically for this
purpose, or multiple polyethylene trash bags, sealed with a tie so
the garbage smell does not become objectionable.
(3) On multiple-occupancy premises, an occupant or lessee, rather
than the property owner, shall be held responsible for the
extermination of vectors when the unit or space occupied by the
occupant or lessee is the only one in which infestation is detected.
However, where infestation is found to be a direct result of owner
neglect, the owner shall be held responsible for extermination.
(4) Upon receipt of a notice of violation, proper steps must be taken by
the occupant or lessee to correct the identified violation. If
continued reapplication is necessary to correct the problem, the
occupant or lessee shall continue the extermination techniques as
determined by the Zoning Officer.
C. Yard and grounds requirements.
(1) The exterior spaces of all premises shall be kept free of all
accumulated garbage, rubbish and junk.
(2) Firewood shall be stacked neatly and maintained.
(3) Any exterior spaces located in an urbanized area shall be kept free
of high grass or weed growth exceeding five inches in height so as
not to serve as a vector harborage.
(4) No material, including firewood or building lumber, which may
serve as a vector harborage shall be stored or stacked directly
against the exterior wall of any structure.
§ 300-104 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-104
1:476
ARTICLE X
Administration and Enforcement
§ 300-105. Zoning permits.
A. General sequence of steps. All persons desiring to undertake any new
construction, structural alteration, repair or changes in the use of a
building or lot shall apply to the Zoning Officer for a zoning permit by
filling out the appropriate application form and by submitting the
required fee. The Zoning Officer will either issue the zoning permit or, if
it is felt that an interpretation, variance or special use permit is
required, refuse to issue it until duly authorized in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. After the zoning permit has been received,
the applicant may proceed to undertake the action permitted by such
zoning permit. If the Zoning Officer finds that the action of the
applicant has been taken in accordance with the zoning permit, a
certificate of zoning compliance will be issued, allowing the premises to
be occupied.
B. Zoning permit types. Under the terms of this chapter, the following
classes of zoning permits may be issued:
(1) Permitted use. A zoning permit for a permitted use may be issued
by the Zoning Officer on the authority of the Zoning Board of
Appeals. When special conditions are indicated in Article IV, such
conditions must be met before the Zoning Officer issues a permit.
(2) Special uses. A zoning permit for a special use may be issued by the
Zoning Officer after review by the Planning Board and upon the
order of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) Variance request. A zoning permit may be issued by the Zoning
Officer upon the order of the Zoning Board of Appeals and after a
public hearing held by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the purpose
of deciding upon a request for a variance.
C. General. No building or structure shall be erected, added to or
structurally altered until a zoning permit therefor has been issued by
the Zoning Officer. No such permit shall be issued for any building or
for any use of land where said construction, addition, alteration or use
thereof would be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
Alterations or additions include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) New construction, including houses, garages, commercial
structures, additions thereto and accessory structures;
(2) Adding apartments to existing structures;
(3) Windows, roofing and siding;
(4) Demolition of structures;
(5) Fences;
§ 300-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-105
1:477
(6) Signs;
(7) Swimming pools;
(8) Satellite dishes;
(9) Decks and patios;
(10) Change of use permits; and
(11) Repairs.
D. Information necessary for application. Every application for a zoning
permit shall state, in writing, the intended use of the building or land
and shall be accompanied by two copies of a plot plan drawn to a scale
and showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact
size and location on the lot of the building and accessory buildings to be
erected and such other information as may be necessary to provide for
the enforcement of this chapter. Unless such plan is drawn in suitable
form, the Zoning Officer may refuse to accept the application. One copy
of such plot plan, together with the zoning permit, shall be returned to
the applicant when approved by the Zoning Officer and upon payment
of a fee as indicated in this article. The second plot plan, with a copy of
the application for a zoning permit, shall become a public record after a
permit is issued or denied. All applications for industrial or commercial
uses for projects, the costs of improvements of which exceed $50,000,
shall require security in a form acceptable to the Town Attorney in an
amount established by the Town Board after consultation with the Town
Engineer.
E. Water supply and sewage disposal. All water supply and sewage
installations shall conform to Seneca County Department of Health
regulations. No plot plan shall be approved by the Zoning Officer in any
zone unless such conformity is certified on the plan or in writing.
Drainage affecting adjacent properties, including possible runoffs onto
said properties, shall be considered by the Zoning Officer before a
zoning permit is issued.
F. Issuance of permits.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to issue a zoning permit,
provided that he or she is satisfied that the structure, building, sign
and parking area of the premises and the proposed use thereof
conform to all requirements of this chapter and that all other
reviews and actions, if any, called for in this chapter have been
complied with and all necessary approvals and authorizations have
been secured therefor.
(2) All zoning permits shall be kept and displayed sconspicuously on
the premises affected whenever construction work is being
performed thereon. No owner, contractor, worker or other person
shall perform any building operations of any kind unless a zoning
§ 300-105 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-105
1:478
§ 300-106. Certificate of zoning compliance.
permit covering such operation has been displayed as required by
this chapter, nor shall he or she perform building operations of any
kind after notification of the revocation of said zoning permit by the
Zoning Officer or other authorized public official.
G. Denial of permits. When the Zoning Officer is not satisfied that the
applicant's proposed development meets the requirements of this
chapter, he or she will refuse to issue the zoning permit. Such refusal
will enable the applicant to submit an appeal to the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
H. Revocation of permits. If it shall appear, at any time, that the
application or accompanying plan is in any material respect false or
misleading, or that work being done on the premises differs materially
from that called for in the application filed under existing laws or
ordinances, the Zoning Officer shall immediately issue a stop-work
order and may refer the matter to the Zoning Board of Appeals to
consider revocation of the zoning permit at a public hearing to be
conducted upon due notice to the permit holder. After a permit has been
revoked, the Zoning Officer, before issuing a new permit, shall require
the applicant to file a performance bond or other security in a form
acceptable to the Town Attorney and in an amount required by the Town
Board after consultation with the Town Engineer, sufficient to pay the
cost of removal of any nonconforming structure.
I. Expiration of permits.
(1) A zoning permit shall expire after one year if the applicant fails to
start or complete his or her application as filed with the Zoning
Officer.
(2) A subdivision approval shall expire after one year from the date of
such approval if no construction takes place within the year.
(3) If a permit or approval expires, the applicant must reapply and pay
the applicable fees.
(4) Any variance granted shall expire if not implemented within one
year unless the Zoning Board of Appeals provides for a longer
period.
(5) Any special use permit granted shall expire if not implemented
within one year unless the Zoning Board of Appeals provides a
longer period.
A. General. No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter
erected, altered or extended shall be used or changed in use until a
certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning
Officer, stating that the buildings or proposed use thereof complies with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 300-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-106
1:479
§ 300-107. Planning Board review.
§ 300-108. Fees relating to zoning and building matters.
Fees related to zoning and building matters shall be established from time
to time by resolution of the Town Board and set forth on a schedule available
from the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 300-109. Violations; penalties for offenses.
B. Application for certificate of zoning compliance. All certificates of
zoning compliance shall be applied for coincident with the application
for a zoning permit. Said certificate shall be issued within 10 days after
the erection or alteration shall have been approved as complying with
the provisions of this chapter.
C. Record. The Zoning Officer shall maintain a record of all certificates,
and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a
proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.
A. Referral. The Town Planning Board shall review and report on all
matters referred to it by the Town Clerk. See § 300-116.
B. Approval of site plans and certain uses. The Planning Board shall review
and approve, approve with modifications or disapprove site plans,
including certain land uses, when such site plan review is specified in
this chapter. When Planning Board approval is required, no zoning
permit shall be issued until such approval, with or without modification,
has been granted.
C. Appeal. A Planning Board determination made pursuant to the
provisions of Subsection B of this section may be appealed to the Town
Board by any aggrieved party. The Town Board may reverse or modify
such Planning Board determination by vote of a majority plus one.
A. A violation of this chapter occurs when, in any case, any building or
structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired,
converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used,
occupied and/or operated in violation of this chapter or of any
ordinance or regulation made under authority conferred hereby.
B. A violation of this chapter shall be an offense, punishable by a fine not
to exceed $350 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or
both, for a conviction for a first offense; a fine of not less than $350 nor
more than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or
both, for a conviction for a second offense within a period of five years
from the date of the commission of the first offense; a fine of not less
than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 15 days, or both, for a conviction for a third or subsequent
offense within a period of five years from the date of the commission of
the first offense.
§ 300-106 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-109
1:480
§ 300-110. Complaints of violations.
§ 300-111. Civil proceedings for abatement of violations.
In addition to the procedures and powers contained in §§ 300-109 and
300-110 of this chapter, upon the happening of any violation of this chapter,
the Town Board or, with its approval, the Zoning Officer or other proper
official, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action
or proceedings, in law or equity, to:
C. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation.
D. For the purpose of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial
officers generally, violations of this chapter shall be deemed
misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations.
A. Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, any person may file a
complaint in regard thereto. All such complaints must be in writing and
shall be filed with the Zoning Officer, who shall properly record such
complaint and investigate same.
B. Authority of Zoning Officer.
(1) Upon investigation, if the Zoning Officer has probable cause and/or
reasonable suspicion to believe that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, he or she shall have the right and duty to commence a
proceeding in the local justice court.
(2) The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to commence a proceeding
in the local justice court by either of the following methods:
(a) When such an offense was committed in the Zoning Officer's
presence, the Zoning Officer may issue and serve an
appearance ticket under the Criminal Procedure Law of the
State of New York.
(b) In all other cases, by the filing of an accusatory instrument
with the court under the Criminal Procedure Law of the State
of New York. Upon the filing of an accusatory instrument with
the justice court, the court shall cause a summons to be issued.
C. Violations shall be prosecuted by the Zoning Officer, with the assistance
of the Town Attorney when requested by the Zoning Officer, pursuant to
the Criminal Procedure Law of the State of New York pertaining to
prosecution of offenses in the justice courts.
A. Prevent or remove such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, operation,
occupation or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation;
B. Prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land; or
§ 300-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-111
1:481
C. Prevent any illegal act, conduct business or use in or about such
premises.
§ 300-111 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-111
1:482
ARTICLE XI
Appeals
§ 300-112. Zoning Board of Appeals established.
A. Pursuant to the applicable provisions of Article 16 of the Town Law
(Chapter 62 of the Consolidated Laws of the State of New York), a
Zoning Board of Appeals of five members is hereby established in the
Town of Seneca Falls, which shall perform all the duties and have all the
powers prescribed by the laws of the State of New York as set forth in
said Town Law.
B. Alternate members.
(1) In order to permit the Zoning Board of Appeals to transact business
in the event that absence or conflicts of interest preclude a full
membership of five members from considering a particular matter,
it is deemed advantageous by the Town Board to enact a local law
to provide for the appointment of alternate members to the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
(2) The Town Board may, in any year it deems necessary, appoint
temporary alternate members to the Zoning Board of Appeals to
serve as provided in this section. The number of alternate members
so appointed pursuant to this section in any year shall not exceed
three. Each alternate member shall be appointed for a one-year
term of office. The Chair of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
assign the alternate members as necessary when absence of
regular members of the Board or a conflict of interest of regular
members of the Board would otherwise prevent a quorum of the
Board from considering any pending matter. No more than two
alternate members shall sit in determination on any pending
matter. The alternate members shall be designated on a rotating
basis in the manner provided in the general governing rules of the
Zoning Board of Appeals so that each alternate member shall be
afforded an equal opportunity to serve. Once designated to serve
on a particular matter before the Board, the alternate member shall
have the same powers and duties as a regular member of the Board
until that matter is concluded. Any determination by the Board
consisting of alternate members shall have the same weight and be
entitled to the same authority as the act or deed of the regular
Zoning Board of Appeals, and all laws, statutes and regulations
shall apply and be applied with equal force and effect.
C. Term limits. A member appointed to the Zoning Board of Appeals may
serve no more than two consecutive five-year terms. Two years after his
or her prior service, a former Zoning Board of Appeals member may
again be considered for appointment to the Board.
D. Attendance at meetings. Any Zoning Board of Appeals member missing
three consecutive meetings shall automatically forfeit his or her
§ 300-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-112
1:483
§ 300-113. Board of Appeals powers and duties.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and other
matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 300-114. Variances.
appointment. Further, any member missing four meetings in a calendar
year, except for major illness, shall forfeit his or her appointment.
A. Use variances.
(1) No use variance shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals
without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning
regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship. In
order to prove such unnecessary hardship, the applicant shall
demonstrate to the Zoning Board of Appeals that, for each and
every permitted use under the zoning regulations for the particular
district in which the property is located:
(a) The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided the
lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by competent
financial evidence;
(b) The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is
unique and does not apply to a substantial portion of the
district or neighborhood;
(c) The requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
(d) The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals, in granting use variances, shall grant
the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to
address the unnecessary hardship proven by the applicant, and at
the same time preserve and protect the character of the
neighborhood, and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
B. Area variances.
(1) In making a determination whether to grant a request for an area
variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take into consideration
the benefit to the applicant if the variance is granted, as weighed
against the detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the
neighborhood or community by such grant. In making such
determination, the Board shall also consider:
(a) Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area variance;
§ 300-112 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-114
1:484
§ 300-115. Interpretation of zoning provisions.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall, upon appeal from a decision by an
administrative official and pursuant to the applicable provisions of Article
16 of the Town Law (Chapter 62 of the Consolidated Laws of the State of
New York), decide any question involving the interpretation of any provision
of this chapter, including determination of the exact location of any district
boundary, if there is uncertainty with respect thereto.
§ 300-116. Referral to Planning Board.
All appeals related to the use of land (rather than lot size, frontage, yards,
etc.) and all other matters required by this chapter shall be referred by the
Town Clerk to the Seneca Falls Planning Board for review. No decision shall
be made by the Zoning Board of Appeals until such Planning Board review
has been completed and a report has been issued. If the Planning Board
fails to act within 30 days, the Zoning Board of Appeals may assume that a
favorable report has been issued. See also § 300-117.
§ 300-117. Referral to County Planning Board.
(b) Whether the benefits sought by the applicant can be achieved
by some method, feasible for the applicant to pursue, other
than an area variance;
(c) Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
(d) Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or
impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the
neighborhood or district; and
(e) Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Zoning
Board of Appeals, but shall not necessarily preclude the
granting of the area variance.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals, in granting area variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate and at the same time preserve and protect the character
of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
C. Imposition of conditions. In the granting of both use variances and area
variances, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to
impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly
related to and incidental to the proposed use of the property. Such
conditions shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter
and shall be imposed for the purpose of minimizing any adverse impact
such variance may have on the neighborhood or community.
A. Definitions. As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 300-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-117
1:485
FULL STATEMENT OF SUCH PROPOSED ACTION — All materials
required by and submitted to the referring body as an application on a
proposed action, including a proposed environmental assessment form
and all other materials required by such referring body in order to make
its determination of significance pursuant to the State Environmental
Quality Review Act under Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation
Law and its implementing regulations. When the proposed action
referred is the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance or local
law, "full statement of such proposed action" shall also include the
complete text of the proposed ordinance or local law as well as all
existing provisions to be affected thereby, if any, if not already in
the possession of the County Planning Board. Notwithstanding the
foregoing provisions of this definition, any referring body may agree
with the County Planning Board as to what shall constitute a "full
statement" for any or all of those proposed actions upon which said
referring body is authorized to act.
PROPOSED — As used in Subsection C(2)(b) and (c) of this section,
shall be deemed to include only those recreation areas, parkways,
thruways, expressways, roads or highways which are shown on a
county comprehensive plan adopted pursuant to § 239-d of the New
York State General Municipal Law or adopted on an official map
pursuant to § 239-e of the New York State General Municipal Law.
RECEIPT — Delivery of a full statement of such proposed action, as
defined in this section, in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the County Planning Board with respect to person, place and period of
time for submission. In no event shall such rule or regulation define
delivery so as to require in-hand delivery or delivery more than 12
calendar days prior to the County Planning Agency's or Regional
Planning Council's meeting date. In the absence of any such rules or
regulations, "receipt" shall mean delivery in hand or by mail to the
Clerk of the County Planning Board. Where delivery is made in hand,
the date of receipt shall be the date of delivery. Where delivery is
made by mail, the date as postmarked shall be the date of delivery. The
provisions of this section shall not preclude the rules and regulations
of the County Planning Board from providing that the delivery may be
a period greater than 12 days, provided the referring body and the
County Planning Board agree in writing to such longer period.
REFERRING BODY — The Town body responsible for final action on
proposed actions subject to this section.
B. Referral of proposed planning and zoning actions. The Town shall,
before taking final action on proposed actions included in Subsection C
of this section, refer the same to the County Planning Board.
C. Proposed actions subject to referral.
(1) The following proposed actions shall be subject to the referral
requirements of this section, if they apply to real property set forth
in Subsection C(2) of this section:
§ 300-117 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-117
1:486
(a) Adoption or amendment of a comprehensive plan pursuant to
§ 272-a of the Town Law.
(b) Adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance or local law.
(c) Issuance of special use permits.
(d) Approval of site plans.
(e) Granting of use or area variances.
(f) Other authorizations which a referring body may issue under
the provisions of any zoning ordinance or local law.
(2) The proposed actions set forth in Subsection C(1) of this section
shall be subject to the referral requirements of this section if they
apply to real property within 500 feet of the following:
(a) The boundary of any city, village or town;
(b) The boundary of any existing or proposed county or state park
or any other recreation area;
(c) The right-of-way of any existing or proposed county or state
parkway, thruway, expressway, road or highway;
(d) The existing or proposed right-of-way of any stream or
drainage channel owned by the county or for which the county
has established channel lines;
(e) The existing or proposed boundary of any county- or stateowned
land on which a public building or institution is
situated; or
(f) The boundary of a farm operation located in an agricultural
district, as defined by Article 25-AA of the New York State
Agriculture and Markets Law, except this subsection shall not
apply to the granting of area variances.
D. County Planning Board review of proposed actions; recommendation
and report.
(1) The County Planning Board shall review any proposed action
referred for intercommunity or county-wide considerations,
including but not limited to those considerations identified in
§ 239-l of the New York State General Municipal Law. The County
Planning Board shall recommend approval, modification, or
disapproval of the proposed action, or report that the proposed
action has no significant county-wide or intercommunity impact.
(2) The County Planning Board, or an authorized agent of said agency
or council, shall have 30 days after receipt of a full statement of
such proposed action, or such longer period as may have been
agreed upon by the County Planning Board and the referring body,
§ 300-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-117
1:487
§ 300-118. Appeals procedure.
to report its recommendations to the referring body, accompanied
by a statement of the reasons for such recommendations. If the
County Planning Board fails to report within such period, the
referring body may take final action on the proposed action without
such report. However, any County Planning Board report received
after 30 days or such longer period as may have been agreed upon,
but two or more days prior to final action by the referring body,
shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection E of this section.
E. Extraordinary vote upon recommendation of modification or
disapproval. If the County Planning Board recommends modification or
disapproval of a proposed action, the referring body shall not act
contrary to such recommendation except by a vote of a majority plus
one of all the members thereof.
F. Report of final action. Within 30 days after final action, the referring
body shall file a report of the final action it has taken with the County
Planning Board. A referring body which acts contrary to a
recommendation of modification or disapproval of a proposed action
shall set forth the reasons for the contrary action in such report.
A. An appeal from any ruling or decision of the Zoning Officer, acting as
the person charged with administration and enforcement of this
chapter, may be taken by any aggrieved person or by any officer, board
or bureau of the Town of Seneca Falls affected thereby.
B. Procedure for appeals.
(1) Submission to Town Clerk. Within 30 days after a decision by the
Zoning Officer has been made and mailed to the applicant, appeals
made pursuant to this section shall be submitted, in writing, to the
Town Clerk for immediate transmittal as follows:
(a) To the Zoning Board of Appeals for matters of ordinance
interpretation and variance requests.
(b) To the Zoning Board of Appeals for a special use permit or to
appeal a Planning Board decision on site review.
(2) Content of appeal. Appeals shall set forth details of the
interpretation claimed, the variance needed, the special use permit
sought or the Planning Board decision being appealed. The
following information shall also be provided:
(a) The name and address of the appellant.
(b) The name and address of the owner of the lot to be affected by
such proposed change or appeal.
(c) A brief description and the location of the lot to be affected by
such proposed change or appeal.
§ 300-117 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-118
1:488
(d) A statement of the present zoning classification of the lot in
question, the improvements thereof and the present use
thereof.
(e) An accurate description of the present improvements and the
additions or changes intended to be made under this
application, indicating the size of such proposed
improvements, material and general construction thereof. In
addition, there shall be attached a sketch plan of the real
property to be affected, indicating the location and size of the
lot and the size of any improvements thereon or proposed to be
erected thereon.
(f) A draft short-form environmental assessment form (EAF)
pursuant to the New York State Environmental Quality Review
Act (SEQRA). If, upon a review of the short-form EAF, the Town
(or its attorney) determines that a full EAF is warranted, the
applicant shall submit same.
(3) Zoning Officer responsibilities. When an appeal has been submitted
to the Town Clerk, the Clerk will notify the Zoning Officer, who shall
forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken or, in lieu thereof, certified copies of said papers. The Zoning
Officer may also recommend a modification or reversal of his or her
action in cases where he or she believes substantial justice requires
the same but where he or she has not sufficient authority to grant
the relief sought.
C. Zoning Board of Appeals action. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold
a public hearing on all matters transmitted to it within 30 days after
receipt of such matter from the Town Clerk and shall decide each
appeal within 62 days after final hearing. Any party may appear in
person or be represented by an agent or attorney at such hearing. The
Zoning Board of Appeals' decision shall be filed in the office of the Town
Clerk within five business days and shall be a public record. The Zoning
Board of Appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from or may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination in accordance with the
provisions hereof. See also § 300-119C.
D. Expiration of approved appeal. Unless otherwise specified by the
Zoning Board of Appeals, approval of any appeal for a variance shall
expire if the applicant fails to obtain any necessary zoning permit
within six months from the date of authorization thereof.
E. Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance
of the action from which appeal is made, unless the Zoning Officer
certifies, following the filing of the notice of appeal, that, in his or her
opinion, facts stated in the certificate would cause imminent peril to life
§ 300-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-118
1:489
§ 300-119. Public hearings.
§ 300-120. Decisions.
Every decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be by resolution and
shall contain a full record of the findings of the Zoning Board of Appeals in
the particular case.
and property. In this case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than
by a restraining order granted by the State Supreme Court, with notice
to the Zoning Officer and for due cause.
F. Court review. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by
any decision of the Board of Appeals or any officer or board of the Town
may apply to the Supreme Court for relief by a proceeding under Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Such action must be instituted
within 30 days after the filing of a decision in the office of the Town
Clerk.
A. The Town Clerk shall give public notice of the hearing of any appeal or
other matter referred to the Zoning Board of Appeals by publication in
the official newspaper of a notice of such hearing at least five days prior
to the date thereof and shall, at least five days before such hearing, mail
notice thereof to the applicant and to the owners of all property
adjacent to and directly opposite the property for which the variance is
sought (as indicated on the most recent final assessment roll). Names
and addresses for such notices shall be furnished by the Assessor.
B. Adjournment of hearing. The hearing on any application or appeal may
be adjourned for a reasonable period for the purpose of causing such
further notice as deemed proper to be served upon such other property
owners as may be interested in said application or appeal.
C. Rehearing.
(1) Upon motion initiated by any member of the Zoning Board of
Appeals and adopted by a majority vote of all members, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall review at a rehearing any new information
not previously reviewed which might affect the original order,
decision or determination.
(2) Notice of such hearing shall be given in the same manner as the
original hearing.
(3) By a majority vote of all members, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
reverse or modify its original order, decision or determination if
such would not adversely affect the rights previously vested in
persons acting in good faith with respect to reliance on an original
order, decision or determination.
§ 300-118 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-120
1:490
ARTICLE XII
Amendments
§ 300-121. Powers of Town Board.
The Town Board may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition
or on recommendation of the Planning Board, amend, supplement or repeal
the regulations and provisions of this chapter after public notice and
hearings as provided by Article 16, § 265, of the Town Law (Chapter 62 of
the Consolidated Laws of New York State).
§ 300-122. Review by Planning Board.
Every such proposed amendment or change, whether initiated by the Town
Board or by petition, shall be referred to the Planning Board for report
thereon before the public hearing hereinafter provided for. If the Planning
Board shall fail to submit such report within 30 days, it shall be deemed that
the Planning Board has approved the proposed amendment or change.
A. The Town Board, by resolution adopted at a stated meeting, shall fix the
time and place of a public hearing on the proposed amendments and
shall cause notice to be given as follows:
(1) Public notice. By publishing a notice at least 10 days in advance of
such hearing in the official Town newspaper. Such notice shall state
the general nature of the proposed amendment in such reasonable
detail as will give adequate notice of its contents and shall name
the place or places where copies of the proposed amendment may
be examined.
(2) Personal notice.
(a) A copy of such notice shall be mailed to every association or
resident of the Town which or who has registered its name for
this purpose with the Town Clerk.
(b) A written notice of any proposed change or amendment
affecting property within 500 feet of the boundary of any state
park shall be given to the regional State Park Commission
having jurisdiction over such state facility at least 10 days prior
to the date of such public hearing.
(c) A written notice of any proposed change or amendment
affecting property within 500 feet of the boundary of any
village, town or county shall be given to the Clerk of such
municipality and to the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors at
least 10 days prior to the date of such hearing.
B. Opportunity to be heard. At the public hearing, full opportunities to be
heard shall be given to any citizen and all parties in interest.
§ 300-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-122
1:491
§ 300-123. Referral to County Planning Board.
Before taking final action on certain proposed amendments to this chapter,
as set forth in § 239-m of the General Municipal Law, the Town Board
shall refer such amendments to the Seneca County Planning Board for
report thereon. Said referral process shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 300-117.
§ 300-124. Environmental impact.
Before adopting any proposed amendment to this chapter, the Town Board
shall assess the environmental impact of such amendment in accordance
with the State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA) and may
determine that an environmental impact statement on such amendment
shall be prepared.
§ 300-125. Adoption procedure.
All changes, amendments or supplements to this chapter and to the Zoning
Map, which forms a part hereof, shall be adopted in accordance with the
Municipal Home Rule Law (Chapter 36-a of the Consolidated Laws of the
State of New York).
C. Adoption after protest. The favorable vote of at least four members of
the Town Board shall be required before the passage of an amendment
which is protested by the owners of 20% or more of:
(1) The area of the land included in such proposed change.
(2) The land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom or of
that directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street
frontage of such opposite land.
§ 300-122 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-125
1:492
ARTICLE XIII
Site Plan Review for Commercial, Industrial, Institutional and
Multiple Dwelling Residential Uses
§ 300-126. Purpose and intent.
The Town of Seneca Falls, New York incorporates the site plan review
process adopted on August 2, 2005, as a tool for the Planning Board
to review commercial, industrial, institutional and multiple dwelling
residential uses in all zoning districts. For the purposes of this article,
"multiple dwelling residential" shall mean a building containing five or
more dwelling units. The intent of this site plan review article is to allow
for the Town Planning Board to have power of discretion in reviewing
commercial, industrial, institutional and multiple dwelling residential site
plans pertaining to project design and landscaping requirements. As an
integral component of site plan review, the Town Board has determined that
poor quality of design, poor location of buildings and structures (including
signs and accessory buildings) adversely affects the desirability of the
immediate neighborhood and impairs the benefits, stability and value of
improved and unimproved property in such areas. Therefore, it is the intent
of this article to grant to the Planning Board the review discretion necessary
to avoid such conditions and to ensure that the location and design of
buildings, structures and open spaces in the Town aid in creating a balanced
and harmonious composition of the whole as well as the relationship of its
parts. As such, all applications requiring site plan review will be subject
to a general architectural review and will be evaluated with respect to the
context of, and compatibility with, their surrounding environs.
§ 300-127. Planning Board architectural review.
A. The Town of Seneca Falls Planning Board, appointed by the Town
Board, is duly authorized to perform general architectural review as an
integral component of the Town's site plan review procedure under the
provisions of this article.
B. The Planning Board is charged with the duty of maintaining the
desirable character of the Town and of disapproving the construction,
reconstruction and alteration of buildings subject to site plan review
that are designed without consideration of the harmonious relation of
the new or altered building to such buildings as already exist and the
environs in which they are set.
C. The Planning Board is charged with the duty of exercising sound
judgment and of rejecting plans which, it its opinion, based upon study
and the advice of the Town Engineer, Town Attorney or an architectural/
historic preservation consultant, are not of harmonious character
because of proposed style, materials, mass, line, detail or placement
upon the property or in relation to the spaces between buildings or the
natural character of the landscape or because the plans do not provide
for the location and design of structures and open spaces so as to create
§ 300-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-127
1:493
§ 300-128. Review process.
a balanced and harmonious composition as a whole and in relation to
its several parts and features to each other.
A. The site plan review process has three primary steps as follows:
(1) Concept review.
(2) Preliminary site plan review.
(3) Final site plan review and approval.
B. Concept review. A meeting shall be held between the Planning Board
and applicant to review the basic site and architectural design concept
and generally determine the information to be required on the
preliminary site plan. The applicant should provide the data discussed
below in addition to a statement or rough sketch describing the
proposal. The Planning Board shall issue written comments as the
result of this meeting. The applicant shall provide the following
information:
(1) An area map showing the parcel under consideration for site plan
review, and all properties, subdivisions, streets and easements
within 500 feet of the boundaries thereof.
(2) A map of site topography at no more than five-foot contour
intervals. If general site grades exceed 5% or portions of the site
have bedrock outcrop or are susceptible to erosion, flooding or
ponding, a soils overlay and a topographic map showing contour
intervals of not more than two feet of elevation should also be
provided.
(3) The owner, the architect, or other agent of the owner shall submit
preliminary plans, elevations, sketches and/or proposals to the
Planning Board for consultation concerning preferred architectural
aesthetics prior to filing an application for a zoning permit or an
application for site plan review.
C. Procedure for preliminary site plan review and action.
(1) General provisions.
(a) Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for any site plan review
uses, the Town Board shall refer the application and all
application materials as specified herein to the Planning Board
for its review and approval in accordance with the provisions
set forth in this article. In cases where land use and/or area
density is at issue, or where specific cases of hardship or
improper classification are evident, the Planning Board shall
notify the Town Board and shall refer the application to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for an opinion and recommendation
prior to granting preliminary site plan approval. If an
§ 300-127 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-128
1:494
application for a variance of land use or area is made to the
Zoning Board of Appeals prior to the application for site plan
review, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify the Town
Board and the Planning Board of the action and opinion prior
to the granting of preliminary site plan approval.
(b) Within 62 days of the receipt of a preliminary site plan and all
information necessary to constitute a fully complete
application, the Planning Board shall inform the applicant, in
writing, of its decision.
(c) If the Planning Board determines that the site plan or building
style does not meet the standards of the Town, the applicant
may request an extension of the sixty-two-day period.
(2) Application for preliminary site plan approval.
(a) An administrative fee as set from time to time by resolution of
the Town Board shall accompany an application for preliminary
site plan review and approval. No further fee is required at the
final site plan stage.
(b) The applicant shall pay anticipated costs that the Planning
Board expects to incur due to consulting services or other
review costs and an amount set from time to time by resolution
of the Town Board shall be placed in an escrow account. Any
unspent funds shall be returned to the applicant within five
days of Planning Board action on the final site plan. If the
Town's costs to review the project exceed the amount placed in
the escrow account, the developer will be asked to pay those
costs to the Town based upon a written explanation for the
additional review requirements.
(c) An application for architectural review and preliminary site
plan approval shall be made in writing to the Zoning Officer
and shall be accompanied by information drawn from the
following checklist, as determined necessary by the Planning
Board at the concept review meeting.
(3) Preliminary site plan submission requirements. The following
information shall be included on a preliminary site plan:
(a) Title of drawing, including name and address of applicant and
person responsible for preparation of such drawing;
(b) North arrow, scale and date;
(c) Boundaries of the property, plotted to scale;
(d) Name and address of all adjoining property owners;
(e) Existing watercourses and drainageways;
§ 300-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-128
1:495
(f) Grading and drainage plan, showing existing and proposed
contours;
(g) Location, proposed use and height of all buildings;
(h) Location, design and construction materials of all parking and
truck loading areas, showing access and egress;
(i) Provision for pedestrian circulation access and handicapped
access;
(j) Location of outdoor storage, and method of screening if any;
(k) Location, design and construction materials of all existing or
proposed site improvements, including drains, culverts,
retaining walls, fences, and signs;
(l) Location, design and general construction materials of all
existing or proposed buildings, structures and accessory
structures, including four elevations of the building(s)
illustrating all front, rear and side views and/or threedimensional
renderings necessary to illustrate the size, shape
and form of all sides of the building(s);
(m) Description of the method of sewage disposal and location,
design and construction materials of such facilities;
(n) Description of the method of securing public water and
location, design and construction materials of such facilities;
(o) Location of fire and other emergency zones, including the
location of fire hydrants and fire lanes;
(p) Location, design and construction materials of all energy
distribution facilities, including electrical, gas and solar
energy;
(q) Location, size and design and construction materials of all
proposed signs;
(r) Location and proposed development of all buffer areas,
including existing vegetative cover;
(s) Location and design of outdoor lighting facilities and light
emissions to 25 feet within adjoining property;
(t) Designation of the amount of building area proposed for retail
sales or similar commercial activity;
(u) General landscaping plan and planting schedule;
(v) Other elements integral to the proposed development as
considered necessary by the Planning Board, including
§ 300-128 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-128
1:496
identification of any state or county permits required for the
project's execution;
(w) Agricultural data statement if located within 500 feet of any
agricultural district;
(x) Archeological survey as required by SHPO, if any; and
(y) Completed environmental assessment form (EAF) in
compliance with the New York State Environmental Quality
Review Act (SEQRA).
(4) Review criteria. Criteria for Planning Board review may include,
but shall not be limited to, the following:
(a) Adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic egress/ingress
and circulation, including intersections, road widths, pavement
surfaces, dividers and traffic controls.
(b) Adequacy, arrangement of pedestrian, ADA-compliant traffic
access, and circulation, walkway structures, control of
intersections with vehicular traffic and overall pedestrian
convenience.
(c) Location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of offstreet
parking and loading.
(d) Location, arrangement, size, design, architectural style and
general site compatibility of buildings, lighting and signs.
(e) Relationship of proposed architectural styles and materials
within the context of the community, surrounding
neighborhood or compatibility with adjacent environs.
(f) Adequacy of stormwater and drainage facilities.
(g) Adequacy of water supply for drinking and fire protection
purposes and sewage disposal facilities.
(h) Adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and other
landscaping constituting a visual and/or noise buffer between
the applicant's and adjoining lands, including the maximum
retention of existing vegetation.
(i) In the case of an apartment complex or other multiple
dwelling, the adequacy of usable open space for play areas and
informal recreation.
(j) Protection of adjacent or neighboring properties against noise,
glare, unsightliness or other objectionable features.
(k) Adequacy of fire lanes, other emergency zones, and the
provision of fire hydrants.
§ 300-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-128
1:497
(l) Special attention to the adequacy of structures, roadways, and
landscaping in areas with susceptibility to ponding, flooding
and/or erosion.
(m) Relationship to active agricultural land and fallow land to
ensure that the conversion of agricultural land to
nonagricultural uses is minimized and to ensure that all
potential conflicts with agricultural operations are minimized.
(5) Consultant review. The Planning Board may consult with the Town
Engineer, Town Building Inspector, Fire Commissioners,
Conservation Council, Commissioner of Public Works, other local
and county officials, and its designated private consultant, in
addition to representatives of federal and state agencies, including
but not limited to the Soil Conservation Service, the State
Department of Transportation and the State Department of
Environmental Conservation.
(6) Public hearing. The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing
on the preliminary site plan. Such public hearing shall be
conducted within 62 days of the receipt of the complete application
for preliminary site plan approval and shall be advertised in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least five days
before the public hearing.
(7) Planning Board action on preliminary site plan.
(a) The proposed development in question may be subject to the
provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review Act
(SEQRA). First, the Planning Board should identify the type of
action the proposed development is according to SEQRA.
Depending on the size, location, and other factors, it may be a
Type I or an unlisted action. To make a decision, the Planning
Board should consult Article 8 of the Environmental
Conservation Law and Part 617 of the New York Codes, Rules
and Regulations. The Planning Board should also review the
environmental assessment form (EAF) submitted as part of the
application and consider compliance with current planning
activities and plans. The action type and related procedure will
dictate the next steps, if any, to be taken to comply with SEQRA
regulations.
(b) If it is determined that an environmental impact statement will
be prepared for the proposal in question, all time frames and
deadlines are delayed until a draft environmental impact
statement is filed. The application is not complete, and
therefore the review clock does not start, until a determination
of "no significance" has been made or until a draft
environmental impact statement has been completed and
submitted to the Planning Board. When the draft
environmental impact statement is completed, the period for
§ 300-128 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-128
1:498
Planning Board review begins (62 days). If another agency
has determined that the proposal in question may have a
significant effect on the environment, the Planning Board shall
not issue a decision until a final environmental impact
statement has been filed.
(c) When compliance with SEQRA is complete, the Planning Board
shall act on the application within 62 days. If no decision is
made within said sixty-two-day period, the preliminary site
plan shall be considered approved. The Planning Board's
action shall be in the form of a written statement to the
applicant stating whether the preliminary site plan is
approved, disapproved or approved with modifications. The
Planning Board's statement may include recommendations of
desirable modifications to be incorporated in the final site plan,
and conformance with said modifications shall be considered a
condition of approval. If the preliminary site plan is
disapproved, the Planning Board's statement will contain the
reasons for such findings. In such a case, the Planning Board
may recommend further study of the site plan and
resubmission to the Planning Board after it has been revised or
redesigned.
D. Procedure for final site plan review and action.
(1) After receiving approval, with or without modifications, from the
Planning Board on a preliminary site plan, the applicant shall
submit a final, detailed site plan to the Planning Board for approval.
If more than six months have elapsed since the time of the Planning
Board's action on the preliminary site plan and if the Planning
Board finds that conditions have changed significantly in the
interim, the Planning Board may require a resubmission of the
preliminary site plan for further review and possible revision prior
to accepting the proposed final site plan for review.
(2) The final site plan shall conform substantially to the approved
preliminary site plan. It should incorporate any modifications that
may have been recommended by the Planning Board in its
preliminary review, including consensus regarding recommended
architectural style. All such compliance shall be clearly indicated
by the applicant on the appropriate submission.
(3) The following additional information shall accompany an
application for final site plan approval:
(a) Record of application for and status of all necessary permits
from state and county officials;
(b) Detailed sizing and final material specification of all required
improvements; and
(c) An estimated project construction schedule.
§ 300-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-128
1:499
§ 300-129. Applicability.
The site plan review process shall apply to all uses, whether designated
"permitted" or otherwise, in those portions of all zoning districts located
within the Town except the following: one-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings, farms. Such uses shall be termed "site plan review uses."
(4) Required referral. Prior to taking action on the final site
development plan, the Planning Board shall refer the plan to the
County Planning Department for advisory review and a report in
accordance with § 239-m of the General Municipal Law, where the
proposed action is within a distance of 500 from the boundary of
any city, village, or town, or from the boundary of any existing or
proposed county or state park or other recreation area, or from the
right-of-way of any existing or proposed county or state parkway,
thruway, expressway, road or highway, or from the existing or
proposed right-of-way of any stream or drainage channel owned by
the county or for which the county has established channel lines, or
from the existing or proposed boundary of any county- or stateowned
land on which a public building or institution is situated.
(5) Planning Board action on final detailed site plan.
(a) No final site plan approval shall be granted on any application
that has been referred to the Planning Board unless the
Planning Board has recommended approval of the
architectural style, the plans have been amended to
incorporate any conditions of approval imposed by the
Planning Board or the Planning Board approves the site plan
by a vote of a majority plus one of its members.
(b) Within 62 days of receipt of the application for final site plan
approval, the Planning Board shall render a decision to Town
Board. If no decision is made within the sixty-two-day period,
the final site plan shall be considered approved.
§ 300-128 SENECA FALLS CODE § 300-129
1:500
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2014 10-1-2013 Repeal of moratorium on
multiple dwellings
Repealer only
5-2014 9-2-2014 Moratorium on mineral
extraction approvals
NCM
6-2014 10-7-2014 Tax levy limit override
2015
NCM
7-2014 12-2-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
1-2015 8-4-2015 Boards, commissions and
committees amendment;
historic preservation
amendment
Ch. 13; Ch. 173
2-2015 10-5-2015 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 213
3-2015 10-5-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 280
4-2015 10-5-2015 Parks and recreation
facilities amendment
Ch. 207
5-2015 10-5-2015 Extension of moratorium
on mineral extraction
approvals
NCM
6-2015 10-5-2015 Sewers amendment Ch. 230
7-2015 11-12-2015 Tax levy limit override
2016
NCM
1-2016 4-5-2016 Highway Superintendent
salary
NCM
2-2016 11-1-2016 Tax levy limit override
2017
NCM
3-2016 12-6-2016 Waste Disposal Law
(restriction on waste
disposal operations)
Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2017
1-2017 5-2-2017 Highway Superintendent
salary
NCM
§ 300-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:501
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2017 5-5-2017 Repeal of L.L. No. 3-2016 Repealer only
3-2017 10-3-2017 Town Attorney residency
requirements
Ch. 55, Art. II
§ DL-1 SENECA FALLS CODE § DL-1
1:502

ZONING
300 Attachment 2
Town of Seneca Falls
Zoning Schedule I: Lot and Bulk Regulations
District
Minimum lot area
Width
Depth
Front 
Rear
Side
stories
feet
A-1 30,000
square feet
200 200 50 50 25 2 1/2 35 15%
A-2 30,000
square feet
200 200 50 50 25 2 1/2 35 15%
R-1 
15,000
square feet
100 150 30 30 15 2 1/2 35 25%
R-2 
15,000
square feet 
Not
allowed
150 50 40 20 2 1/2 35 30%
C-1 10,000
square feet
100 100 30 30 20 2 35 40%
C-2 20,000
square feet
100 150 50 30 20 2 35 35%
M-1 1 acre 100 150 50 30 20 2 35 35%
M-2 1 acre 100 150 50 30 20 2 35 35%
L-C 4 acres 200 200 50 50 25 2 1/2 35 15%
F-P Same bulk and coverage regulations apply as for the zoning district adjacent to a floodplain area (see also § 300-24).
Wetlands Same bulk and coverage regulations apply as for the zoning district underlying the wetland (see also § 300-25).
NOTES:
(a) Must also have public sewers available
(b) For multifamily, 7,500 square feet per dwelling unit, with a minimum of 40,000 square feet.
300 Attachment 2:1 10 - 01 - 2013