Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Amendments to Code
[Adopted 5-28-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002 (Ch. 1, Art. I, of the 1965
Code)]
§ 1-1. Restrictions on permits or approvals.
Whenever the Board of Trustees shall, by resolution, authorize a public
hearing on a local law which, if adopted, would have the effect of amending
this Code, then for a period of 90 days therefrom, or until the effective date
of the proposed law, if adopted, or of its defeat, whichever shall be sooner,
no permit or approval can be granted unless the permit would comply with
both the existing law and the law as it is proposed to be amended or the
applicant shall consent to the inclusion, as conditions on the permit or
approval, of any restrictions which would be imposed by the local law.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3

ARTICLE II
Governing Body
§ 1-2. Village Board.
The Mayor and Trustees of the Village shall constitute the Board of Trustees
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:5
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 23. Code of Ethics — See Ch. 34.
§ 5-1. Establishment; purpose. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
In order to provide the most economical and efficient overall direction,
coordination and control of the day-to-day activities and operations of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow, to minimize the administrative details now handled
by the Board of Trustees, to provide centralized direction and control of
Village employees and to formalize staff and advisory functions, the position
of Village Administrator is hereby established.
§ 5-2. Appointment; eligibility.
§ 5-3. Compensation. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
The Village Administrator shall receive such compensation as the Board of
Trustees shall fix.
A. Appointment. The Village Administrator shall be appointed by the
Board of Trustees upon the recommendation of the Mayor. The position
of Village Administrator shall be full-time and shall be unclassified. The
Village Administrator shall serve for an indefinite term and shall remain
in the position at the pleasure of the Board of Trustees. The
Administrator shall be chosen by the appointing authority without
regard to the appointee's political beliefs and solely on the basis of the
appointee's training and experience in the field of public administration
or municipal management. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
B. Eligibility. At the time of the appointment, the Administrator need not
be a resident of the Village or the State of New York, but shall become a
resident of the Village within six months after appointment and
qualification and so remain during his tenure. This residency
requirement, however, may be waived by a majority of the Board of
Trustees. No elected official of the Village shall be eligible for such
appointment during the term for which the official shall have been
elected nor within one year after the expiration of that term.
§ 1-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 5-4
1:6
§ 5-4. Duties and responsibilities. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Subject to the approval, direction and control of the Board of Trustees, or
in those instances in which approval, direction and control is, by applicable
law, reserved to the Mayor, then under the approval, direction and control
of the Mayor, and in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be
promulgated by the Board of Trustees, the Village Administrator shall:
A. Oversee the enforcement of the rules, regulations, ordinances, local
laws and codes of the Village so that they are administered efficiently
and impartially.
B. Supervise and coordinate the activities of all Village departments.
C. Oversee and coordinate the work of all Village employees, except the
Village Attorney, and implement the personnel policies, rules and
regulations of the Village.
D. Recommend to the Mayor and the Board of Trustees appointments,
promotions or dismissals of all Village employees in accordance with
applicable statutes.
E. Represent or supervise the representation of the Village in collective
negotiations with employees.
F. When so designated by the Mayor, prepare, as budget officer, the
annual operating budget according to law and, when directed by the
Board of Trustees, prepare the capital projects budget.
G. Be responsible for the preparation of all contracts and bid
specifications and act as purchasing agent for all Village offices,
departments, boards and commissions.
H. Supervise and control all encumbrances, expenditures and
disbursements, including the auditing of all vouchers, to ensure that
budget appropriations are not exceeded.
I. Keep the Board of Trustees fully informed as to the Village's financial
condition and future monetary needs for operational and capital project
purposes and recommend needed action.
J. Keep the Board of Trustees and appropriate Village officials advised of
pending federal, state and county legislation and of the availability of
any applicable grants-in-aid from higher levels of government.
K. Attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees, unless excused by the
Mayor, with the right to take part in any discussion, but without the
right to vote; and provide information relevant to agenda items and
questions of the Board of Trustees.
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4
1:7
§ 5-5. Acting Administrator.
In the case of a vacancy or during the absence or disability of the Village
Administrator, the Mayor shall designate some properly qualified person to
perform the duties of the Administrator on an acting basis for a period not
to exceed 90 days.
§ 5-6. Removal. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
The Board of Trustees may remove the Village Administrator in accordance
with the following procedure:
L. Consult with appropriate Village officers and employees in the
preparation of any resolutions or local laws for the consideration of the
Board of Trustees.
M. Recommend to the Board of Trustees for adoption such measures as the
Administrator may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety
or welfare of the Village residents or for the improvement of
administrative services through greater productivity and economy.
N. Investigate and respond to all inquiries by Village residents and other
interested persons concerning Village government operations and
services.
O. If requested by the Board of Trustees, maintain liaison with other
governments and administrative agencies.
P. Perform such other duties as may be required by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
A. The Board of Trustees shall adopt, by affirmative vote of the majority of
its membership, a preliminary resolution which shall state the reasons
for such removal and may suspend the Village Administrator from duty
for a period not to exceed 30 days with pay, but without reimbursable
expenses. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered to the Village
Administrator personally or by certified mail to the Administrator's
home address within five days after adoption.
B. Within five days after receipt of the resolution, the Village
Administrator may file with the Village Clerk a written request for a
public hearing. Such hearing shall be held at an advertised meeting not
earlier than 20 days nor later than 30 days after the hearing request
has been filed with the Village Clerk.
C. The Board of Trustees may adopt a final resolution of removal, which
may be made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of the majority
of the membership of the Board, any time after 10 days from the day of
delivery of the preliminary resolution to the Village Administrator, if the
Administrator has not requested a public hearing, or at any time after
the public hearing if such was requested.
§ 5-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 5-6
1:8
§ 5-7. Construal of provisions.
Chapter 9
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 148.
Fees — See Ch. 200.
Housing standards — See Ch. 245.
Signs — See Ch. 338.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 9-1. Findings; purpose.
D. The Village Administrator shall continue to receive full salary until the
effective date of the final resolution of removal and for a period of 30
days thereafter.
E. The action of the Board of Trustees in suspending or removing the
Village Administrator shall not be subject to review by any court or
agency.
A. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed or construed as
abolishing, transferring or curtailing any powers or responsibilities of
the Mayor or the Board of Trustees or other Village officers as
prescribed by the Village Law or other applicable laws of the state.
B. Any existing local laws or ordinances of the Village setting forth the
duties of heads of departments shall remain in full force and effect,
except insofar as they conflict with the provisions of this chapter.
A. The Board of Trustees hereby finds that excessive uniformity,
dissimilarity, inappropriateness or poor quality of design in the exterior
appearance of buildings erected in any neighborhood adversely affects
the desirability of the immediate area and neighboring areas for
residential, business or other purposes and by so doing impairs the
benefits of occupancy of existing property in such areas; impairs the
stability and value of both improved and unimproved real property in
such areas; prevents the most appropriate development and use of such
areas; contributes to the degeneration of property in such areas, with
attendant deterioration of conditions affecting the health, safety and
general welfare of the community; and contributes to the diminution of
the taxable value of real property in such areas and its ability to support
the municipal services provided thereof. It is the purpose of this chapter
to prevent these and other harmful effects of such exterior appearance
of buildings erected or altered in any neighborhood and thus to
promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community,
conserve the value of buildings and encourage the most appropriate use
§ 5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-1
1:9
§ 9-2. Creation of Board; membership; terms of office; vacancies
and removal from office.
There is hereby created a Board of Architectural Review, which shall consist
of three members who shall serve without compensation. One member, who
shall be the Chairperson of the Board, shall be the Building Inspector of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow. The other members of the Board shall be
residents of the Village of Sleepy Hollow and shall be specifically qualified
by reason of training or experience in art, architecture or other relevant
business or profession or by reason of civic interest and sound judgment to
judge as to the effects of a proposed building upon the desirability, property
values and development of the surrounding area. At least one member of
such Board shall be a registered architect in the State of New York. The
members of such Board shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to be
approval of the Board of Trustees. Members shall be appointed for a term
of three years commencing with the adoption of this chapter. If a vacancy
shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, the Mayor shall appoint
a new member for the unexpired term. There shall also be one alternate
member who shall sit as a member when called upon when one of the
regular members is absent or is otherwise unable to serve. The alternate
member shall be appointed in the same manner as other members of the
Board. The Village Board of Trustees shall have the power to remove any
member of the Board for cause and after public hearing.
§ 9-3. Meetings; quorum; official records; powers and authority.
Meetings of the Board of Architectural Review shall be held at least once a
month or at such other times as the Chairman may determine. A majority
of said Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact, and shall also keep records of its examination and other official actions.
The Board shall have power from time to time to adopt, amend and repeal
rules and regulations not inconsistent with law or the provisions of this
chapter, governing its procedure and the transaction of its business, and for
the purpose of carrying into effect the standards outlined in §§ 9-4 and 9-5
hereof. Every rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof and
every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board shall be
placed on the public record.
of land within the Village of Sleepy Hollow. In furtherance of the
aforementioned purpose, the Board of Trustees, adopts design
guidelines for building within the Village of Sleepy Hollow as outlined
in § 9-5 hereof.
B. It is not the purpose of this chapter to cause unnecessary delay and
expense to the owners of property seeking to build within the Village of
Sleepy Hollow.
§ 9-1 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 9-4
1:10
§ 9-4. Applications. [Amended 12-8-2015 by L.L. No. 9-2015]
In all cases where application is made for a building permit for construction
of a new building or for exterior improvements or alterations to an existing
building and site plan approval is not required, with the exception of
building permits for construction, improvement, or alteration of singlefamily
and two-family residences, review and approval by the Board of
Architectural Review shall be required. In addition to any notice as may be
required by law, the applicant shall cause notice of such application to be
mailed at least 10 days before the date scheduled for the review of such
application by the Board to all owners of property directly abutting and
across from any boundary line of the property which is the subject matter of
the application and to such others as the Board of Architectural Review may
deem advisable. The names of said owners shall be taken as they appear
on the last completed tax roll of the Village. Provided that due notice shall
have been given as otherwise required by law and there shall have been
substantial compliance with the remaining provisions of this section, the
failure to give notice in exact conformance herewith shall not be deemed to
invalidate action taken by the Board of Architectural Review in connection
with such application.
§ 9-5. Design guidelines.
The Village shall utilize the Downtown Sleepy Hollow Façade Renovation
Design Standards adopted in a resolution on March 22, 2011, and the
Design Guidelines for Lighthouse Landing Riverfront Development adopted
in a resolution on June 7, 2011, in making a determination whenever
appropriate. Copies of the Design Guidelines and Downtown Sleepy Hollow
Façade Renovation Design Standards shall be posted on the Village website
and kept at the office of the Village Clerk and made available to all
applicants, if necessary.
§ 9-6. Grounds for refusal of permit applications.
The Board of Architectural Review may disapprove any application for a
building permit, provided that such disapproval shall be by a majority of the
members of the entire Board, at any meeting where said vote is taken, and
provided that the Board finds that the building or buildings for which the
permit was applied would, if erected, be so detrimental to the desirability,
property values or development of the surrounding area as to provide one or
more harmful effects set forth in § 9-1 hereof by reason of failing to comply
with design guidelines as set forth in § 9-5 hereof.
§ 9-7. Issuance of building permits.
The Building Inspector shall refuse any building permit application
disapproved as provided in § 9-6 hereof. If the Board of Architectural
Review shall fail to disapprove any such application referred to it within 60
days of the date of filing such application or if such Board shall approve any
such application, the Building Inspector shall forthwith issue the building
§ 9-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-7
1:11
permit, provided that it conforms in all respects to all other applicable laws
and ordinances.
§ 9-8. Sign permits.
The Building Inspector shall be given the authority to examine, review,
approve or disapprove applications for permits for signs, as regulated by the
provisions of Chapter 338, Signs, of the Village Code. A fee as set forth in
the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees, shall be charged
for said review for sign permits.
§ 9-9. Appeal procedure.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Board of Architectural Review
in disapproving a building permit application and of the Building Inspector
in denying any permit because of such disapproval and of the Building
Inspector in denying any sign permit may take an appeal therefrom to the
Zoning Board of Appeals, in the same manner as is provided for other
zoning appeals, and such Zoning Board of Appeals, after proceeding in
the same manner as is provided for other zoning appeals and with the
same power and authority therein vested in passing under appeals before
it under the provisions of law and this chapter and in the exercise thereof,
may reverse or affirm or modify and affirm the action of the Board of
Architectural Review and of the Building Inspector.
§ 9-10. Consultation with Planning Board.
Upon request of the Planning Board, the Architectural Review Board shall
consult with and advise the Planning Board with respect to any site plan
which the Planning Board is required to review under the provisions of law
or of this chapter. This consultation and advisement may include, but not be
limited to, the holding of joint meetings to review a site plan application.
Chapter 11
ARCHITECTURE, LAND USE DEVELOPMENT, BUILDINGS
AND BUILDING COMPLIANCE, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Architectural Review Board — See Ch. 11.
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 148.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 151.
Housing standards — See Ch. 245.
Signs — See Ch. 338.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 425.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 9-7 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 11-1
1:12
§ 11-1. Title.
This chapter is to be known and cited as the "Department of Architecture,
Land Use Development, Building and Building Compliance" of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow.
§ 11-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING COMPLIANCE OFFICE — The Building Compliance Office of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow, Westchester County, New York.[Added 1-22-2013
by L.L. No. 1-2013]
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow, Westchester County, New York, who shall be the director of the
Division of Buildings and Building Compliance.[Amended 1-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
CODE ENFORCER — The Code Enforcer of the Village of Sleepy Hollow,
Westchester County, New York.[Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
DEPARTMENT OF ARCHITECTURE, LAND USE DEVELOPMENT,
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING COMPLIANCE — The Department of
Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings and Building Compliance of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
FIRE INSPECTOR — The Village Fire Inspector of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow.
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR — The Village Administrator of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow, Westchester County, New York.
VILLAGE ARCHITECT — An architect licensed in the State of New York,
hired as an employee by the Village of Sleepy Hollow and serving as
the department head of the Department of Architecture, Land Use
Development, Buildings and Building Compliance of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow.1
VILLAGE CLERK — The Village Clerk of the Village of Sleepy Hollow,
Westchester County, New York.
VILLAGE OF SLEEPY HOLLOW — The Village of Sleepy Hollow,
Westchester County, New York.
ZONING INSPECTOR — The Zoning Inspector of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow, Westchester County, New York.[Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
1. Editor's Note: The definition of "Village Board," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013.
§ 11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-3
1:13
§ 11-3. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established the Department of Architecture,
Land Use Development, Buildings and Building Compliance of the Village,
hereinafter referred to as the "Department of Architecture, Land Use
Development, Buildings and Building Compliance," as a separate
department of the Village. This Department shall provide for the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of all laws, ordinances,
rules, regulations and orders applicable to the location, design, material,
construction, alteration, repair, equipment, maintenance, use, occupancy,
fire safety, removal and demolition of buildings and structures and their
appurtenances located in the Village.
§ 11-4. Village Architect.
There is hereby created the position of Village Architect. The Architect shall
serve as the Director in charge of the Department of Architecture, Land
Use Development, Buildings and Building Compliance of the Village. The
Village Architect shall have primary responsibility for the administration
and enforcement of the provisions of this Code and shall supervise the
personnel assigned to and the activities of the Building Department, and
shall further supervise the activities of the Building Inspection and Building
Compliance Divisions. Wherever in this Code, authority is vested in the
Building Inspector or Building Compliance Officer to enforce any provisions
of this Code, or the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code, such authority shall also be vested in the Village Architect.
§ 11-5. Village Fire Inspector. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
The Village Fire Inspector shall be the Village Architect and may be referred
to by either title. The duties of the Village Fire Inspector may be delegated
as necessary, from time to time, by the Village Architect or the Board of
Trustees consistent with applicable law.
§ 11-6. Term of employment of Village Architect. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
The Village Architect shall be employed on such terms and conditions as
may be offered, from time to time, by the Board of Trustees.
§ 11-7. Duties of Village Architect.
A. The Village Architect shall be the principal executive in charge and the
administrator of the Department of Architecture, Land Use
Development, Buildings and Building Compliance.
B. The Village Architect shall, under the general direction of the Village
Administrator, be responsible for the overall coordination of the
Village's review and oversight of site planning and development
projects.
§ 11-3 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 11-7
1:14
§ 11-8. Compensation of Village Architect and inspectors.
Compensation for the Village Architect and inspectors shall be fixed from
time to time by the Board of Trustees or as prescribed by law.
§ 11-9. Divisions.
There shall be within the Department of Architecture, Land Use
Development, Buildings and Building Compliance the following divisions:
C. The Village Architect shall coordinate the planning and review of
building and construction projects of the Village from inception to
completion.
D. The Village Architect shall oversee building and renovation plan review
for compliance with all state and local codes.
E. The Village Architect shall assist in the enforcement of the Code of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow and the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code laws and regulations, as amended from
time to time.
F. The Village Architect shall act as liaison between the Architectural
Review Board, Planning Board, Waterfront Advisory Committee and
Zoning Board of Appeals, and development projects before the Board of
Trustees. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
G. The Village Architect shall oversee and assist in the inspection of the
construction and repair of buildings and structures and all related
tasks, other than those specifically exempted by local building, zoning,
plumbing and electrical ordinances, and the Multiple Residence Law.
H. The Village Architect shall oversee and assist in the investigation of
complaints and assist in the prosecution of violations of the Code of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow and the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
I. The Village Architect shall check permit applications for compliance
with zoning ordinances, including, but not limited to, size requirements
for land, size restrictions for signs and buildings, and the necessity for
variances.
J. The Village Architect shall maintain all Department records, including
all acts and decisions.
K. The Village Architect shall prepare periodic reports of departmental
activity for presentation to the Board of Trustees, no less than two times
per fiscal year, and at any other time if requested by the Board of
Trustees. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
L. The Village Architect shall have all the powers and duties of the
Building Inspector and Building Compliance Officer.
§ 11-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-9
1:15
§ 11-10. Absence or inability to serve as Village Architect.
In the absence or inability of the Village Architect to perform his duties,
the Village Board may designate a person to fill the position of the Village
Architect for the period of absence or inability to serve. In a case of
emergency, the position may be filled by the Village Administrator with the
advice and consent of the Mayor of the Village of Sleepy Hollow. In no event
shall said designation be longer than six months.
§ 11-11. Appointment of employees. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
All employees of the Department of Architecture, Land Use, Buildings and
Building Compliance shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval
of the Board of Trustees and shall hold their position at the pleasure of
the Board of Trustees; provided, however, that any employee in a classified
civil service position may be appointed and/or removed only in accordance
with applicable civil service law and/or the terms of an applicable collective
bargaining agreement, if any.
A. Fire Safety Division. The Fire Safety Division shall be responsible for
the enforcement of all laws and ordinances covering the prevention of
fire; the storage and use of explosives and inflammables; the
installation and maintenance of automatic and other private fire alarm
systems and fire extinguishing equipment; the maintenance and
regulation of fire escapes; the means and adequacy of exits in case of
fire from factories, schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals,
churches, halls, theaters, and all other places in which numbers of
people are employed, live or congregate from time to time, for any
purpose; and the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of
fires. In these endeavors, the Fire Inspector may employ as necessary
the advice and assistance of the Fire Department of the Village.
B. Building Inspection Division. The Building Inspection Division shall be
responsible for the enforcement of the New York State Building Code;
the Zoning Code of the Village2 and the local laws of the Village. The
Building Inspection Division shall also include other functions
incidental to the Building Department, including, but not limited to,
Plumbing Inspector, Electrical Inspector, Sanitation Inspector and Code
Enforcer. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
C. Building Compliance Division. The Building Compliance Division shall
be responsible for the enforcement of local laws and ordinances of the
Village.
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 450, Zoning.
§ 11-9 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 11-12
1:16
§ 11-12. Transfer of employees. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
The Mayor, with concurrence of the Board of Trustees, may transfer any
employee of the Department herein from one division or office thereof to
another division or office thereof, and such transfer may be on either a
temporary or a permanent basis; provided, however, that the salary of such
employee shall be reduced only in conjunction with any diminution of job
responsibilities, and only in accordance with applicable civil service law
and/or the terms of an applicable collective bargaining agreement, if any. In
the event of an emergency designated as such by the Village Administrator,
an employee may be transferred to a higher pay scale for the period of the
emergency and paid at the classification for the higher pay scale.
§ 11-13. Personnel powers of Village Architect. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Nothing contained herein shall vest in the Village Architect the right to
discipline employees. The right to discipline any employee is vested in
the Board of Trustees, in its sole discretion. The Village Architect may
recommend to the Board of Trustees, from time to time, as he believes
will best assist in the administration of his Department, the discipline of
any employee subject to applicable civil service law and/or the terms of an
applicable collective bargaining agreement, if any. At all times, the Village
Architect will assist the Board of Trustees, as it may need, in the discipline
of Department employees.
§ 11-14. Existing employees. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
All property, equipment and budgetary appropriations of, or for, the
Department of Fire and Life Safety are hereby transferred to the
Department of Architecture, Land Use, Buildings and Building Compliance.
The employees of the Department of Fire and Life Safety shall be continued
as employees of the Department of Architecture, Land Use, Buildings and
Building Compliance with the same classification, salary, benefits, pensions
and retirement rights and privileges as they had immediately prior to
such transfer, except to the extent their duties and responsibilities are
otherwise reduced; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall
be construed to deprive the Mayor and the Board of Trustees of any power
they now have or may have under this chapter or otherwise with respect to
the hiring, firing, disciplining and fixing of salaries of such employees.
Chapter 23
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 34.
§ 11-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-14
1:17
§ 23-1. Legislative intent; scope.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide legal and financial protection for
those individuals serving the Village of Sleepy Hollow from losses which
may be brought against them in their individual capacity for actions taken
while in the performance of their official duties and responsibilities. In
enacting this chapter, the Board of Trustees finds that the State of New
York has enacted similar provisions for the legal and financial security
of its officers and employees and further finds that such security is also
required for local personnel. By enactment of this chapter, the Board of
Trustees does not intend to limit or otherwise abrogate any existing right or
responsibility of the Village or its employees with regard to indemnification
or legal defense. It is solely the intent of this chapter to provide similar
coverage for local employees as is presently provided for state employees,
so as to continue to attract qualified individuals to local government service.
§ 23-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person holding a position by election, appointment or
employment in the service of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, whether or not
compensated or a volunteer program, but shall not include an independent
contractor. The term "employee" shall include a former employee, his estate
or judicially appointed personal representative.
§ 23-3. Defense of employees; selection of counsel.
A. Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 23-5 of this
chapter, the Village shall provide for the defense of the employee in any
civil action or proceeding in any state or federal court, or any
administrative action or proceeding, arising out of any alleged act or
omission which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to have occurred
while the employee was acting in good faith within the apparent scope
of his or her public employment or duties, or which is brought to
enforce a provision of Section 1981 or 1983 of Title 42 of the United
States Code. This duty to provide for a defense shall not arise where
such civil or administrative action or proceeding is brought by or on
behalf of the Village of Sleepy Hollow. [Amended 4-17-2001 by L.L.
No. 4-2001]
B. Subject to the conditions set forth in Subsection A of this section, the
employee shall be entitled to be represented by the Village Attorney;
provided, however, that the employee shall be entitled to
representation by private counsel of his choice in any civil judicial
proceeding whenever the Village Attorney determines, based upon his
investigation and review of the facts and circumstances of the case, that
representation by the Village Attorney would be inappropriate, or
§ 11-14 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 23-3
1:18
§ 23-4. Indemnification; amount of settlement.
whenever a court of competent jurisdiction, upon appropriate motion
or by a special proceeding, determines that a conflict of interest exists
and that the employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel
of his choice. The Village Attorney shall notify the employee, in writing,
of such determination that the employee is entitled to be represented
by private counsel of his choice. The Village Attorney may require, as a
condition to payment of the fees and expenses of such representation,
that appropriate groups of such employees be represented by the same
counsel. If the employee or group of employees is entitled to
representation by private counsel under the provisions of this section,
the Village Attorney shall so certify to the Village Board. Reasonable
attorneys' fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by the Village to
such private counsel from time to time during the pendency of the
civil action or proceeding, subject to certification that the employee is
entitled to representation under the terms and conditions of this section
by the head of the department, commission, division, office or agency
in which such employee is employed and upon the audit and warrant
of the Village Treasurer. Any dispute with respect to representation
of multiple employees by a single counsel or the amount of litigation
expenses or the reasonableness of attorneys' fees shall be resolved by
the court upon motion or by way of a special proceeding.
C. Notwithstanding Subsection B above, if the claim or cause of action
alleged against the employee is within the coverage of any liability
insurance policy issued to the Village, the employee shall accept
representation by counsel selected in accordance with the terms of
such policy. [Added 4-17-2001 by L.L. No. 4-2001]
D. Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to the
Village Attorney as required by § 23-5 of this chapter, the Attorney shall
take the necessary steps, including the retention of private counsel
under the terms and conditions provided in Subsection B of this section,
on behalf of the employee to avoid entry of a default judgment pending
resolution of any question pertaining to the obligation to provide for a
defense.
A. The Village shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the
amount of any judgment obtained against such employees in any state
or federal court, or in the amount of any settlement of a claim, provided
that the act or omission from which such judgment or settlement arose
occurred while the employee was acting in good faith within the
apparent scope of his or her public employment or duties. The duty to
indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this subsection shall not
arise where the injury or damage resulted from intentional wrongdoing
or recklessness on the part of the employee. [Amended 4-17-2001 by
L.L. No. 4-2001]
B. An employee represented by private counsel shall cause to be
submitted to the Board of Trustees any proposed settlement which may
§ 23-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-4
1:19
be subject to indemnification by the Village, and if not inconsistent with
the provisions of this section, the Mayor shall certify such settlement,
and submit such settlement and certification to the Village Attorney.
The Attorney shall review such proposed settlement as to form and
amount and shall give his approval if, in his judgment, the settlement
is in the best interest of the Village. Nothing in this subsection shall
be construed to authorize the Village to indemnify or save harmless an
employee with respect to a settlement not so reviewed and approved by
the Village Attorney.
C. Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee or upon the
settlement of the claim, the employee shall cause to be served a copy of
such judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or registered
mail within 30 days of the date of entry or settlement, upon the Mayor;
and if not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, such
judgment or settlement shall be certified for payment by such Mayor. If
the Attorney concurs in such certification, the judgment or settlement
shall be paid upon the audit and warrant of the Village Treasurer.
D. The Village shall also indemnify and save harmless its employees in the
amount of any punitive damages in accordance with the following
procedure and such additional procedures as may be established by the
Village Attorney: [Added 4-17-2001 by L.L. No. 4-2001]
(1) In the event of a final judgment of punitive damages against the
employee, the employee shall serve copies of such judgment,
personally or by certified or registered mail within 10 days of the
date of entry, upon the Village Attorney and upon the Mayor on
behalf of the Village Board. The Village Board shall meet as soon as
practicable to review, make findings and determine if all the
following conditions have been met and, if so, shall appropriate the
funds necessary to pay such punitive damages:
(a) The judgment of punitive damages is based on an act or
omission of an employee acting within the scope of his or her
employment;
(b) At the time of the action or omission giving rise to the liability,
the employee acted without recklessness, without
maliciousness and without gross negligence and otherwise
within the standards required for employees holding
comparable positions within the Village;
(c) At the time of the act or omission, the employee acted in good
faith and in the best interests of the Village; and
(d) At the time of the act or omission, the employee did not
willfully violate a clearly established provision of law or Village
policy.
(2) Except as otherwise required by federal or state law, deliberations
by the Village Board shall be held in executive session, and the
§ 23-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 23-4
1:20
§ 23-5. Responsibility of employees. [Amended 4-17-2001 by L.L.
No. 4-2001; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless provided by this chapter
shall be conditioned upon delivery to the Village Attorney at his office by the
employee of a written request to provide for his defense, together with the
original or a copy of any summons, complaint process, notice, demand or
pleading within 10 days after he is served with such document and upon the
full cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action or proceeding
and in defense of any action or proceeding against the Village based upon
the same act or omission and in the prosecution of any appeal.
§ 23-6. Effect of provisions. [Amended 4-17-2001 by L.L. No.
4-2001]
Benefits accorded to employees under this chapter shall be in lieu of and
take the place of defense or indemnification protections accorded the same
employees by another enactment, including Public Officers Law § 18.
§ 23-7. Rights of insurers.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit
or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of
insurance.
§ 23-8. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all actions and proceedings
pending upon the effective date thereof or thereafter instituted.
§ 23-9. Construal of provisions.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions of
this chapter shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify,
abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon any unit,
entity, officer or employee of the Village, or any right to defense and/or
indemnification provided for any governmental officer or employee by, in
accordance with or by reason of any other provision of state or federal
statutory or common law.
Chapter 27
DISCIPLINARY HEARINGS
findings and determination of the Village Board shall remain
confidential.
§ 23-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-1
1:21
§ 27-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the Village Board of Trustees of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow to appoint a hearing officer to conduct hearings
in disciplinary proceedings and to establish the rules of procedure to be
followed in such proceedings.
§ 27-2. Appointment and qualifications of hearing officer.
§ 27-3. Powers and duties of hearing officer; final determination.
If a hearing officer is so appointed by the Board, the Board shall keep
or cause to be kept a record of such hearing. After the conclusion of
the hearing, the hearing officer shall make specific findings of fact which
shall then be transmitted to the Board of Trustees, together with his/
her conclusions regarding each of the charges and specifications, his/her
recommendations for a penalty and the record of the hearing. The Board
shall then review the record, factual findings, conclusions and
recommendations of the hearing officer and render a final determination in
writing.
§ 27-4. Procedure.
The procedure to be followed in any disciplinary proceeding, whether it
is heard by the Board or a hearing officer, shall be the procedure as set
forth in the New York State Administrative Procedure Act, as it may be
amended from time to time, for adjudicatory proceedings, except to the
extent that said procedure conflicts with this chapter, or any other state or
local law more specifically directed at such disciplinary proceedings. The
Board of Trustees reserves the right to hereinafter adopt rules of procedure
for administrative hearings.
Chapter 34
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 23.
A. In the event that disciplinary charges are presented to the Village
Board of Trustees of the Village of Sleepy Hollow against any municipal
employee, including police officers, said Board may adopt a resolution
appointing a hearing officer to conduct the hearing on such charges.
B. The hearing officer designated by the Board shall be an attorney duly
licensed to practice law in the State of New York at the time of the
appointment.
§ 27-1 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 34-1
1:22
§ 34-1. Legislative authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the
Board of Trustees of the incorporated Village of Sleepy Hollow, Westchester
County, New York, recognizes that there are rules of ethical conduct for
public officers and employees which must be observed if a high degree of
moral conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence is to be maintained
in our unit of local government. It is the purpose of this chapter to
promulgate these rules of ethical conduct for the officers and employees of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow. These rules shall serve as a guide for official
conduct of the officers and employees of the Village of Sleepy Hollow. The
rules of ethical conduct of this chapter, as adopted, shall not conflict with
but shall be in addition to any prohibition of Article 18 of the General
Municipal Law or any other general or special law relating to ethical
conduct and interest in contracts of municipal officers and employees.
§ 34-2. Definitions. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTEREST — A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing
to a municipal officer or employee as the result of a contract with the
municipality which such officer or employee serves, unless the context
otherwise requires. For the purposes of this chapter, a municipal officer or
employee shall be deemed to have an interest in the contract of his spouse,
minor children and dependents, except a contract of employment with the
municipality which such officer or employee serves, a firm, partnership or
association of which such officer or employee is a member or employee,
a corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director or
employee and a corporation any stock of which is owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by such officer or employee.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer, employee or volunteer
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, whether paid or unpaid, including members
of any administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person
shall be deemed to be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of
being a volunteer fire fighter or civil defense volunteer.
§ 34-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the Village of Sleepy Hollow shall be subject to
and abide by the following standards of conduct:
A. Gifts. He shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit any gift, or accept or
receive any gift having a value of $75 or more, whether in the form of
money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or
promise or any other form, under circumstances in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him or
could reasonably be expected to influence him in the performance of his
official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on his
part. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 34-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-3
1:23
§ 34-4. Claims against Village.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand or suit against the incorporated Village of Sleepy Hollow, or any
agency thereof, on behalf of himself or any member of his family arising
out of any personal injury or property damage or for any lawful benefit
authorized or permitted by law.
B. Confidential information. He shall not disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his official duties or use such
information to further his personal interest.
C. Representation before one's own agency. He shall not receive, or enter
into any agreement for, express or implied, compensation for services
to be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal agency of
which he is an officer, member or employee or before any municipal
agency over which he has jurisdiction or to which he has the power to
appoint any member, officer or employee.
D. Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He shall not
receive, or enter into any agreement for, express or implied,
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any agency of his municipality whereby his compensation is to
be dependent or contingent upon any action by such agency with
respect to such matter, provided that this subsection shall not prohibit
the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable value of the
services rendered.
E. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he knows thereof,
a member of the Board of Trustees and any officer or employee of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow who participates in the discussion or gives
official opinion to the Board of Trustees on any legislation before the
Board of Trustees shall publicly disclose on the official record the
nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial or other private
interest he has in such legislation. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
F. Investments in conflict with official duties. He shall not invest or hold
any investment, directly or indirectly, in any financial, business,
commercial or other private transaction which creates a conflict with
his official duties.
G. Private employment. He shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or
promise to accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his official duties.3
3. Editor's Note: Original Subsection H, Future employment, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013.
§ 34-3 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 34-5
1:24
§ 34-5. Distribution of copies. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
The Mayor of the Village of Sleepy Hollow shall cause a copy of this Code
of Ethics to be distributed to every officer and employee of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter. Each
officer and employee elected or appointed thereafter shall be furnished a
copy before entering upon the duties of his office or employment. Failure to
distribute any such copy shall have no effect on the duty of compliance with
this article, nor with the enforcement of the provisions thereof.
§ 34-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions
of this chapter may be fined, suspended or removed from office or
employment, as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 71
POLICE
§ 34-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-6
1:25

ARTICLE I
Intermunicipal Police Assistance
[Adopted 1-19-1981 by L.L. No. 2-1981 (Ch. 40A of the 1965 Code)]
§ 71-1. Delegation of powers.
The powers of the Mayor, as set forth in § 209-m of the General Municipal
Law of the State of New York, Subsection 2, are hereby delegated to the
Chief of Police, only insofar as the right to request police assistance from or
to grant police assistance to the Village of Tarrytown is concerned.
§ 71-2. When effective.
This article shall become effective in the time prescribed by law or on such
date as a similar and reciprocal law enacted by the Village of Tarrytown
becomes effective, whichever is later.
§ 71-3. Term.
This article shall remain in effect until it is repealed or until the Village of
Tarrytown repeals or amends its similar reciprocal law, whichever is earlier.
§ 71-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-3
1:27
Chapter 80
RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 200.
§ 80-1. Designation of records access officers. [Amended 1-22-2013
by L.L. No. 1-2013]
There shall be a records management program established under the aegis
of the Village Clerk's Office and headed by the Village Clerk as Records
Management Officer (RMO). The RMO will be responsible for administering
the noncurrent and archival public records and storage areas for the Village
of Sleepy Hollow in accordance with local, state and federal laws and
guidelines. The Village Clerk shall have the option to appoint a designee to
perform this function with the prior approval of the Mayor.
§ 80-2. Responsibilities.
The records access officers, under the coordination of the Village Clerk,
shall be responsible for assuring that Village personnel:
A. Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
B. Assist the requester in identifying requested records, if necessary, and,
when appropriate, indicate the manner in which the records are filed,
retrieved or generated to assist persons in reasonably describing
records. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
C. Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions:
(1) Make records available for inspection.
(2) Deny access to the records in whole or in part and explain in
writing the reasons therefor.
D. Upon request for copies of records to which access is granted, take one
of the following actions:
(1) Make a copy available upon payment or offer to pay established
fees as set forth in § 80-8 hereof.
(2) Permit the requester to copy those records.
E. Upon request, certify that a record is a true copy.
F. Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
(1) The Village is not the custodian for such records.
§ 71-3 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 80-2
1:28
§ 80-3. Inspection of records during business hours; access to
police records.
The records access officers shall accept requests for public access to
records, other than those having to do with police matters, and shall
produce records during all hours that the offices of the Village Clerk,
Treasurer and Building Inspector are regularly open for business. With
respect to records having to do with police matters, the duties of all Village
records access officers shall be deemed automatically delegated to the
Chief of Police, to whom the records access officer shall forward all requests
for access to police records, and he shall also be authorized to directly
accept and act on requests for access to police records during all hours
that the office of the Chief of Police is regularly open for business at police
headquarters at 28 Beekman Avenue.
§ 80-4. Requests for records.
The records access officers and the Chief of Police may make records
available only upon written request upon a form prescribed by the Village,
a copy of which is made a part of this chapter.4 A request shall reasonably
describe the record or records sought. Whenever possible, a person
requesting records should supply information regarding dates, file
designations or other information that may help to describe the records
sought. Records requested must be readily identifiable, and all requests
should be presented in an orderly fashion, avoiding narrative and prolix
requests.
§ 80-5. Granting or denial of requests. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
(2) The records of which the Village is a custodian cannot be found
after a diligent search.
G. Contact persons seeking records when a request is voluminous or when
locating the records sought involves substantial effort, so that agency
personnel may ascertain the nature of records of primary interest and
attempt to reasonably reduce the volume of the records requested.
[Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. The records access officers and the Chief of Police shall respond to any
request reasonably describing the record or records sought within five
business days of receipt of the request by:
(1) Informing a person requesting records that the request or portion
of the request does not reasonably describe the records sought,
including direction, to the extent possible, that would enable that
person to request records reasonably described;
(2) Granting or denying access to records in whole or in part;
4. Editor's Note: Copies of the form are on file in the Village offices.
§ 80-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:29
§ 80-6. Subject matter lists.
The records access officer and the Chief of Police shall each maintain a
reasonably detailed current list by subject matter of all records in their
possession, whether or not records are available pursuant to § 87(2) of the
Public Officers Law. The subject matter lists shall be sufficiently detailed
to permit identification of the category of the record sought and shall be
updated not less than twice per year. The most recent update shall appear
on the first page of the subject matter list.
§ 80-7. Appeals.
(3) Acknowledging the receipt of a request in writing, including an
approximate date when the request will be granted or denied in
whole or in part, which shall be reasonable under the
circumstances of the request and shall not be more than 20
business days after the date of the acknowledgment, or if it is
known that circumstances prevent disclosure within 20 business
days from the date of such acknowledgment, providing a statement
in writing stating the reason for inability to grant the request
within that time and a date certain, within a reasonable period
under the circumstances of the request, when the request will be
granted in whole or in part; or
(4) If the receipt of request was acknowledged in writing and included
an approximate date when the request would be granted in whole
or in part within 20 business days of such acknowledgment, but
circumstances prevent disclosure within that time, providing a
statement in writing with 20 business days of such
acknowledgment stating the reason for the inability to do so and a
date certain, within a reasonable period under the circumstances of
the request, when the request will be granted in whole or in part.
B. If the record sought is not provided and if access thereto is not denied
within five business days of receipt of a request, the records access
officer or the Chief of Police shall furnish a written acknowledgment of
receipt of the request and a statement of the approximate date when
the request will be granted or denied. If access to records is neither
granted nor denied within 20 business days after the date of
acknowledgment of receipt of a request, the request may be construed
as a denial of access that may be appealed as set forth in § 80-7 hereof.
A. Any person denied access to records may appeal, within 30 days of such
denial, to the Mayor, who is hereby designated to hear and act on all
appeals from a denial of access to records by a records access officer or
the Chief of Police.
B. Denial of access shall be in writing stating the reason therefor and
advising the person denied access of his or her right to appeal to the
Mayor, who shall be identified by name, title and official address.
§ 80-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 80-7
1:30
§ 80-8. Fees.
Except where a different fee is otherwise provided for by law:
C. The time for deciding an appeal, by the Mayor, shall commence upon
receipt of a written appeal identifying:
(1) The date and location of a request for records.
(2) The records that were denied.
(3) The name and return address of the appellant.
D. The Village Clerk shall transmit to the State Committee on Open
Government a copy of each appeal upon its receipt. Such copies shall be
addressed to:
The Committee on Open Government
One Commerce Plaza
99 Washington Avenue, Suite 650
Albany, New York 12231
E. The Mayor shall inform the appellant and the State Committee on Open
Government of his determination of an appeal, in writing, within seven
business days of the receipt of the appeal. The determination shall be
transmitted to the State Committee on Open Government in the same
manner as set forth in Subsection D of this section.
F. A final denial of access to a requested record, as provided for in
Subsection E of this section, shall be subject to court review as
provided for in Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
A. There shall be no fee charged for the following:
(1) Inspection of records for which no redaction is permitted.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(2) Search for records.
(3) Any certification pursuant to the Freedom of Information Law.
B. The records access officer and the Chief of Police may charge a fee for
copies of records, provided that:
(1) The fee for copying records for photocopies not exceeding nine
inches by 14 inches shall be established and determined by the
Board of Trustees from time to time and set forth in the fee
schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees. [Amended
7-6-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981; 8-16-1994 by L.L. No. 11-1994]
(2) At times when photocopying equipment is not in operation or is not
available, a transcript of the requested records shall be made upon
request. Such transcripts may be either typed or handwritten. In
§ 80-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-8
1:31
such cases, the person requesting records shall be charged for
the clerical time involved in making the transcript, such fee to be
payable in advance of transcription.
(3) The fee for copies of records not covered by Subsection B(1) and (2)
of this section shall not exceed the actual reproduction cost, which
is the average unit cost for copying a record.
(4) An agency has the authority to redact portions of a paper record
and does so prior to disclosure of the record by making a photocopy
from which the proper redactions are made. [Added 1-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
C. The fee the Village may charge for a copy of any other record is based
on the actual cost of reproduction and may include only the following:
[Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(1) An amount equal to the hourly salary attributed to the lowest paid
employee who has the necessary skill required to prepare a copy of
the requested record, but only when more than two hours of the
employee's time are necessary to do so; and
(2) The actual cost of the storage devices or media provided to the
person making the request in complying with such request; or
(3) The actual cost to the agency of engaging an outside professional
service to prepare a copy of a record, but only when the Village’s
information technology equipment is inadequate to prepare a copy,
and if such service is used to prepare the copy.
D. When the Village has the ability to retrieve or extract a record or data
maintained in a computer storage system with reasonable effort, or
when doing so requires less employee time than engaging in manual
retrieval or redactions from nonelectronic records, the Village shall be
required to retrieve or extract such record or data electronically. In
such case, the Village may charge a fee in accordance with Subsection
C(1) and (2) of this section. [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
E. The Village shall inform a person requesting a record of the estimated
cost of preparing a copy of the record if more than two hours of a
Village employee's time are needed, or if it is necessary to retain an
outside professional service to prepare a copy of the record. [Added
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
F. The Village may require that the fee for copying or reproducing a
record be paid in advance of the preparation of such copy. [Added
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
G. The Village may waive a fee in whole or in part when making copies of
records available. [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 80-8 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 80-9
1:32
§ 80-9. Granting or denial of requests guided by Freedom of
Information Law.
In the denial or granting of access to records hereunder, the records access
officer, the Chief of Police, the Mayor and all other Village personnel
involved shall be guided by the mandates, rules and exceptions as set forth
in the Freedom of Information Law. In no case shall original records be
removed from the lawful custody of any officer charged with the duty of
maintaining such records. In the event that any question should arise as to
the necessity or propriety of the granting of access to any records under the
Freedom of Information Law, such as whether such access would result in
an unwarranted invasion of privacy or a disclosure of information that must
be confidential in order to safeguard law enforcement, or a similar question,
the records access officer and/or Chief of Police and/or Mayor shall confer
with the Village Attorney prior to making a final decision as to granting
access.
§ 80-10. Publication of information. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
The Village Clerk is hereby directed to publish in any newspaper currently
designated by the Board of Trustees as an official newspaper of the Village,
a public notice containing the following information:
Chapter 83
RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 83-1. Establishment and purpose.
A Recreation Advisory Committee is hereby established in and for the
Village of Sleepy Hollow to advise and consult with the Board of Trustees
and Recreation Department regarding recreation and parks located within
the Village.
A. The fact that such police records as may be made available pursuant to
the Freedom of Information Law of the State of New York will be made
available for inspection and copying at the office of the Chief of Police at
police headquarters at 28 Beekman Avenue and that all other Village
records that are to be made so available pursuant to the statute will be
made available for inspection and copying at the office of the Village
Clerk, Treasurer and Building Inspector in Village Hall, 28 Beekman
Avenue.
B. The name, title and business address and telephone number of the
personnel designated as records access officers hereunder.
C. The right to appeal by any person denied access to a record by either
the records access officers or the Chief of Police and the business
address and name of the Mayor to whom an appeal is to be directed.
§ 80-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-2
1:33
§ 83-2. Composition; appointment; terms.
The Recreation Advisory Committee shall consist of seven members, all of
whom shall be residents of the Village of Sleepy Hollow and who shall not
hold any other position, elective or appointive, under the municipality. The
members shall be appointed by the Mayor. The members of the Committee
first appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one
member shall expire annually thereafter, and their successors shall
thereafter be appointed to serve terms of years which shall total in number
the membership of the Committee.
§ 83-3. Compensation of members; vacancies.
Members of such Committee shall serve without pay. Vacancies in such
Committee occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be for
the unexpired term and shall be filled in the same manner as original
appointments.
§ 83-4. Removal of members.
A member of the Committee may be removed for cause upon written
charges presented by the governing body of the Village and after notice of
such charges and a public hearing thereon.
Chapter 87
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
§ 87-1. Purpose.
In order to provide for a broader pull of professional employees for the
positions of Village Clerk and Deputy Village Clerk and Village Treasurer
and Deputy Village Treasurer, alternate residency requirements, pursuant
to the Village Law of the State of New York, are hereby established.
§ 87-2. Eligibility. [Amended 1-22-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
Pursuant to the authority provided in the Village Law of the State of New
York, § 3-300, the Village of Sleepy Hollow hereby provides that, in lieu of
the residency requirements imposed by Village Law, the person appointed
to the position of Village Clerk or Deputy Village Clerk or Village Treasurer
or Deputy Village Treasurer may reside within the State of New York.
§ 83-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 87-2
1:34
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 110
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 200. Noise — See Ch. 272.
§ 110-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and controls of various
types of intrusion, holdup, fire alarm and other emergency signals from
alarm devices that require Police Department or Fire Department responses
for investigation, action and safeguarding of property at the location of
an event which is reported by a signal transmitted by telephone, leased
wire, radio or in any other way relayed to the Police Department or Fire
Department by an alarm device requiring investigation or other action by
any person acting in response to a signal actuated by an alarm device,
including such devices already in use within the Village.
§ 110-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM DEVICE — Any mechanism, equipment or device which is designed
to operate, automatically or manually, to transmit an audible or visible
signal, message or warning from one place to another location.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal actuated through an alarm system to which the
Police Department or Fire Department responds which is not the result of a
holdup, robbery or other crime, fire or other emergency.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Fire Department of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
PERMIT — A permit obtained on a form supplied by the Village Clerk of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow and approved by either the Police Chief of the
Police Department or the Fire Chief of the Fire Department of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow.
§ 110-3. Permit required.
No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall operate or maintain an
alarm system which automatically transmits a signal, message or warning to
the Fire Department or Police Department without first obtaining a permit
for the same as required by this chapter.
§ 87-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-4
1:35
§ 110-4. Application for permit.
§ 110-5. Inspections.
The Chief of either the Police Department or the Fire Department shall have
the right to inspect any alarm system prior to issuance of the permit for its
operation and may cause an inspection of such system to be made at any
time after issuance of a permit to determine whether it is being used in
conformity of the terms of the permit and the provisions of this chapter.5
§ 110-6. Permit fees. [Amended 1-5-1981 by L.L. No. 1-1981;
8-16-1994 by L.L. No. 11-1994]
The annual permit fees for the alarm system shall be as follows:
A. Application for a permit to install, maintain or operate an alarm system
which is intended to automatically transmit a signal, message or
warning by an audible or visible signal to the Police Department or Fire
Department shall be filed with the Village Clerk on forms supplied by
the Village Clerk, together with an application fee to be established and
determined by the Board of Trustees from time to time and set forth in
the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees. Said
application shall set forth the name and address and telephone number
of the installer of the system and the company that maintains the alarm
if different than the installer and the owner, lessee or user of the
premises where the alarm system will be installed. [Amended
8-16-1994 by L.L. No. 11-1994]
B. The Chief of either the Police Department or the Fire Department shall,
upon receiving the application from the Village Clerk, immediately
cause an inspection to be made of the premises described in the
application and the locations where the alarm system will be installed
and shall approve the application if he finds that:
(1) The use of said alarm system to transmit a signal, message or
warning to either the Police Department or the Fire Department
will not interfere with the orderly conduct of Village, Police or Fire
Department business.
(2) The person, firm or corporation installing the system maintains an
adequate service organization to repair, maintain and otherwise
service said alarm systems sold or leased by said installation
service.
(3) The applicant on whose premises the alarm system is to be
installed and the installer of the alarm system agree to install said
system in either the Police Department or Fire Department in such
a manner and in locations designated by the Chief of the Police
Department or Chief of the Fire Department.
5. Editor's Note: Original § 3-6 of the 1965 Code, Compliance date, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013.
§ 110-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 110-6
1:36
§ 110-7. Limitations.
No alarm system shall be connected to either the Police Department or Fire
Department for which an application by permit is not on file with the Village
Clerk and which has not been approved by either the Police Chief or the
Fire Chief.
§ 110-8. False alarms. [Amended 3-16-1994 by L.L. No. 4-1994;
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
It shall be a violation of this chapter to cause or permit a false alarm to be
made, and any person who causes or permits to be made such false alarm
shall be subject to the penalty provision of this chapter.
§ 110-9. Fines for false alarms. [Amended 1-5-1981 by L.L. No.
1-1981; 3-16-1994 by L.L. No. 4-1994]
A. Business location: to be established and determined by the Board of
Trustees from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule included at
the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
B. Private home: to be established and determined by the Board of
Trustees from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule included at
the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
C. Church or school: no charge.
A. Any owner or lessee of property having an alarm device or system of
devices on his or its premises and any user of any services or equipment
furnished pursuant to this chapter shall pay to the Village of Sleepy
Hollow, upon demand, a charge for each and every false alarm, as
defined within this chapter, to which Police Department or Fire
Department personnel respond in each calendar year as follows:
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(1) First two false alarms: no charge; a warning only.
(2) Three to four false alarms: $75 per occurrence.
(3) Five to 10 false alarms: $150 per occurrence.
(4) More than 10 false alarms: $200 per occurrence.
B. More than five false alarms in any calendar year may constitute
grounds for the suspension or revocation of an alarm user's permit. Any
alarm user charged with a false alarm penalty as prescribed herein may
appeal such charge or penalty, in writing, within 10 days after receipt of
the notice of such penalty and may appear before the Mayor and Board
of Trustees at a place and time selected by the Board. False alarm
penalties or charges may be waived only by order of the Mayor and
Board of Trustees. Failure to pay a false alarm charge or penalty as
prescribed shall subject such alarm user to the suspension or
§ 110-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-9
1:37
§ 110-10. Automatic cutoff system; installation and maintenance of
alarm system.
§ 110-11. Revocation of permit.
The Police Chief or the Fire Chief may revoke any permit issued pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter after giving written notice to the holder
of the permit and an opportunity for the holder of the permit to be heard
by the Board of Trustees, if the Police Chief or the Fire Chief determines
that the alarm system installed pursuant to said permit has been installed,
maintained or operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any
term or condition contained in said permit or for failure to pay the annual
permit fee as specified in this chapter.
revocation of his/her alarm user permit, as determined by the Mayor
and Board of Trustees.
A. Automatic cutoff systems. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(1) Requirement of cutoff system. No person shall install or maintain in
any building, structure or establishment in the Village of Sleepy
Hollow an external audible alarm of any type which does not also
contain an automatic cutoff system or feature automatically cutting
off the source of power to the alarm after it has sounded for a
period of no longer than 15 minutes.
(2) Penalties.
(a) Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of
up to $250. Each day on which an alarm remains in
nonconformity with this section shall be deemed a separate
violation.
(b) The owner and the occupant of any building, structure and
establishment shall each be responsible for the conformity
with this section of any alarm located on or in premises owned
or occupied by him.
B. The installation and maintenance of the alarm system permitted by this
chapter, including the connections to locations designated by the Police
Chief or Fire Chief, shall be made at no cost to the Village. The owner,
lessee or user shall be responsible for the maintenance and service of
his or its alarm device equipment and shall be responsible for all
malfunctions of his or its equipment. If it is necessary to change the
location within the area designated by the Police Chief or Fire Chief to
another location designated by the Police Chief or Fire Chief, the
Village shall not be responsible for any expenses incurred by the owner,
lessee or user of the alarm system for reconnecting said alarm system.
§ 110-9 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 110-12
1:38
§ 110-12. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which does not pay any charge or
fee established in this chapter or who or which violates any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine in an amount which shall not be in excess
of $250 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day during which a violation occurs or is committed.
Chapter 114
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public gatherings — See Ch. 268.
§ 110-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-12
1:39

ARTICLE I
Public Consumption
[Adopted 7-14-1975 (Ch. 40, Art. IV, of the 1965 Code)]
§ 114-1. Definitions. [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTENT TO CONSUME — Includes any of the following: drinking from the
container; possession with movement of the container to the mouth; and
any circumstances evidencing an intent to ultimately consume in any public
place.
OPEN BOTTLE, CAN OR OTHER CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass or
other receptacle suitable for or used to hold any liquid, which has been
uncapped, uncorked, the tab removed or the top sliced, cut or broken, or its
original condition altered in such a way that the liquid can flow out of it.
§ 114-2. Consumption on public property prohibited. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage,
as defined by § 3 of the New York State Alcoholic Beverage Control Law,
on any of the highways, avenues, roadways, sidewalks, parks or other
public property of the Village of Sleepy Hollow. Any person having in his
possession or under his control, in or on any of the aforesaid places, an
open container of any sort, whether covered or uncovered, containing any
alcoholic beverage as above defined shall be presumed to have consumed
or intend to consume said beverage in violation hereof.
§ 114-3. Exception.
This article shall not apply to the consumption of alcoholic beverages at any
meeting or gathering in which permission has been obtained as set forth in
Chapter 268, Public Gatherings.
§ 114-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Any person violating this article shall be guilty of a violation punishable by
a fine of up to $250, 15 days' imprisonment, or both.
§ 114-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-4
1:41
Chapter 119
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 200. Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 119-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Includes but is not limited to the type of coin-
, token- or similarly operated machine commonly known as "bagatelle,"
"football," "pinball," "video," "electronic" or "computer" and any and all
other coin- or token-operated rides, attractions and games not otherwise
prohibited by the laws of this state and used for a commercial purpose.
Specifically excluded from this chapter are coin-, token- or similarly
operated pool tables, jukeboxes and shuffleboard. No more than one pool
table, jukebox or shuffleboard is permitted on a premises.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, a partnership, company,
corporation, association or society, and any officer, agent, servant or
employee of the foregoing in responsible charge of premises hereinafter
mentioned.
PREMISES — Includes any parcel of land, building, structure, vehicle, boat,
airplane or any other property or part thereof.
§ 119-2. Permit required; application; number of devices restricted.
A. No amusement device shall be kept, maintained, used, exhibited or
operated in or upon any premises within the Village of Sleepy Hollow,
unless the owner thereof and the person upon whose premises the same
shall be kept, maintained, used, exhibited or operated shall first obtain
a permit from the Village Clerk of the Village of Sleepy Hollow as
hereinafter provided.
(1) A permit shall be issued upon the following terms and conditions. A
verified application, in duplicate, shall be made by such person to
the Village Clerk for said permit upon blanks to be furnished by
said Clerk, giving the name and address of the applicant, the name
and address of the manufacturer of the amusement device, the
manufacturer's number, if any, a complete detailed description of
the amusement device, including all the mechanical features
thereof, the method of its operation, the location by street and
number where the amusement device is sought to be permitted, the
nature and use of the premises upon which the amusement device
is proposed to be kept, maintained, exhibited, used or operated, the
§ 114-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 119-2
1:42
§ 119-3. Permit required of device owner and property owner.
A permit shall be procured by the owner of said amusement device and also
by the person upon whose premises the same is located. Such amusement
device shall have written thereon the name and address of the owner
thereof.
§ 119-4. Permit fee and display.
§ 119-5. Permit expiration date; inspection of premises.
number of such amusement devices already permitted and sought
to be permitted upon the same premises and such further
information as the Village Clerk or the Board of Trustees may
require.
(2) The application shall also contain a complete statement indicating
whether or not any previous application has been made hereunder
and whether any permit has been received, refused, suspended or
revoked, with the circumstances thereof.
B. No premises shall keep, maintain, use, exhibit or operate more than a
total of three amusement devices within the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
Furthermore, the owner thereof and the person upon whose premises
the same shall be kept, maintained, used, exhibited or operated shall
first obtain a permit from the Village Clerk of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow as hereinafter provided.
A. Prior to the issuance of such permit, there shall be paid to the Village
Clerk of the Village of Sleepy Hollow the annual sum to be established
and determined by the Board of Trustees from time to time and set forth
in the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees, by the
owner of the amusement devices as a one-time annual fee and, by the
person upon whose premises the same are kept, maintained, used,
exhibited or operated, a sum to be established and determined by the
Board of Trustees from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule
included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees. Furthermore, there shall be a
one-time nonrefundable application fee to be established and
determined by the Board of Trustees from time to time and set forth in
the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees, and payable
by the person on whose premises the amusement device is used,
exhibited or displayed, upon filing of his application. If the application is
approved, a credit will be applied against the permit fee. Not more than
three such amusement devices shall be permitted for maintenance,
exhibition or use in the same premises at any one time. Permit fees shall
be prorated on a monthly basis for a calendar year January 1 through
December 31. [Amended 8-16-1994 by L.L. No. 11-1994]
B. All permits shall, at all times, be conspicuously displayed in the public
area of the premises housing the amusement device(s).
§ 119-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-5
1:43
§ 119-6. Minors. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted to be the holder of
a permit hereunder, nor shall any person in responsible charge of the
premises upon which such permitted amusement device is located permit
such person to operate said amusement device.
§ 119-7. Enforcement.
The control and regulation of these amusement devices shall be in the Chief
of Police of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 119-8. Revocation of permit.
A. All permits shall expire on the first day of January succeeding the date
of issuance unless otherwise revoked, pursuant to this chapter.
B. Prior to any renewal or reissuance of any permit granted under this
chapter, a thorough review of the premises housing an amusement
device will be made by the Chief of Police to ensure proper compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Any permit granted hereunder may be revoked by the Chief of Police for
any of the following:
(1) The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation of any
governmental officer, agency or department governing or
applicable to the maintenance or conduct of the premises upon
which said amusement device is located.
(3) The violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation governing or
applicable to the maintenance, possession, use or operation of the
permitted amusement device.
(4) Upon the conviction of the holder of a permit or any person in
responsible charge of said premises of a crime.
(5) Otherwise for just cause.
B. This section shall in no way limit or impair the power otherwise vested
in the Board of Trustees by law to revoke such permits.
C. All applicants will receive written notice of denial of a request for a
permit or revocation of the same. The notice will contain a brief
description of the reasons for the denial or revocation. Within seven
days of notice of denial or revocation, an aggrieved party may petition
the Chief of Police for review of said denial or revocation. Said petition
must be in writing, together with any and all supporting documentation.
After review of said petition, if the permit for an amusement device is
not restored, then the aggrieved party may seek relief pursuant to the
Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York.
§ 119-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 119-9
1:44
§ 119-9. Location of devices. [Amended 2-2-1993 by L.L. No.
2-1993]
No amusement device shall be kept, maintained, used or exhibited or
operated in or upon any premises within the Village of Sleepy Hollow. This
provision shall not apply to any bar or tavern licensed by the State Liquor
Authority of the State of New York for the on-premises consumption of
alcohol.
§ 119-10. Regulations and restrictions.
§ 119-11. Penalties for offenses.
§ 119-12. When effective. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
A. No premises shall be permitted to keep, maintain, use or exhibit an
amusement device, except in a C-2 Central Commercial Zone as defined
in Chapter 450, Zoning, § 450-10, unless otherwise permitted in a
preexisting nonconforming use. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
B. Proper and separate male and female sanitary facilities shall be
provided on each premises.
C. Closing time for authorized premises shall be no later than 4:00 a.m.
D. Gambling in any form, whether actual or implied, is strictly prohibited.
Violation of this subsection shall result in immediate revocation of all
permits issued under this chapter.
E. No minor enrolled as a student in any school, grades kindergarten
through 12, shall operate or cause to be operated an amusement device
while school is in session.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment, and all permits held by such person
shall automatically be revoked. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
B. Each day's maintenance, exhibition or use of any amusement device in
violation of the foregoing sections shall constitute a separate offense
per amusement device.
§ 119-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-12
1:45
Chapter 123
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 200. Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 119-12 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 119-12
1:46
ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 6-1-1978 (Ch. 16 of the 1965 Code)]
§ 123-1. Findings and intent. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
The Board of Trustees finds that dogs in the Village have, in some instances,
been allowed to cause annoyance and damage to the person and properties
of others and, further, that dogs properly cared for serve a useful purpose.
Therefore, the Board of Trustees enacts the following article to preserve
the relationship between a dog and his/her owner and at the same time
to protect the health, safety and property of others from annoyance and
damage caused by dogs.
§ 123-2. Title; applicability.
The title of this article shall be the "Dog Control Ordinance of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow," and it shall affect the areas within the jurisdictional limits
of the Village.
§ 123-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — The person authorized by the Village
Board from time to time, by resolution, to enforce the provisions of this
article. The Animal Control Officer shall be authorized to draw on
information and obtain supporting affidavits for submission to the Village
Justice Court and to perform all functions of the office permitted by statute,
law or ordinance.[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
OWNER — Any person who is a licensed owner of a dog or any person who
keeps, feeds or harbors a dog for over one week. The owner need not be a
resident of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, but for a violation to occur the dog
must be in the Village limits of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
PERSON — Any natural individual or two or more individuals living in the
same household, or any firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation
in his or its own capacity or as administrator, executor, trustee, receiver or
other representative capacity appointed by a court.
§ 123-4. Owner to be held responsible. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
The owner of every dog which is at any time kept in, brought to or comes
into the Village of Sleepy Hollow shall be held responsible for the strict
observance by such animal, with respect to such animal, of all the rules and
regulations contained in this article at all times when such dog is within the
Village.
§ 123-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-5
1:47
§ 123-5. Dog licensing. [Added 9-17-1979 by L.L. No. 6-1979;
11-3-1980 by L.L. No. 7-1980; 7-7-1987 by L.L. No. 9-1987;
8-16-1994 by L.L. No. 11-1994; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Applications for dog licenses shall be directed to and processed by the Clerk
of the Town of Mt. Pleasant.
§ 123-6. Dogs in heat to be confined.
The owner of every female dog shall effectively confine such dog in or on
the premises of the owner or person harboring the dog during every period
in which said female dog is in heat.
§ 123-7. Leash requirements.
§ 123-8. Barking by confined dogs prohibited. [Amended 1-22-2013
by L.L. No. 1-2013]
No dogs confined under the provisions of §§ 123-6 and 123-7 of this article
shall be allowed to bark for an unreasonable length of time causing serious
annoyance or disturbance to a reasonable person of normal sensitivities or
to the neighborhood, and it shall be unlawful for a person to allow a dog to
be in such a condition.
§ 123-9. Nuisances prohibited. [Amended 9-18-1990 by L.L. No.
12-1990; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
No person as defined in § 123-5 of this article shall cause or permit his or
her dog to become or commit a nuisance within the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
As used in this article, a "nuisance" shall be defined as follows:
A. No dog shall be off the premises of its owner or the person harboring
said dog unless it is on a leash of not more than six feet in length, which
leash shall be held by a person having the ability to control and restrain
the dog by means of the collar or harness and the leash. No dog shall be
permitted to be in any park or playground, recreation area or ball field,
even if leashed, except as provided in Subsection B below. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. The walking of leashed dogs at Douglas Park, Kingsland Point Park and
Horan's Landing shall be permitted.6 [Added 9-8-2009 by L.L. No.
6-2009]
A. Dumping of garbage and other receptacles.
B. Fighting with other dogs.
C. Prolonged barking or whining.
6. Editor's Note: Original § 16-7, Curfew, of the 1965 Code, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013.
§ 123-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 123-9
1:48
§ 123-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-11-1978; 7-6-1981 by
L.L. No. 3-1981; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Every person convicted of violating any of the requirements or other
provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $250.
§ 123-11. Owner not entitled to compensation.
§ 123-12. Administrative official. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
This article shall be administered by a Animal Control Officer appointed
pursuant to the Agriculture and Markets Law or, in lieu thereof, by any
incorporated society for the prevention of cruelty to animals or similar
D. Tearing, digging or otherwise destroying or damaging property of any
person, firm or corporation.
E. Chasing or otherwise harassing any person in such a manner as
reasonably to cause intimidation or to put such person in reasonable
apprehension of bodily harm or injury.
F. Habitually chasing or barking at motor vehicles.
G. No owner or possessor of a dog or domestic animal shall suffer or
permit it to soil, defile or commit any nuisance on any common fare,
sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any place where the
public congregates or walks or upon any lawn, shrubbery or tree on any
private property not belonging to the owner or custodian of said dog or
domestic animal. The owner or possessor of a dog or domestic animal
that permits the dog or domestic animal to soil, defile or commit any
nuisance on that portion of the property lying between the street and
the sidewalk (curbing of the dog or domestic animal) shall be
responsible to clean up, on an immediate basis, said defilement or
nuisance (fecal matter).7
A. The owner, harborer or possessor of any dog destroyed under the
provisions of this article shall not be entitled to any compensation, and
no action shall be maintainable thereafter to recover the value of the
dog.
B. Immediately after a second substantiated instance of personal injury or
injury to another animal, the offending dog shall, by order of the Village
Justice, be permanently confined to the premises of its owner. If the
owner of said dog fails to comply with the confinement order, the
Village Justice shall then order said dog destroyed in a humane manner
in accordance with the laws of the State of New York. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
7. Editor's Note: Original §§ 16-10, Impoundment of abandoned dogs, 16-11, Seizure and
detention standards; notice, and 16-12, Redemption; disposal, of the 1965 Code, which
immediately followed this section, were repealed 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013.
§ 123-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-12
1:49
incorporated dog protective association with which the Village of Sleepy
Hollow shall have contracted pursuant to the Agriculture and Markets Law.
Any such Animal Control Officer appointed by the Village of Sleepy Hollow
shall have the powers and prerequisites of a peace officer of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow.
§ 123-13. Maximum number permitted.
Except as provided in Chapter 450, Zoning, no person shall keep more than
four dogs of licensing age, as defined by the New York Agriculture and
Markets Law, within the incorporated limits of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 123-14. Procedure for filing complaints.
Any person who observes a dog causing damage or destruction to property
of a person other than its owner or committing a nuisance upon the
premises of a person other than its owner or who is subjected to habitually
loud or annoying barking or who shall be subject to or observe a dog
otherwise harassing any person or persons or otherwise acting in violation
of this article may file a signed complaint, under oath, with the Village
Justice of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, specifying the objectionable conduct
of the dog, the date thereof, the damage caused, a description of the
dog and the name and residence, if known, of the owner or other person
harboring said dog.
§ 123-15. Exemption for service dogs. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
Recognizing the special needs of blind and disabled residents and their
reliance on Seeing Eye and other types of service dogs, the owner or
handler of said Seeing Eye or service dog shall be exempt from §§ 123-6,
123-6, and 123-9.
§ 123-16. Kingsland Park Dog Park Run. [Added 3-26-2019 by L.L.
No. 2-20198]
A. Permits.
(1) Permits are available to Westchester County residents only.
(2) Permits shall be valid from January 1 through December 31 of each
year. For each dog park permit, the applicant shall pay to the
Village Treasurer a fee of:
(a) $25 for Sleepy Hollow residents and $30 for non-Sleepy Hollow
residents from January 1 through September 30 for a permit
that expires December 31.
8. Editor's Note: This local law also renumbered former § 123-16 as § 126-17.
§ 123-12 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 123-16
1:50
(b) $15 for Sleepy Hollow residents and $20 for non-Sleepy Hollow
residents from October 1 through December 31 for a permit
that expires December 31.
B. Rules. The following rules apply to the use of Kingsland Point Park Dog
Park Run.
(1) All dogs entering the dog park must be licensed and have a valid
Village of Sleepy Hollow dog park permit.
(2) Owners are legally responsible for their dogs and injuries to
humans and other dogs caused by them.
(3) Limit two dogs per person.
(4) Dogs must be accompanied by individuals 16 years or older.
(5) Dogs must be leashed upon entering and exiting the dog park.
(6) Owners must carry a leash at all times. Dogs should be under voice
control.
(7) Gates at the dog park must be closed at all times.
(8) All dogs must be properly inoculated and healthy.
(9) No puppies less than four months of age are allowed in the park.
(10) Animals must wear collars and identification tags at all times.
(11) Dogs in heat will not be allowed. Spayed/neutered animals are
recommended.
(12) Owners must clean up after their dogs. Dog waste must be bagged
and disposed of properly.
(13) Dogs showing aggression towards people or other animals will be
removed from the dog park and permit may be revoked.
(14) Dogs who exhibit a history of aggressive behavior will not be
allowed to enter the dog park.
(15) Owners must not leave dogs unattended or be allowed out of sight.
(16) Young children in the dog park must be under constant supervision
by a parent or supervising adult.
(17) No excessive noise or barking.
(18) Fill in any hole your dog digs.
(19) No food of any sort is allowed in the dog park.
(20) No dog walkers allowed.
(21) No more than 10 dogs in the dog park at one time.
§ 123-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-16
1:51
§ 123-17. Statutory provisions to prevail. [Amended 1-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
Nothing in this article will be deemed to be inconsistent with the New
York Agriculture and Markets Law, Article 7. Where differences occur, such
inconsistencies will be resolved in favor of the state mandate.
C. Suspension and revocation of permit.
(1) In addition to the fine authorized by this Chapter 123, a violation of
any provision of this Chapter 123, Article I or of any rule may result
in the forfeiture of a permit and in the issuance of a summons.
(2) The Chief of Police may, in his discretion, suspend a permit pending
or in advance of the prosecution of the permit violation.
§ 123-16 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 123-17
1:52
Chapter 133
BARBER SHOPS AND BEAUTY SALONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 280.
§ 133-1. Purpose.
As a legislative purpose, it is deemed necessary to the safety, health and
general welfare of the inhabitants of Sleepy Hollow that the hours of
operation of barber shops, haircutting salons, hairdressers, beauty parlors,
and similar types of establishments be prohibited between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 133-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BARBER — One whose business is cutting, dressing, grooming or styling
hair, shaving and trimming beards, and performing related services.
BARBER SHOP — The place of business of a barber.
BEAUTY PARLOR — An establishment providing individuals with services
to improve their beauty, such as hairdressing, manicuring, pedicuring,
tanning, facial treatments, and massage, including the sale of goods related
to such services.
HAIRCUTTING SALON — The place of business of a hairdresser, barber, or
hair stylist.
HAIRDRESSER — One who cuts, arranges, styles, colors, dresses, or
washes hair.
§ 133-3. Hours of operation limited.
No barber shop, haircutting salon, hair dresser, beauty parlor, or similar
type of establishment shall be open for business between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 133-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $250, 15 days' imprisonment,
or both, for each offense.
Chapter 135
§ 123-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-4
1:53
BICYCLES, IN-LINE SKATES, SKATEBOARDS AND OTHER
EQUIPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 405.
§ 133-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 133-4
1:54
ARTICLE I
Use Regulations
[Adopted 8-18-1937; amended in its entirety 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013 (Ch. 9, Art. I, of the 1965 Code)]
§ 135-1. Use of sidewalks prohibited; exceptions.
No bicycles, in-line skates, skateboards, or other vehicle propelled or moved
by power carried by the vehicle itself, or foot power, shall be allowed to
run on any sidewalk in this Village, in the commercial zones of the Village.
In all residential and other zones, bicycles, in-line skates, skateboards, or
other vehicles propelled or moved by power carried by the vehicle itself,
or foot power, shall be allowed on sidewalks, but must yield to pedestrians.
Motorized equipment for the handicapped is excluded.
§ 135-2. Required equipment.
No vehicle of the nature herein mentioned shall be permitted on the streets
after sunset without having proper lights and/or reflectors on the same.
Operators and/or passengers of vehicles of the nature herein mentioned
shall wear reflective equipment when operating such vehicles after sunset.
§ 135-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a penalty not to exceed $250 for each and every
offense.
§ 135-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-3
1:55

ARTICLE II
Helmets
[Adopted 5-22-2001 by L.L. No. 5-2001 (Ch. 9, Art. II, of the 1965
Code)]
§ 135-4. Purpose. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
The purpose of this article is to promote safety by establishing a local law
requiring bicycle riders and passengers, skateboard and in-line skate users
and rollerskaters to wear protective gear, thereby reducing the possibility
of injuries and fatalities.
§ 135-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Any vehicle with two wheels in tandem, a steering handle,
seat and pedals. This definition includes a bicycle equipped with temporary
training wheels.
HELMET — Any protective equipment designed or intended to be worn
on the head which complies with the standards of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI Z 90.4 bicycle helmet standards) or the Snell
Memorial Foundation's Standards for Protective Headgear for Use in
Bicycling.
IN-LINE SKATE — A device consisting of an upper portion that is secured
to a human foot, with a frame or chassis attached along the length of the
bottom of such upper portion, with such frame or chassis holding two or
more wheels that are longitudinally aligned and used to skate or glide by
means of human foot and leg power while having such device attached to
each such foot or leg.[Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
ROLLER SKATE — A shoe with small wheels attached to it, including any
form of in-line wheel configuration.
SKATEBOARD — A short, oblong board with wheels at each end. This
definition shall include scooters, go-peds and other similar variations.
WEARING A HELMET — Having a helmet of good fit fastened securely to
the head by the use of helmet straps.
§ 135-6. Prohibitions.
A. No person operating a bicycle shall carry an infant under the age of one
year as a passenger by any means whatsoever, including the use of a
bicycle seat, body pack or by any other means.
B. No persons operating a bicycle shall carry as a passenger any person
between the ages of one year and five years unless such passenger is
placed in a separate seat, securely attached to the bicycle, and such
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-6
1:57
§ 135-7. Penalties for offenses; waiver; contributory negligence.
§ 135-8. Home rule.
Pursuant to New York Municipal Home Rule Law § 22, this article is
intended to supersede any inconsistent provision of law.
seat is capable of retaining the passenger in place and protecting the
passenger from the moving parts of the bicycle.
C. No person who is 15 years of age or younger shall operate a twowheeled
bicycle, or be carried as a passenger, unless such person is
wearing a helmet meeting the standards of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) or the Snell Memorial Foundation's
Standards for Protective Headgear for Use in Bicycling. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
D. No person who is 15 years of age or younger shall use a skateboard, inline
skates or any type of roller skates unless such person is wearing a
helmet meeting the standards of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) or the Snell Memorial Foundation's Standards for
Protective Headgear for Use in Bicycling. [Amended 1-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a violation and liable for a civil fine not to exceed
$250. In addition, any person who is a parent or guardian of a minor
child, and whose minor child is found in violation of any of the
provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation
and liable for a civil fine not to exceed $250.
B. The court may waive any fine for a person who violates any provision of
this article where the court is supplied with proof that, between the
date of the violation and the appearance date for violation of this
article, a person accused of a violation has purchased, rented or
otherwise secured possession of a helmet.
C. The court may, in its discretion, waive any fine for which a person who
violates the provisions of this article would otherwise be liable if the
court finds that due to reasons of economic hardship such person was
unable to purchase a helmet or due to such economic hardship such
person was unable to obtain a helmet from the statewide bicycle helmet
distribution program, as established in § 206 of the Public Health Law,
or other local distribution program.
D. The failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this article
shall not constitute contributory negligence or assumption of risk and
shall not in any way bar, preclude or foreclose an action for personal
injury or wrongful death by or on behalf of such person, nor in any way
diminish or reduce the damages recoverable in any such action.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 135-6 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 135-8
1:58
Chapter 139
BOARDINGHOUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Housing standards — See Ch. 245.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Residential occupancy restrictions — See Ch.
319.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 139-1. Legislative intent.
As a legislative determination, it is deemed necessary to the safety, health
and general welfare of the residents of the Village of Sleepy Hollow that
certain types of residential establishments within the Village be regulated
due to the severe overcrowding, congested conditions and depletion of
parking they create. It is the purpose of this chapter to ensure the health,
safety, comfort and general welfare of the inhabitants of the community.
§ 139-2. Definitions. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Notwithstanding any other provisions which may be contained in the Village
Code of Sleepy Hollow, as used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
BOARDER or ROOMER — A person who permanently occupies a room in a
dwelling unit for sleeping purposes for which he or she pays compensation
to the property owner, lessee, or other tenant occupying the dwelling.
BOARDINGHOUSE or ROOMING HOUSE — A building which contains one
or more rooming units and in which space is occupied or intended to be
occupied by persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother
or father, or sister or brother of the owner and operator and in which no
table board is provided.
§ 139-3. Permit required.
No rooming house or boardinghouse which furnishes lodging or rooming
accommodations for hire within the same shall exist or be maintained within
the Village without a permit, which shall be issued by the Board of Trustees
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, New York, as hereinafter provided.
§ 139-4. Requirements for issuance and maintenance of permit.
[Amended 2-27-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
No permit shall be issued hereunder and any permit heretofore or hereafter
issued shall be subject to revocation unless the applicant or holder of such
permit fully complies with the following requirements:
§ 135-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-4
1:59
§ 139-5. Application for permit.
An application for a permit shall be in writing upon printed forms furnished
by the Village Clerk stating:
§ 139-6. Sprinklers required. [Amended 2-27-2001 by L.L. No.
3-2001]
Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, all rooming
houses and boardinghouses located within the Village of Sleepy Hollow
shall comply with the installation of a fire sprinkler system meeting the
A. The applicant shall be the individual owner of such premises and shall
be of good moral character.
B. The maximum number of roomers or boarders shall be four.
C. There shall be no more than one person occupying a room as a roomer
or boarder, and such room shall have a minimum of 100 square feet of
floor space. More than one person may occupy a single room if related
by blood or marriage, provided that the room shall be of such size as to
provide a minimum of 75 square feet of floor area for each person.
D. Rooming houses and boardinghouses legally operating and duly
permitted at the time of the adoption of this chapter, as amended, which
may be nonconforming uses under Chapter 450, Zoning, of the Code of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow shall be entitled to the issuance of a permit
upon compliance with all provisions of this chapter, except Subsections
A, B and C of this section under applications made prior to and for the
permit year ending December 31, 2001. After said date, no permit shall
be issued to any applicant unless such applicant fully complies with all
of the provisions of this chapter, including said Subsections A, B and C
of this section. Notwithstanding the above, provisions regarding
nonconformity shall not apply to any use established or building or
structure erected in violation of law, regardless of the time of
establishment or erection. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
E. All permitted rooming houses and boardinghouses shall be subject to
inspections at all reasonable hours by properly authorized
representatives of the Village of Sleepy Hollow. Failure to comply with
this provision shall constitute a ground for immediate revocation of the
permit.
A. The name, age and occupation of the applicant.
B. The residence of the applicant. [Amended 2-27-2001 by L.L. No.
3-2001]
C. The experience of the applicant in such a business.
D. The location by street number where the occupation or business is to be
carried on. [Amended 2-27-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
§ 139-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 139-6
1:60
requirements of the standards of the National Fire Protection Association
relating to installations in these occupancies on or before December 31,
2001. In order to obtain a temporary permit to operate, current owners
shall provide to the Village of Sleepy Hollow a signed contract for the
installation of the required fire protection system prior to obtaining said
temporary permit.
§ 139-7. Registers. [Amended 2-27-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
Any person operating such a rooming house or boardinghouse pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter shall keep upon such premises a list showing
the names of all persons residing or living in or upon said premises and
shall exhibit said list to any authorized representative of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow at any reasonable time upon demand, and the failure to so
exhibit same shall constitute a violation and be punished in accordance with
§ 139-8.
§ 139-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Any person or persons violating any provisions of this chapter shall be liable
to a civil penalty of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 for each
day or part thereof during which such violation continues; which fine shall
be increased to not less than $500 nor more than $2,500 for subsequent
violations. The civil penalties provided by this section shall be recoverable
in an action instituted in the name of this Village. In addition to the fine, the
Court may impose a one-year conditional discharge requiring the defendant
to permit access to the Department to reinspect the premises from time to
time during the period of the conditional discharge.
§ 139-9. Permit fees. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
The fee for any permit required by the provisions of this chapter shall be at
the levels fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow or by local law.
§ 139-10. Term of permit.
A. No permit shall be issued or renewed for a longer period than one year,
and all permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. All
applications, properly filled out, must be filed with the Village Clerk of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow at least 30 days prior to the expiration of
the previous permit or 30 days before the applicant intends to
commence operations.
B. The permit fee for the issuance of a permit hereunder or for subsequent
renewals thereof is hereby established for the whole part of the
calendar year.
C. Said permit shall be automatically null and void upon changing of
ownership of the subject premises.
§ 139-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-11
1:61
§ 139-11. Effect on other provisions.
Anything contained in any other local law of the Village to the contrary
notwithstanding, the provisions of this chapter shall supersede such
contrary provisions.
§ 139-12. State regulations applicable.
The provisions of the Public Health Law, Building Code and Sanitary Code of
the State of New York applicable to boardinghouses and/or rooming houses
shall apply to every boardinghouse and rooming house in the Village of
Sleepy Hollow.
Chapter 145
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 110.
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 148.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 182.
Fees — See Ch. 200.
Housing standards — See Ch. 245.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Sewers — See Ch. 330.
§ 139-11 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 139-12
1:62
ARTICLE I
Fire Escapes
[Adopted 8-18-1937 (Ch. 21 of the 1965 Code)]
§ 145-1. Required means of egress.
Any and all owners or occupants of a hotel, factory, theater, opera house,
music hall or other place of amusement, assembly hall, church, literary or
charitable institution shall provide sufficient exit doors, opening outwards
from said buildings, and each exit must invariably be unlocked and
unfastened during the entire time of assemblage.
§ 145-2. Marker lights.
All exits or passageways to exits in any public building, factory, church,
hotel, theater, opera house, music hall or other place of amusement shall
be sufficiently marked and shall be provided with a red electric or gas
light, which light must be kept burning during the whole performance or
assemblage.
§ 145-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine
not to exceed $250, 15 days' imprisonment, or both, for each offense.
A. No seats shall be permitted in aisles or passageways leading to an exit,
nor shall people be permitted to stand in such aisles or passageways
during any performance.
B. Every public building, factory, church, hotel, music hall or other place
of amusement shall maintain and keep in a conspicuous place such fire
extinguishing appliances as, in the judgment of the Board of Trustees,
shall be necessary to safeguard the public.
§ 145-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-3
1:63

ARTICLE II
Sprinklers
[Adopted 10-3-1989 by L.L. No. 16-1989 (Ch. 48B of the 1965
Code)]
§ 145-4. Sprinkler systems required.
All buildings which are constructed after the effective date of this article
shall be required to have sprinkler systems. Such systems shall be approved
as per nationally accepted standards and the latest edition of the National
Fire Protection Association bulletin.
§ 145-5. Building permits.
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building,
structure or portion thereof unless compliance is met, as defined in § 145-4.
§ 145-6. Certificates of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for occupancy or use of any
building, structure or portion thereof required to have a sprinkler system,
as defined by § 145-4 above, unless such system is installed, inspected,
tested and approved.
§ 145-7. Exceptions.
§ 145-8. Alterations, additions and repairs.
Alterations, additions or repairs of any building as defined herein equal to
or exceeding 50% of the usable floor area of that building shall be required
to comply with § 145-4 above.
§ 145-9. Bureau of Fire Prevention established. [Amended
11-6-1991 by L.L. No. 8-1991; 8-20-1996 by L.L. No. 7-1996]
In order to be in compliance with § 145-4 above, a Bureau of Fire Prevention
shall be established, consisting of the Fire Chief, the Code Enforcement
Officer, two members appointed by the Mayor and serving at his pleasure,
who preferably shall be a New York State licensed professional engineer or
a New York State registered architect, and one member appointed from the
public at large by the Mayor with the approval of the Board of Trustees.
A. Sprinklers shall not be required to be installed in spaces where the
discharge of water would be hazardous. In such places, other approved
fire-extinguishing equipment shall be provided, as approved by the
Bureau of Fire Prevention.
B. Detached garages are excluded from the requirements of this article.
[Added 8-16-1994 by L.L. No. 11-1994]
§ 145-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-10
1:65
§ 145-10. Jurisdiction of Bureau. [Added 11-6-1991 by L.L. No.
8-1991]
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall serve as the municipal appeal agency
and shall assume jurisdiction for an independent review of all applications
pursuant to this article. In no event shall the Bureau of Fire Prevention
interpret or modify any provision of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, nor shall it in any manner substitute for the
regional boards of review with respect to Uniform Code provisions.
§ 145-11. Standards for appeal. [Added 11-6-1991 by L.L. No.
8-1991]
Any denial of a building permit on the basis of this article may be reviewed
under the following standards:
§ 145-12. Time to appeal. [Added 11-6-1991 by L.L. No. 8-1991]
Any appeal pursuant to this article must be filed no later than 30 days from
the date of an adverse determination on the application.
§ 145-13. Appeal procedure. [Added 11-6-1991 by L.L. No. 8-1991;
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
All appeals shall be conducted at an open hearing or meeting and the
procedures established by the Bureau of Fire Prevention, pursuant to a
notice published 10 days prior to the hearing and the mailing of the notice,
certified mail/return receipt requested, to all abutting property owners.
Upon reading of the public notice and the convening of a quorum, the
appeals board may hear such evidence as it deems appropriate and adjourn
the meeting from time to time as may be necessary to render a
determination. In any event, a determination shall be made no later than 90
days from the date of the initial hearing.
§ 145-14. Conflicts of interest. [Added 11-6-1991 by L.L. No.
8-1991]
No member of the appeal agency may deliberate if he is involved in a
family, business or professional manner with the applicant in a proceeding
pursuant to this article.
A. Undue economic hardship or burden.
B. Restriction from the achievement of a valid state or federal policy.
C. Physical or legal impossibility.
D. Impediment to the intended objective of the regulation.
E. Unnecessary in light of a viable alternative which meets the intended
objective of the more stringent ordinance.
§ 145-10 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 145-15
1:66
§ 145-15. Submission of plans. [Amended 11-6-1991 by L.L. No.
8-1991; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Two copies of all sprinkler system plans shall be submitted with calculations
where needed, and said plans shall be stamped by a licensed New York
State professional engineer or a licensed fire protection engineer.
§ 145-16. Penalties for offenses. [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine
not to exceed $250, 15 days' imprisonment, or both, for each offense.
§ 145-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-16
1:67

ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement of Uniform Code
[Adopted 3-23-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010 (Ch. 22 of the 1965 Code)9]
§ 145-17. Purpose and intent; applicability.
This article provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code)
and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code) in
the Village. This article is adopted pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home
Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Code, other state
law, or other section of this article, all buildings, structures, and premises,
regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions this article.
§ 145-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 145-20 of this article.
The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this article.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A
certificate issued pursuant to § 145-23B of this article.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector appointed pursuant to
§ 145-19B of this article.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — Includes the Building Inspector
and all inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Building Inspector
pursuant to § 145-31A of this article.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR — An inspector appointed pursuant to § 145-19D of this article.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 145-26 of this article.
The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this article.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — Includes an individual, corporation, limited-liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association,
or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 145-22 of this article.
9. Editor's Note: This article was amended to change "Code Enforcement Officer" to
"Building Inspector" 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013.
§ 145-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-18
1:69
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 145-23D of
this article.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
VILLAGE — The Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 145-19. Building Inspector and inspectors.
A. The Building Inspector shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this article. The Building
Inspector shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits, and the
plans, specifications and construction documents submitted with
such applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates and operating permits, and to include in building
permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance,
temporary certificates and operating permits such terms and
conditions as the Building Inspector may determine to be
appropriate;
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits, fire
safety and property maintenance inspections, inspections
incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all other
inspections required or permitted under any provision of this
article;
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
(6) To issue orders pursuant to § 145-31A of this article;
(7) To maintain records;
(8) To collect fees as set by the Board of Trustees of the Village;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(10) In consultation with the Village Attorney, to pursue such legal
actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this article, or to abate or
correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this article; and
§ 145-18 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 145-19
1:70
§ 145-20. Building permits.
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Building Inspector by this article.
B. The Building Inspector shall be appointed by Mayor of the Village. The
Building Inspector shall be a registered architect or licensed
professional engineer of the State of New York or a builder with at least
10 years' recent experience related to building construction and fire
prevention. The Building Inspector shall, within the time prescribed by
law, obtain such basic training, in-service training, advanced in-service
training and other training as the State of New York shall require for
code enforcement personnel, and the Building Inspector shall obtain
certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to the
Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
C. In the event that the Building Inspector is unable to serve as such for
any reason, an individual shall be appointed by Mayor of the Village to
serve as Acting Building Inspector. The Acting Building Inspector shall,
during the term of his or her appointment, exercise all powers and fulfill
all duties conferred upon the Building Inspector by this article. In no
event shall said appointment be longer than six months.
D. One or more inspectors may be appointed to act under the supervision
and direction of the Building Inspector and to assist the Building
Inspector in the exercise of the powers and fulfillment of the duties
conferred upon the Building Inspector by this article. Each inspector
shall, within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, inservice
training, advanced in-service training and other training as the
State of New York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and
each inspector shall obtain certification from the State Fire
Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Building Inspector and inspectors shall be
fixed from time to time by the Board of Trustees of the Village.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, a building permit shall be required for any work which
must conform to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code, including,
but not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration,
improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building or
structure or any portion thereof, and the installation of a solid-fuelburning
heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No
person shall commence any work for which a building permit is
required without first having obtained a building permit from the
Building Inspector.
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
§ 145-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-20
1:71
(1) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
(2) Installation of portable, swimming pools associated with a one- or
two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses) where such pools are designed for a water depth of
less than 24 inches and are installed entirely above ground;
(3) Installation of movable cases less than five feet nine inches in
height;
(4) Painting, wallpapering, carpeting, or other similar finish work;
(5) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances which does not
require permanent utility connections;
(6) Repairs, with an estimated value not exceeding $2,500, provided
that such repairs do not involve:
(a) The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component;
(b) The removal or change of any required means of egress, or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
(c) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or
(d) The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection
system for any period of time.
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code or the Energy Code.
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Building Inspector. The application shall be signed by the owner
of the property where the work is to be performed or an authorized
agent of the owner. The application shall include such information as
the Building Inspector deems sufficient to permit a determination by
the Building Inspector that the intended work complies with all
applicable requirements of the Code of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code. The application shall include or be
accompanied by the following information and documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
§ 145-20 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 145-20
1:72
(2) The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least three sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
(b) Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or
licensed professional engineer where so required by the
Education Law;
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed;
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the Code
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, the Uniform Code and the
Energy Code; and
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location
of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings
and structures and the lot lines.
(6) The application for the building permit shall set forth in detail the
estimated cost of the project. "Estimated cost" shall mean the
reasonable market value of all labor, materials, equipment and
professional services entering into and necessary for the
completion of the proposed project, including all property
improvements, except the cost of the land. Where, in the opinion of
the Building Inspector, the estimated cost of construction as shown
on the building permit does not reflect the actual construction
costs, the Building Inspector may require the applicant to submit a
notarized affidavit of the final cost of construction, and pay the
difference in the amount of the building permit fee.
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in Subsection D(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Building Inspector in writing
or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents shall be
retained by the Building Inspector, and one set of the accepted
construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to be kept at
the work site so as to be available for use by code enforcement
personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted construction
§ 145-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-20
1:73
documents to the applicant shall not be construed as authorization to
commence work, nor as an indication that a building permit will be
issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a building permit
is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code. The Building Inspector shall issue a building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Code and Energy Code.
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
H. Work to be in accordance with construction documents. All work shall
be performed in accordance with the construction documents which
were submitted with and accepted as part of the application for the
building permit. The building permit shall contain such a directive. The
permit holder shall immediately notify the Building Inspector of any
change occurring during the course of the work. The building permit
shall contain such a directive. If the Building Inspector determines that
such change warrants a new or amended building permit, such change
shall not be made until and unless a new or amended building permit
reflecting such change is issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this subsection may be renewed upon application by the
permit holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of the
application by the Building Inspector.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits.
(1) If the Building Inspector determines that a building permit was
issued in error because of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete
information, or that the work for which a building permit was
issued materially differs from the approved permit, or if the work
violates the Village Code, Uniform Code or the Energy Code, the
Building Inspector shall revoke the building permit or suspend the
building permit until such time as the permit holder demonstrates
that:
(a) All work then completed is in compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(b) All work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the
Energy Code.
§ 145-20 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 145-20
1:74
§ 145-21. Construction inspections.
(2) The Building Inspector may in his discretion, before issuing a new
building permit, require the applicant to file an indemnity bond in
favor of the Village, with sufficient surety conditioned for
compliance with this article and all laws then in force and in a sum
to cover the cost of removing the structure if it does not so comply.
K. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 145-32, Fees, of this article must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a building permit, for an
amended building permit, or for renewal of a building permit.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Building Inspector or
by an inspector authorized by the Building Inspector. The permit holder
shall notify the Building Inspector when any element of work described
in Subsection B of this section is ready for inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing;
(3) Foundation walls;
(4) Waterproofing, drainage, backfilling;
(5) Preparation for concrete slab;
(6) Framing;
(7) Insulation;
(8) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(9) Fire-resistant construction;
(10) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(11) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(12) Energy Code compliance; and
(13) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work
shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions
§ 145-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-21
1:75
§ 145-22. Stop-work orders.
of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected, and found
satisfactory as completed.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 145-32, Fees, of this article must be paid prior
to or at the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
A. Authority to issue. The Building Inspector is authorized to issue stopwork
orders pursuant to this section. The Building Inspector shall issue
a stop-work orders to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Building Inspector to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy
Code, without regard to whether such work is or is not work for
which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether
a building permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Building Inspector, without regard to whether
such work is or is not work for which a building permit is required,
and without regard to whether a building permit has or has not
been issued for such work; or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Building Inspector;
(3) State the reason or reasons for issuance; and
(4) If applicable, state the conditions which must be satisfied before
work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Building Inspector shall cause the
stop-work orders, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by certified mail. The Building Inspector
shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the stop-work orders, or a
copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant, contractor,
subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents, or any
other person taking part or assisting in work affected by the stop-work
orders, personally or by certified mail; provided, however, that failure
to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the
efficacy of the stop-work orders.
§ 145-21 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 145-22
1:76
§ 145-23. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work orders, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work orders.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work orders shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue stop-work orders
shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of, the
right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty under § 145-31 of this article or under any other applicable
local law or state law. Any such other remedy or penalty may be
pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the time of, or after the
issuance of a stop-work order.
A. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance required. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall be required for
any work which is the subject of a building permit and for all structures,
buildings, or portions thereof which are converted from one use or
occupancy classification or subclassification to another. Permission to
use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof, for which a
building permit was previously issued shall be granted only by issuance
of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
B. Issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. The
Building Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance if the work which was the subject of the building permit was
completed in accordance with all applicable provisions of the Uniform
Code and Energy Code and, if applicable, the structure, building or
portion thereof that was converted from one use or occupancy
classification or subclassification to another complies with all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code. The
Building Inspector or an inspector authorized by the Building Inspector
shall inspect the building, structure or work prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance. In addition, where
applicable, the following documents, prepared in accordance with the
provisions of the Uniform Code by such person or persons as may be
designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Building Inspector, at the
expense of the applicant for the certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance, shall be provided to the Building Inspector prior to the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections;
(2) Flood hazard certifications;
(3) As-built plans; and
§ 145-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-23
1:77
(4) As-built survey.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall contain the
following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
(4) If the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance is not
applicable to an entire structure, a description of that portion of the
structure for which the certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Building Inspector issuing the certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance and the date of issuance.
D. Temporary certificate. The Building Inspector shall be permitted to
issue a temporary certificate allowing the temporary occupancy of a
building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to completion of the
work which is the subject of a building permit.
(1) However, in no event shall the Building Inspector issue a temporary
certificate unless the Building Inspector determines:
(a) That the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered
by the temporary certificate, may be occupied safely;
(b) That any fire- and smoke-detecting or fire protection
equipment which has been installed is operational; and
(c) That all required means of egress from the building or
structure have been provided.
(2) The Building Inspector may include in a temporary certificate such
terms and conditions as he or she deems necessary or appropriate
to ensure safety or to further the purposes and intent of the
Uniform Code.
§ 145-23 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 145-23
1:78
§ 145-24. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The chief of any fire department providing fire-fighting services for a
property within the Village shall promptly notify the Building Inspector
of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage, fuel-burning
appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 145-25. Unsafe buildings and structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in the Village shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the procedures established by Chapter 245,
Housing Standards, Part 3, as now in effect or as hereafter amended from
time to time.
§ 145-26. Operating permits.
(3) A temporary certificate shall be effective for a period of time, not to
exceed six months, which shall be determined by the Building
Inspector and specified in the temporary certificate. During the
specified period of effectiveness of the temporary certificate, the
permit holder shall undertake to bring the building or structure
into full compliance with all applicable provisions of the Uniform
Code and the Energy Code.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Building Inspector
determines that a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance or a
temporary certificate was issued in error because of incorrect,
inaccurate or incomplete information, and if the relevant deficiencies
are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector within
such period of time as shall be specified by the Building Inspector, the
Building Inspector shall revoke or suspend such certificate.
F. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 145-32, Fees, of this article must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance or for a temporary certificate.
A. Operating permits required.
(1) Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or
using the categories of buildings listed below:
(a) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Table 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication
entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by
reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1;
(b) Hazardous processes and activities, including, but not limited
to, commercial and industrial operations which produce
combustible dust as a by-product, fruit and crop ripening, and
waste handling;
§ 145-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-26
1:79
(c) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(d) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with
an occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(e) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village.
(2) Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate
any type of building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to
obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such activity or
operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Building Inspector. Such application shall include
such information as the Building Inspector deems sufficient to permit a
determination by the Building Inspector that quantities, materials, and
activities conform to the requirements of the Uniform Code. If the
Building Inspector determines that tests or reports are necessary to
verify conformance, such tests or reports shall be performed or
provided by such person or persons as may be designated by or
otherwise acceptable to the Building Inspector, at the expense of the
applicant.
C. Inspections. The Building Inspector or an inspector authorized by the
Building Inspector shall inspect the subject premises prior to the
issuance of an operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Building Inspector may require a separate operating permit for each
such activity, or the Building Inspector may, in his or her discretion,
issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall be issued for
such period of time, not to exceed one year in the case of any operating
permit issued for an area of public assembly and not to exceed three
years in any other case, as shall be determined by the Building
Inspector to be consistent with local conditions. The effective period of
each operating permit shall be specified in the operating permit. An
operating permit may be reissued or renewed upon application to the
Building Inspector, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of such
application by the Building Inspector.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Building
Inspector determines that any activity or building for which an
operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked
or suspended.
§ 145-26 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 145-26
1:80
§ 145-27. Fire safety and property maintenance inspections.
G. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 145-32, Fees, of this article must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for an operating permit, for an
amended operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating
permit.
A. Inspections required. Fire safety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Building
Inspector or an inspector designated by the Building Inspector at the
following intervals:
(1) Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this subsection,
and all nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies
not included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this subsection, shall be
performed at least once every 36 months.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a fire safety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Building Inspector or an
inspector designated by the Building Inspector at any time upon the
request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an authorized
agent of such owner; receipt by the Building Inspector of a written
statement alleging that conditions or activities failing to comply with
the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or receipt by the Building
Inspector of any other information, reasonably believed by the Building
Inspector to be reliable, giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that
conditions or activities failing to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code exist; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection
shall be construed as permitting an inspection under any circumstances
under which a court order or warrant permitting such inspection is
required, unless such court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
C. OFPC inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of
this article shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and
Control (OFPC) and the New York State Fire Administrator under
Executive Law § 156-e and Education Law § 807-b.
§ 145-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-27
1:81
§ 145-28. Complaints.
The Building Inspector shall review and investigate complaints which allege
or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail to comply with the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this article, or any other local law, the Code
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, or regulation adopted for administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for
responding to a complaint shall include such of the following steps as the
Building Inspector may deem to be appropriate:
§ 145-29. Recordkeeping.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 145-32, Fees, of this article must be paid prior
to or at the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
This subsection shall not apply to inspections performed by OFPC.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection.
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 145-31
of this article.
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order.
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. The Building Inspector shall keep permanent official records of all
transactions and activities conducted by all Code enforcement
personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and
operating permits issued;
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
§ 145-27 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 145-29
1:82
§ 145-30. Program review and reporting.
§ 145-31. Enforcement; penalties for offenses; transfer of
ownership; expenses.
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by
§§ 145-20 through 145-28, inclusive, of this article; and
(9) All fees charged and collected.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
A. The Building Inspector shall annually submit to the Board of Trustees of
the Village a written report and summary of all business conducted by
the Building Inspector and the inspectors, including a report and
summary of all transactions and activities described in § 145-29,
Recordkeeping, of this article and a report and summary of all appeals
or litigation pending or concluded.
B. The Building Inspector shall annually submit to the Secretary of State,
on behalf of the Village, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of State,
a report of the activities of the Village relative to administration and
enforcement of the Uniform Code.
C. The Building Inspector shall, upon request of the New York State
Department of State, provide to the New York State Department of
State, from the records and related materials the Village is required to
maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of the Village in connection
with administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
A. Compliance orders. The Building Inspector is authorized to order in
writing the remedying of any condition or activity found to exist in, on
or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, or this article. Upon finding that any such
condition or activity exists, the Building Inspector shall issue a
compliance order.
(1) The compliance order shall:
(a) Be in writing;
(b) Be dated and signed by the Building Inspector;
(c) Specify the condition or activity that violates the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, or this article;
§ 145-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-31
1:83
(d) Specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code, or this article which is/are violated by the
specified condition or activity;
(e) Specify the period of time which the Building Inspector deems
to be reasonably necessary for achieving compliance;
(f) Direct that compliance be achieved within the specified period
of time; and
(g) State that an action or proceeding to compel compliance may
be instituted if compliance is not achieved within the specified
period of time.
(2) The Building Inspector shall cause the compliance order, or a copy
thereof, to be served on the owner of the affected property
personally or by certified mail. The Building Inspector shall be
permitted, but not required, to cause the compliance order, or a
copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their
agents, or any other person taking part or assisting in work being
performed at the affected property personally or by certified mail;
provided, however, that failure to serve any person mentioned in
this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the compliance order.
B. Appearance tickets. The Building Inspector and each inspector are
authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of the Uniform
Code. Every appearance ticket that is issued, pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, shall include the following:
(1) The name and address of the party(s) to whom the ticket is issued,
when known.
(2) Citation of law(s) and the appropriate section(s) allegedly violated.
(3) The place and date of the alleged violation(s).
(4) The place, date and time that the party(s) is (are) required to
appear in court.
(5) The date of issuance of the appearance ticket(s).
(6) The title and signature of the issuing officer(s).
C. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this article, or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance, temporary
certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or other notice or order
issued by the Building Inspector pursuant to any provision of this
article, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not less than $250 nor more
than $1,000 for each day or part thereof during which such violation
continues, or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both. The civil
§ 145-31 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 145-31
1:84
penalties provided by this subsection shall be recoverable in an action
instituted in the name of the Village. In addition to the fine, the court
may impose a one-year conditional discharge requiring the defendant
to permit access to the Department to reinspect the premises from time
to time during the period of the conditional discharge.
D. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of the Village, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this article, or any term or
condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit,
compliance order, or other notice or order issued by the Building
Inspector pursuant to any provision of this article. In particular, but not
by way of limitation, where the construction or use of a building or
structure is in violation of any provision of the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code, this article, or any stop-work order, compliance order or
other order obtained under the Uniform Code, the Energy Code or this
article, an action or proceeding may be commenced in the name of the
Village, in the Supreme Court or in any other court having the requisite
jurisdiction, to obtain an order directing the removal of the building or
structure or an abatement of the condition in violation of such
provisions. No action or proceeding described in this subsection shall
be commenced without the appropriate authorization from the Mayor of
the Village.
E. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 145-22, Stop-work orders, of this article, in any other section of this
article, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified
in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this section, in § 145-22, Stop-work orders, of this article, in
any other section of this article, or in any other applicable law. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision (2) of § 381 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision (2) of § 381 of
the Executive Law.
F. Recording violation notice. Whenever a notice or order has been issued
for any infraction of this article, the Building Department shall keep on
file a copy of such notice or order in the Building Department. This
recording shall constitute notice of such violation, infraction or order to
any subsequent purchaser, transferee, grantee, mortgagee or lessee of
§ 145-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-31
1:85
§ 145-32. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees of
the Village. Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from time to time
by like resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with,
such fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be charged and collected
for the submission of applications, the issuance of building permits,
amended building permits, renewed building permits, certificates of
occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary certificates, operating
permits, fire safety and property maintenance inspections, and other
actions of the Building Inspector described in or contemplated by this
article.
the property affected thereby. Whenever a notice or order has been
issued for any infraction of this article, the Building Department shall
forward a copy of such notice or order to the lender or mortgagee of the
property, if the identity of same is known to the Building Department.
G. Transfer of ownership. No owner of any dwelling or commercial
premises upon which any notice or order pursuant to this article has
been served shall sell, transfer, grant, mortgage, lease or otherwise
dispose of such property to another until compliance with the
provisions of such notice or order has been secured and fines, if any,
have been paid in full, or until such owner shall furnish to the
purchaser, transferee, grantee, mortgagee or lessee, prior to such sale,
transfer, grant, mortgage or lease, a true copy of such notice or order
and, at the same time, give adequate notification to the Building
Department of his intent to sell, transfer, grant, mortgage or lease, and
supply to the chief officer, in writing, the name and address of such
person, persons, or firm to whom the sale, transfer, grant, mortgage, or
lease is proposed. A purchaser, transferee, grantee, mortgagee or
lessee who has been informed of the existence of any notice or order
issued pursuant to this article shall be bound thereby. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
H. Expenses. The expenses incurred pursuant to this article shall be paid
by the owner or occupant of the premises, or by the person who caused
or maintained such nuisance or other violation. The Building
Department shall file among its records an affidavit stating, with
fairness and accuracy, the items of expense and the date of execution of
actions authorized above. The Village Attorney may institute a suit to
recover such expenses against any person liable for such expenses or
may cause such expenses to be charged against the property as a lien.
Except with respect to a lien imposed for expenses incurred in
demolition, nothing herein shall be construed as placing a lien upon the
property which has priority over the lien of any recorded mortgage or
lien on such property executed and recorded prior to the existence of a
lien herein authorized.
§ 145-31 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 145-33
1:86
§ 145-33. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Board of Trustees of the Village may, by resolution, authorize the Mayor
of the Village to enter into an agreement, in the name of the Village, with
other governments to carry out the terms of this article, provided that such
agreement does not violate any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code, Part 1203 of Title 19 of the NYCRR, or any other applicable law.
§ 145-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-33
1:87
Chapter 148
BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Dumpsters — See Ch. 175.
Explosives and blasting — See Ch. 193.
§ 145-33 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 145-33
1:88
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 148-1. Purpose.
The general purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations
governing the demolition of buildings and accessory structures, to provide
safety for employees engaged in demolition work, to safeguard the public
in its use of sidewalks and roads adjoining the property on which the
demolition is proceeding and to protect adjacent structures from damage
resulting from the demolition work.
§ 148-2. Agencies having jurisdiction.
§ 148-3. Prevention of spread of vermin.
The Health Department shall have the authority to inspect premises for
which application to demolish has been filed with the Department and to
require that the owner free the premises of rat infestation by extermination
before proceeding with demolition.
§ 148-4. Fees for permits. [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Fees for permits to demolish a building or accessory structure under this
chapter shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees
and set forth in the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
§ 148-5. Liability insurance.
A contractor engaged in demolition work shall keep the municipality
adequately secured against liability resulting from the bodily injury or
death of any person not employed by the contractor, occurring by reason
of an accident resulting from the demolition work. Such security shall be
in the form of a surety bond or a liability insurance policy in an amount
commensurate with the risks involved. A certificate of insurance may be
accepted as evidence of liability insurance coverage. The amount shall
be determined by the Building Inspector and be approved by the Village
Administrator.
A. The Building Department is hereby designated as the agency having
jurisdiction over demolition in the Village. No demolition work may be
commenced without a separate permit issued by the Department for
each building or structure to be demolished. Required fees shall be paid
to the Department, and permits necessary to start work shall be
obtained from the Department.
B. All burning done under this chapter shall be supervised by the Fire
Department.
§ 148-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-6
1:89
§ 148-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter shall
be guilty of a violation punishable as follows: by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 15 days or by a fine not exceeding $250, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. The continuation of an offense against the provisions
of this chapter shall constitute, for each day the offense is continued, a
separate and distinct offense hereunder.
§ 148-6 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 148-6
1:90
ARTICLE II
Protection of Employees
§ 148-7. Condition of machinery, equipment and safety devices.
No employer shall suffer or permit an employee to use any machinery or
equipment which is not in good repair and in safe working condition. All
safety devices and safeguards in use shall be kept sound and operable and
shall be immediately repaired or restored if damaged.
§ 148-8. Design of load-bearing equipment.
All load-carrying equipment shall be designed and constructed throughout
to safely support the intended loads.
§ 148-9. Overhead protection; guarding against inadvertent entry.
Every place where persons are required to work or pass that is normally
exposed to falling material or objects shall be provided with suitable
overhead protection, and, where no one is required to work or pass but
employees are at work in the vicinity, the exposed area shall be roped off or
otherwise guarded against inadvertent entry.
§ 148-10. Barriers around holes.
Every hole into or through which a person may fall shall be guarded by a
barrier sufficient to prevent falls, except where free access is required by
work actually in progress.
§ 148-11. Protection against water hazards.
Where employees are exposed to the hazard of falling into water in which
one may drown, there shall be provided at all times during the exposure
equipment for promptly rescuing persons from the water, including a
manned and properly equipped boat where necessary.
§ 148-12. Protection against slippery footing.
No employer shall suffer or permit an employee to use a passageway or
a scaffold platform or an elevated working surface which is in a slippery
condition. Ice, snow, grease and other substances causing slippery footing
shall be removed, sanded or covered to provide safe footing.
§ 148-13. Protection against tripping; sharp projections.
All passageways shall be kept free from accumulations of dirt and debris
and from other obstructions or defects which could cause tripping. Sharp
projections which could cut any employee shall be removed or covered.
§ 148-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-14
1:91
§ 148-14. Condition of floors and platforms where work is being
performed.
The parts of floors, platforms and similar areas where employees must work
shall be kept free from accumulations of dirt and debris and from scattered
tools and materials and from sharp projections insofar as may be consistent
with the work being done.
§ 148-15. Means of access to work areas above or below ground.
Stairways, ramps or runways shall be provided as the means of access to
working levels above or below ground, except where the nature or process
of the work prevents their installation, in which case, ladders or other safe
means shall be provided.
§ 148-16. Control of dusts and gases.
Dusts and gases shall be controlled by ventilation or otherwise so as to
prevent concentrations tending to injure health or obstruct vision.
§ 148-17. Eye-protection equipment.
Approved eye-protection equipment shall be provided for and shall be used
by workmen while employed in flame-cutting operations or in chipping or
cutting any material from which particles may fly or while engaged in any
other operation which may endanger the eyes.
§ 148-18. Safety hats.
Every employee required to pass or work within areas where there is
danger of being struck by falling objects or materials shall be provided with
an approved safety hat.
§ 148-19. Waterproof boots.
Every employee required to work in water or in wet footing shall be
provided with waterproof boots with safety insoles.
§ 148-20. Waterproof coats and hats.
Every employee required to work in rain or similar wetting conditions shall
be provided with a waterproof coat and hat.
§ 148-21. Condition of personal protective equipment.
All personal protective equipment shall be kept clean and in good repair.
Before being transferred from one employee to another, safety hats, foul
weather hats, boots and hat or boot liners shall be washed or dry cleaned
so as to be clean and sanitary. Goggles, glasses and protective shields shall
be sterilized before being transferred from one employee to another.
§ 148-14 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 148-22
1:92
§ 148-22. Condition of tools.
Edged tools shall be kept sharp, and striking tools shall be maintained free
from burrs and mushroomed heads. Split or loose tool handles shall not be
used.
§ 148-23. Lumber and nails.
A. Lumber used in the construction of equipment or temporary structures
shall be sound and shall not contain defects such as ring shakes, large
or loose knots or other defects which may impair the strength of the
piece for the purpose for which it is to be used.
B. Nails shall be driven full length, and the nails shall be of proper size,
length and number to provide the required strength at the joints.
§ 148-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-23
1:93

ARTICLE III
Conduct of Operations
§ 148-24. Preparations prior to demolition.
§ 148-25. Stability and restoration of adjacent premises.
A. Before starting demolition, all glass in exterior openings shall be
removed. All gas, electric, water, steam and other supply lines shall be
shut off and capped. In each case, the service company involved shall be
notified in advance. All sewer connections shall be sealed off in a
manner satisfactory to the Department of Public Works.
B. Where it is necessary to maintain any power, water, gas or electric lines
during demolition, such lines shall be relocated or protected with
substantial coverings so as to protect them from injury and to afford
safety to the workmen and the public.
C. Before demolition is started, the cellar shall be thoroughly cleaned of
combustible material, and all fixtures and equipment which would
cause voids in the fill shall be removed. If the cellar is to be filled to
grade, the existing cellar floor shall be broken up to provide ground
drainage and prevent accumulation of water. If the cellar is not to be
filled, adequate drainage shall be provided.
A. Before doing any demolition work which may affect the safety or
stability of any adjacent structure, the demolition contractor shall make
a thorough examination of all such structures and shall note all existing
conditions. During the demolition, frequent reexaminations shall be
made by the demolition contractor, and every precaution shall be taken
to prevent any movement, settlement or weakening of any adjacent
structure.
B. Where there is reason to believe that an adjacent structure is unsafe or
will become unsafe because of demolition operations, no demolition
shall be performed until adequate precautions have been taken to
ensure the stability of the adjacent structure.
C. All beams in party walls shall be cut off close to the walls, and stub ends
shall be removed without weakening masonry, and beam pockets shall
be cleaned of loose mortar and bricked up and bonded into the wall
with sound brick and cement mortar. Roofing material of adjoining
buildings at party walls shall be bent over and flashed. All door or other
openings in party walls shall be adequately sealed. Cornices, where cut,
shall be properly sealed. Parapet and front and rear walls, where
disturbed, shall be pointed up and made weathertight. All exposed
furring, lath and plaster on party walls shall be removed. Roofs,
skylights and flues of adjoining buildings shall be protected from
damage from demolition by the demolition contractor, provided that he
is granted the necessary license to enter the adjoining premises for that
purpose.
§ 148-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-25
1:95
§ 148-26. Demolition of walls and partitions.
§ 148-27. Boarding up of wall openings.
Windows and other exterior wall openings in buildings more than 25 feet in
height which are within 20 feet of any floor opening used to remove debris
from floors above shall be solidly boarded up during demolition operations.
§ 148-28. Means of debris removal.
Debris, bricks and other material shall be removed by means of chutes or by
means of buckets or hoists or through openings in the floors of the building.
§ 148-29. Safe access to building required.
There shall be provided at all times safe access to and egress from every
building in the course of demolition by means of entrances, hallways,
D. The cost of refinishing a common wall or party wall shall be taken into
account by the owner of a building which is to be demolished, and after
demolition of a building with a common wall, whether brick or frame,
the remaining wall shall be finished off in a workmanlike manner and
shall be subject to the approval of the Building Inspector. Specifically,
but in no way limiting the generality of the above with respect to
approval which must be received by the Building Inspector, brick walls
shall be finished as called for in Subsection C above, and, in addition
thereto, said remaining portion of the common wall shall be finished off
with one-half-inch stucco or any other sealer acceptable to the Building
Inspector and painted as close as possible to the wood trim. Also,
without limiting the generality above, in the event that the common wall
is frame, the remaining portion of said frame wall shall be re-sided as
close as possible to the rest of the building and, if required, painted to
match the rest of the wood trim. Flashing shall also be installed on the
roof and wherever else required by the Building Inspector.
A. Demolition of walls and partitions shall proceed in a systematic manner,
and all work above each tier of floor beams shall be completed before
the safety of its supports is impaired. Masonry shall neither be loosened
nor permitted to fall in such masses as to endanger the structural
stability of any floor or structural support. No wall, chimney or other
structure or part of a structure shall be left unguarded in such condition
that it may fall, collapse or weaken due to wind pressure, rain, snow or
vibration.
B. No employer shall suffer or permit any employee to work on top of a
wall. In the demolition by hand of exterior walls, safe footing for the
workman shall be provided in the form of sound flooring or scaffolds.
Walls or portions which are to be demolished by hand shall not be left
standing more than one story high above the uppermost floor on which
men are working. Such walls or portions shall be removed before the
aggregate area of openings in such floor exceeds 25% of the total area.
§ 148-25 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 148-29
1:96
stairways or ladder runs so protected as to safeguard the persons using
them from falling material.
§ 148-30. Protection of floor areas from falling material.
Every floor area within the building that is subject to the hazard of material
falling from above shall be boarded up to prevent passage or shall be fenced
off by a substantial rail placed not less than 20 feet from the floor opening
or shall be provided with overhead protection in the form of tight planking
to eliminate such hazard.
§ 148-31. Demolition of structural members.
All steel construction shall be demolished column length by column length
and tier by tier. Every structural member which is being removed shall
be chained or lashed in place to prevent any uncontrolled swinging or
dropping. Large structural members shall not be thrown or dropped from
the building but shall be carefully lowered. Where a derrick is used in the
demolition of buildings of skeleton steel construction, the floor on which the
derrick rests shall be completely planked over. Where other methods are
used, the workmen engaged in the dismantling of steel shall be protected
by solidly planked flooring or sound floor arches not more than two stories
below and directly under that portion of any tier of beams where such men
are at work.
§ 148-32. Demolition of floor arches.
Before demolishing any floor arch, debris and other material shall be
removed from such arch and other adjacent floor area. Planks not less than
two inches by nine inches in cross section, full size undressed, shall be
provided for and shall be used by the workmen to stand on while breaking
down floor arches between beams. Such planks shall be so located as to
provide a safe support for the workmen should the arch between the beams
collapse. The open space between planks shall not exceed 16 inches.
§ 148-33. Floor openings.
A. The aggregate area of openings in the floor immediately beneath the
floor being demolished shall not exceed 25% of the total area of such
floor.
B. Every opening used for the removal of debris on every floor which is not
closed to access, except the top or working floor, shall be provided with
an enclosure from floor to ceiling equivalent to that afforded by
planking not less than two inches in thickness, full size undressed. The
enclosure shall be solid except for portions openable for loosening
blocked debris. Alternatively, the opening shall be so barricaded that no
person shall have access to within a horizontal distance of 20 feet from
any opening above through which debris is being dropped. Every
opening not used for the removal of debris in any floor to which access
§ 148-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-33
1:97
§ 148-34. Storage of material.
§ 148-35. Safe footing required.
No employer shall suffer or permit an employee working above the first
floor level to use accumulated debris or piled material as a footing for
the performance of his work. Every employee shall be provided with safe
footing in the form of sound planking, or flooring.
§ 148-36. Barricades and fences.
is permitted shall be protected by a solid enclosure or by a safety railing
and toeboard or shall be solidly planked over.
C. Openings in the top or working floor more than 16 inches in their least
dimension shall be protected on all sides, except the side at which
debris is deposited, by a safety railing and toeboard, or the sides of the
opening shall be roped off at a distance of not less than two feet from
the edge of the opening by not less than one-half-inch-diameter rope
securely tied to provide a guard of a height equivalent to that provided
by the safety railing. That portion of any floor opening adjacent to and
immediately below a point where men are employed in any work on a
wall shall be provided with a solid flooring not less than five feet wide
measured from the inside face of the wall.
A. Material shall not be stored on working platforms, floors or stairways of
the building being demolished, except that the floor of a building may
be used for the temporary storage of material when such floor is of such
strength as to support safely the load to be superimposed.
B. Storage spaces shall not interfere with access to any stairway or
passageway, and suitable barricades shall be provided so as to prevent
material from sliding or rebounding into any space used by the
workmen or the public.
C. All material shall be safely piled in such locations as will not interfere
with any operations nor present a hazard to those at or frequenting the
demolition site. When debris is piled in the cellar, it shall not be piled
above the top of the foundation wall.
D. The person in charge of demolition operations shall provide such means
as may be necessary to ensure the stability of the foundation walls and
to prevent any wall from collapsing due to the pressure of the
accumulated material.
A. Along every sidewalk or thoroughfare bordering demolition operations,
there shall be erected a substantial barricade to prevent unauthorized
persons from entering the site of such operations.
B. Such barricade shall be a fence not less than six feet in height. It shall
be built solid for its entire height and length, except for such openings
provided with solid doors as may be necessary for the proper
§ 148-33 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 148-36
1:98
§ 148-37. Sidewalk sheds.
§ 148-38. Chutes.
prosecution of the work. Where the distance from the face of the
building to be demolished to the inside edge of a sidewalk or
thoroughfare is more than 1/2 the height of the building and the height
of the building is not more than 25 feet, a substantial railing not less
than 36 inches high and provided with an intermediate rail may be
constructed at the inside edge of such sidewalk or thoroughfare in lieu
of a solid barricade or sidewalk shed.
A. When the structure to be demolished is more than 25 feet above
adjacent grade and where the horizontal distance from the structure to
the inside edge of a sidewalk or other public way is barred or closed to
the public or is more than 40 feet from the building or structure which
is to be demolished, regardless of the height of the building, whenever
any material or debris is moved or swung by means of a derrick, hoist,
chute or similar device over any sidewalk or public way which is not
barred or closed to the public, a sidewalk shed shall be erected over
such sidewalk or public way.
B. The deck of every sidewalk shed shall be constructed to sustain a live
load of at least 150 pounds per square foot, and if materials are to be
stored thereon, it shall be constructed to sustain a load of not less than
300 pounds per square foot.
C. The sidewalk shed shall be so erected as to provide a clear ceiling
height of not less than eight feet above the walkway surface, and the
clear width of the passageway through the shed shall be not less than
10 feet. The outside edge and the ends of the deck of every sidewalk
shed shall be provided with a substantial enclosure at least 42 inches in
height, consisting of boards laid close or of screen formed of not less
than No. 16 gauge steel wire with one-and-one-half-inch mesh or of
corrugated metal or plywood.
D. The deck of the sidewalk shed shall be watertight and of plank not less
than two inches thick. The side of the shed toward the structure to be
demolished shall be solidly fenced for the full height of the sidewalk
shed. Solid sliding or swinging gates may be provided for the movement
of men and materials. Steel or other materials of equivalent strength
and suitability may be used in lieu of wood in the construction of a
sidewalk shed.
E. Sidewalk sheds shall be provided with light equivalent to a onehundred-
watt electric light bulb every 40 feet along the passageway.
A. Wooden or metal chutes provided for the removal of material and which
are at an angle of more than 45° with the horizontal shall be entirely
enclosed on all sides, including the upper side, except openings used
for receiving or discharging of material. Such openings shall not exceed
§ 148-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-38
1:99
§ 148-39. Runways and ramps.
48 inches in height, measured along the wall of the chute, and all
openings, except the top opening, shall be closed when not in use.
Chutes at an angle of 45° or less with the horizontal may be open on
the upper side.
B. Every chute more than 24 inches in maximum inside dimension shall be
constructed of not less than two-inch planking or of not less than threesixteenths-
inch sheet metal. It shall have a metal bottom where the
material strikes the chute and shall be rigidly supported throughout its
height. A strong gate shall be constructed at the lower end of every
loading chute to control the loading of material into trucks and to close
the chute at all other times. Splashboards or baffles shall be erected to
prevent materials from rebounding into the street or under the
sidewalk shed. A bumper or curb not less than four inches by four
inches in section shall be provided at each chute opening where such
opening is level with or below the floor or platform. Every space
between the chute and the edge of the opening in the floor or platform
shall be solidly planked.
C. Danger signs shall be placed in a conspicuous position at the discharge
end of every chute to warn the workmen and public.
A. All runways and ramps shall be substantially constructed and securely
braced and supported. Runways and ramps for the use of motor trucks
or heavier vehicles shall have a width of not less than eight inches by
eight inches placed parallel to and secured to the sides of the runway or
ramp.
B. The flooring shall be not less than three-inch planking, full size
undressed.
C. Runways and ramps for the use of workmen shall be not less than 18
inches in width and shall be constructed of not less than two-inch full
size undressed planking, substantially supported and braced to prevent
excessive spring or deflecting.
D. Planking shall be laid close and shall be butt-jointed and securely
nailed. Horizontal runways for the use of workmen and located more
than 10 feet above the floor or ground shall be provided on the open
sides with a safety railing. Runways used for wheelbarrows, handcarts
or hand trucks shall be not less than 36 inches in width. Ramps shall
have a slope not exceeding one in four, and the total rise of a continuous
ramp used by men carrying material or using wheelbarrows shall not
exceed 12 feet, unless broken by horizontal landings at least four feet in
length.
E. If the slope is steeper than one in eight, the ramp shall be provided with
cleats spaced not more than 14 inches apart and securely fastened to
§ 148-38 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 148-39
1:100
§ 148-40. Platforms.
§ 148-41. Safety railings.
A safety railing shall consist of a two-inch-by-four-inch wooden handrail
not less than 36 inches nor more than 42 inches above the walking level,
securely supported by two-by-four-inch posts at intervals of not more than
eight feet, and shall include a one-inch-by-four-inch midrail and a toeboard
at least four inches high. The handrail shall be smooth and free from
splinters or protruding nails. Other material or construction may be used,
provided that the assembly assures equivalent safety.
§ 148-42. Burning at site.
No debris shall be burned at the site unless permits are obtained from the
Fire Department A one-and-one-half-inch fire hose, equipped with a control
nozzle, shall be connected to a reliable water supply, and the water pressure
shall be on the hose line and the hose laid to reach the location of the fire,
wherever a fire is burning.
§ 148-43. Flame cutting.
the planking to afford a foothold. Spaces in the cleats may be provided
for the passages of the wheels of the vehicles.
F. Ramps which are located at or extend to a height of more than four feet
above the adjacent ground or floor level shall be provided with a safety
railing on their open sides.
A. Platforms used as working areas or for the unloading of wheelbarrows,
hand trucks or carts shall have a floor of not less than two-inch
planking. Platforms used for motor trucks shall have a floor of not less
than three-inch planking.
B. Every platform more than 10 feet above the ground or above a floor
shall be provided with a safety railing, except that the sides of a
platform used for the loading or unloading of vehicles may be protected
only by a timber curb not less than eight inches by eight inches for
motor trucks or heavier vehicles or four inches by four inches for
wheelbarrows and hand trucks.
A. Compressed gas cylinders shall be stored in an upright position, away
from open flames and other sources of heat and be so arranged or
placed that they will not be knocked over or damaged by passing or
falling objects.
B. During use, cylinders shall be securely lashed to a stationary object
unless other suitable provision has been made to prevent their
upsetting. During use, every cylinder shall have the valve key or wrench
set in place on the valve spindle. All cylinders shall be used in an
upright position.
§ 148-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-43
1:101
C. Cylinders containing oxygen shall not be stored so near to cylinders
containing combustible gas or to combustible material, oil or grease as
to create a spontaneous combustion hazard.
D. Cylinder valves shall be closed at all times when not in use. Regulators
or reducing valves shall be tightly connected with a gastight
connection. Gas or oxygen cylinders shall not be used unless equipped
with the proper regulator or automatic reducing valve. All valves shall
be opened by hand.
E. Empty cylinders shall be immediately removed from working areas and
stored in a designated location. The valves shall be closed and a tag or
sign indicating that the tank is empty shall be attached.
F. The use of cylinders as rollers, props or supports is forbidden.
G. All gas-carrying hose shall be first quality and of a type manufactured
for use on construction jobs. Oxygen hose shall have fittings of a
different design and shall be of a different color from the hose used for
the fuel-gas connections. Hose connections shall be of either the ferrule
or clamp type, and the hose shall be capable of withstanding, without
leakage, a pressure equal to at least twice the maximum delivery
pressure of the pressure regulators provided on the system, but not less
than 300 pounds per square inch.
H. Hose shall be protected from damage by trucks or other moving objects
and shall be so placed as not to constitute a falling or tripping hazard.
All hose or connections shall be immediately repaired or replaced.
I. Torches shall be lighted by means of friction lighters only. When torches
are changed or when the cutting is stopped longer than five minutes, all
cylinder valves shall be closed. Momentary stoppage of the cutting
torch may be controlled at the torch valves.
J. All persons engaged in cutting operations shall be supplied with proper
scaffolds and shall be supplied with and use approved eye-protection
equipment having goggles provided with filter lenses of suitable shade.
Such lenses and goggles shall protect the eyes of the worker not only
from the heat and glare of the work but also from particles of hot metal
which may fly during the operation. Operators engaged in continuous
operations shall be supplied and shall wear fire-resistant gauntlet
gloves and aprons.
K. Oily and greasy substances shall be kept from the cylinders, hoses and
torches. Cylinder valves and connections shall not be lubricated.
L. Where there is a hazard to other workmen from flying particles of
metal, there shall be provided proper screening around the cutting
area. Whenever cutting operations are performed and there is in the
vicinity any combustible, there shall be provided a fire watcher,
equipped with a water hose, whose sole duty is to watch for and
extinguish any fires that might start.
§ 148-43 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 148-43
1:102
§ 148-44. Electrical and pneumatic tools.
Electrical and pneumatic tools shall be disconnected from the source of
power and the pressure in hose lines shall be released before any
adjustments or repairs are made, except replacement of bits in electric
drills. The air shall be shut off before disconnecting the air hose. Electric
lines and hose lines shall be guarded by location or covering to prevent
severe abrasion. Electrically operated tools shall be grounded during use.
The ground wire shall be connected to the frame of the machine, and the
other end shall be properly grounded.
§ 148-45. Mechanical method of demolition.
The use of a swinging weight, clamshell bucket, power shovel, bulldozer or
other mechanical contrivance for the purpose of demolishing walls shall be
in accordance with the following requirements:
M. Before any flame cutting is done on any tank or container that
contained material which may generate flammable vapor upon
application of heat, all pipes connected thereto shall be disconnected or
blanked off. Residual flammable material shall be removed, and the
tank shall be completely purged with a suitable purging agent.
A. The building or structure or remaining portion thereof shall be not
more than 80 feet in height.
B. Where a swinging weight is used, a zone of demolition at least 1 1/2
times the height of the structure or portion thereof being so demolished
shall be maintained around the points of impact.
C. Where a clamshell bucket is used, a zone of demolition shall be
maintained within 25 feet of the line of travel of the bucket.
D. Where mechanical contrivances other than a swinging weight or
clamshell bucket are used to effectuate total or partial collapse, there
shall be maintained in the area into which the affected portion may fall
a zone of demolition at least 1 1/2 times the height of the structure or
remaining portion thereof.
E. No person other than workmen essential to the operation of the
equipment shall be suffered or permitted to enter a zone of demolition.
F. Substantial barricades shall be erected wherever there is likelihood of
persons other than essential workmen entering the zone of demolition.
G. The controls of mechanical devices used in such method of demolition
shall be located and operated at a safe and reasonable distance from
the point of demolition.
H. Where swinging weight is used, the supporting cables shall be of such
length or shall be so restrained that it is not possible for the weight to
swing against any structure other than the structure being demolished.
§ 148-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-46
1:103
§ 148-46. Sprinkling for dust control.
Chutes, floors, stairways and all other places affected shall be sprinkled
with water sufficiently to keep down the dust.
§ 148-47. Inspection by municipality.
During demolition, the municipality shall have the right to inspect the work
to detect any hazards to workmen or to the public resulting from weakened
or deteriorated floors or walls or loosened material. No employee shall
be suffered or permitted to work where such hazards exist. They shall be
corrected by shoring, bracing or other effective means.
§ 148-48. Clearing of site and filling of holes.
§ 148-49. Notification to Treasurer.
Immediately after said demolition, the Building Inspector shall notify the
Village Treasurer in writing that said structure or building has been
demolished.
A. After a building has been demolished, the entire site of such building
shall be cleared of any and all debris or waste materials, and all
basements, all cellars and all other holes or openings in or on the site
shall be properly filled up to the ground level with earth, stone,
masonry or other similar sanitary and incombustible materials. All
grading shall be so sloped that all water falling on the site will not flow
over any adjoining property.
B. However, upon the presentation of definite proof that construction
operations for the erection of a new building will be commenced on the
site within two months after the demolition has been completed, then
the filling of basement, cellars and other holes will not be necessary,
provided that a substantial barricade is erected enclosing the entire
site.
§ 148-46 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 148-49
1:104
Chapter 151
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 148.
Housing standards — See Ch. 245.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Signs — See Ch. 338.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 425.
§ 151-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to require the clear display of house
numbers from public streets for all properties that contain principal
buildings within the Village of Sleepy Hollow in order to assist the general
public or the authorities in identifying any property in case of an emergency,
as well as for the welfare of the general public in conducting its normal
affairs.
§ 151-2. Scope; display of numbers required.
This chapter shall apply to all properties within the Village of Sleepy Hollow
that contain a principal building thereon, whether or not said building is
occupied. Such premises shall bear and display at least one set of house
numbers, which shall be assigned by the Building Inspector. Buildings
facing two or more public roadways shall be required to display auxiliary
numbers, if necessary, to pass the visibility test (as hereinafter set forth)
when viewed from these points in the center line of the public roadway
opposite those points where regularly used pedestrian or vehicular
passageways enter the public roadway.
§ 151-3. Specifications. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
In order to comply with this chapter, house numbers shall be Arabic design,
shall have a minimum height of four inches, with a minimum stroke width
of 0.5 inch, and shall be mounted in a secure fashion to the building's front
wall or to a porch or other fixed appurtenance in front of the building in the
general vicinity of the main entryway or main path of travel which leads to
the main entrance from a public street or otherwise separately mounted in
an approved manner upon the face of a wall or upon a post in the front yard
of the premises. Auxiliary numbers shall be mounted at a height between
four feet and 10 feet above the adjacent grade or exterior landing directly
beneath but never higher than 15 feet above the adjoining grade. They shall
be sufficiently legible as to contrasting background, arrangement, spacing,
size and uniformity of integers so that the numbers may be read with ease
during the daylight hours by a person possessing at least 20/40 vision as
he views the numbers from the center line of the facing street and at an
elevation of five feet above the finished surface thereof. The numbers shall
§ 148-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-3
1:105
be so placed that trees, shrubs or other obstructions do not block the line of
the numbers from the center of the street to any appreciable degree. Where
the front of the building upon which the number is to be displayed is more
than 75 feet from the edge of the right-of-way (whether improved or not) of
the street or road serving the building, the number shall, in addition to the
other requirements of this chapter, be displayed on a post, mailbox or other
structure visible from the road or street and in no event further back than
25 feet from said road or street right-of-way.
§ 151-4. Existing numbers.
Existing numbers used or premises which essentially comply with numbers
officially assigned by the Building Inspector, at least to the extent that such
number or numbers are in logical sequence with the number or numbers
assigned to properties on either side which are located on the same side of
the street, shall be considered as bearing the correct number or numbers
for the purposes of this chapter. Existing installations which essentially
meet the requirements and/or spirit of these regulations, including numbers
presently on or attached to a mailbox, may be granted approval by the
Building Inspector without further alteration.
§ 151-5. Failure to comply; assessment of costs. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
The absence of house numbers or the insecure fastening or absence of any
integer thereof or the use of any number or the failure of a number to meet
the elevation requirement or the visibility requirements shall be considered
a violation of this chapter. Failure on the part of the property owner to
comply with the provisions of this chapter within a period of 15 days from
the date of issuance of a notice of violation shall be sufficient cause for the
Village Building Inspector to proceed with carrying out the provisions of this
chapter and assessing any costs incurred to the property owner concerned,
with a minimum charge of $250 for each property in violation.
§ 151-6. Building Inspector to have final authority.
The final authority for determining and assigning the number or numbers to
be used upon any particular property shall be the Building Inspector of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 151-7. Penalties for offenses. [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine
not to exceed $250 for each offense.
Chapter 158
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION (ENERGY) PROGRAM
§ 151-3 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 158-1
1:106
§ 158-1. Legislative findings; intent and purpose; authority.
A. It is the policy of both the Village of Sleepy Hollow and the State of New
York to reduce costs and provide cost certainty for the purpose of
economic development, to promote deeper penetration of energy
efficiency and renewable energy resources such as wind and solar, and
wider deployment of distributed energy resources as well as to examine
the retail energy markets and increase participation of and benefits for
residential and small commercial customers in those markets. Among
the policies and models that may offer benefits in New York is
community choice aggregation, which allows local governments to
determine the default supplier of electricity and natural gas on behalf of
its residential and small commercial customers.
B. The purpose of this Community Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program
is to allow participating local governments including the Village of
Sleepy Hollow to procure energy supply service for their residential and
small commercial customers, who will have the opportunity to opt out of
the procurement, while maintaining transmission and distribution
service from the existing distribution utility. This chapter establishes a
program that will allow the Village to put out for bid the total amount of
natural gas and/or electricity being purchased by local residential and
small commercial customers. Bundled customers will have the
opportunity to have more control to lower their overall energy costs, to
spur clean energy innovation and investment, to improve customer
choice and value, and to protect the environment, thereby fulfilling the
purposes of this chapter and fulfilling an important public purpose.
C. The Village of Sleepy Hollow is authorized to implement this
Community Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program pursuant to § 10,
Subdivision 1(ii)a(12) of the New York Municipal Home Rule Law and
State of New York Public Service Commission Case No. 14-M-0564,
Petition of Sustainable Westchester for Expedited Approval for the
Implementation of a Pilot Community Choice Aggregation Program
within the County of Westchester, Order Granting Petition in Part
(issued February 26, 2015), as may be amended, including subsequent
orders of the Public Service Commission issued in connection with or
related to Case No. 14-M-0564 (collectively, the "Order"). "Order" shall
also mean orders of the Public Service Commission related to State of
New York Public Service Commission Case No. 14-M-0224, Proceeding
on Motion of the Commission to Enable Community Choice Aggregation
Programs (issued December 15, 2014), to the extent that orders related
to Case No. 14-M-0224 enable actions by the Village not otherwise
permitted pursuant to orders related to Case 14-M-0564; provided,
however, that in the event of any conflict between orders from Case No.
14-M-0564 and orders from Case No. 14-M-0224, orders from Case No.
14-M-0564 shall govern the Community Choice Aggregation (Energy)
Program.
§ 158-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-1
1:107
§ 158-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, and unless otherwise expressly stated or
unless the context otherwise requires, the terms in this chapter shall have
the meanings employed in the State of New York Public Service
Commission's Uniform Business Practices or, if not so defined there, as
indicated below:
BUNDLED CUSTOMERS — Residential and small commercial customers of
electricity or natural gas ("fuels") who are purchasing the fuels from the
distribution utility.
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION PROGRAM OR CCA PROGRAM —
A municipal energy procurement program, which replaces the incumbent
utility as the default supplier for all bundled customers within the Village of
Sleepy Hollow.
DISTRIBUTION UTILITY — Owner or controller of the means of distribution
of the natural gas or electricity that is regulated by the Public Service
Commission.
ESCOS — Energy service companies that procure electric power and
natural gas for bundled customers in connection with this chapter.
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION — New York State Public Service
Commission.
SMALL COMMERCIAL — Non-residential customers as permitted by the
Order.
SUPPLIERS — ESCOs or, alternatively, generators of electricity and natural
gas or other entities who procure and resell electricity or natural gas.
SUSTAINABLE WESTCHESTER — A not-for-profit organization comprised
of member municipalities in Westchester County, New York.
§ 158-3. Establishment of a Community Choice Aggregation
(Energy) Program.
D. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Community
Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program Law of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow."
A. A Community Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program is hereby
established by the Village of Sleepy Hollow, whereby the Village shall
work together with Sustainable Westchester to implement the CCA
Program to the full extent permitted by the Order, as set forth more
fully herein. The Village's role under the CCA Program involves the
aggregating of the electric and/or natural gas supply of its residents
and the entering into a contract with one or more suppliers for supply
and services. Under the CCA Program, the operation and ownership of
the utility service shall remain with the distribution utility.
§ 158-1 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 158-3
1:108
§ 158-4. Procedures for eligibility; customer data sharing.
§ 158-5. Choice of energy supplier; opt-out notice and procedure.
B. The Village's participation in a CCA Program constitutes neither the
purchase of a public utility system nor the furnishing of utility service.
The Village will not take over any part of the electric or gas
transmission or distribution system and will not furnish any type of
utility service, but will instead negotiate with suppliers on behalf of
participating residential and small commercial customers.
C. In order to implement the CCA Program, the Village will adopt one or
more resolutions that outline the process of and conditions for
participation in the CCA Program, including but not limited to signing a
contract for a compliant bid with one or more suppliers, all as
consistent with this chapter and the Order.
D. The Public Service Commission supervises retail markets and
participants in these markets through legislative and regulatory
authority and the Uniform Business Practices, which includes rules
relating to the eligibility of participating ESCOs, the operation by which
ESCOs provide energy services, and the terms on which customers may
be enrolled with ESCOs.
A. As permitted by the Order, the Village may request from the
distribution utilities aggregated customer information by fuel type and
service classification on a rolling basis.
B. Sustainable Westchester, on behalf of the Village, shall issue one or
more requests for proposals to suppliers to provide energy to
participants and may then award a contract in accordance with the CCA
Program.
C. Sustainable Westchester or the Village if the Village so chooses will
then request individual customer data from the distribution utility in
accordance with the CCA Program.
D. Sustainable Westchester or the Village if the Village so chooses and the
selected supplier will then notify bundled customers of the contract
terms and their opportunity to opt out of the CCA Program.
E. In accordance with and for purposes of the Order, Consolidated Edison
Company of New York, Inc. will provide to Sustainable Westchester
aggregate and customer-specific data (including usage data, capacity
tag obligations, account numbers, and service addresses) of all bundled
customers in the Village not currently enrolled with an ESCO.
F. Sustainable Westchester and the Village will protect customer
information as required by law, subject to the Order and the limitations
of the New York State Freedom of Information Law.
§ 158-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-5
1:109
§ 158-6. Verification and reporting.
Chapter 165
DAMAGE TO VILLAGE PROPERTY
§ 165-1. Damage to fountains and hydrants prohibited. [Amended
7-6-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981]
Any person or persons who shall, in any manner whatsoever, break, disturb,
mar or interfere with any fountain or hydrant in this Village, except those
authorized to use or repair the same, shall be liable to a fine in the sum of
$10 for each and every offense and in addition thereto shall be subject to an
action for the damages caused.
§ 165-2. Damage to buildings, structures or vegetation prohibited.
[Amended 7-6-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981]
Any person or persons who shall break, mar, injure, remove or deface any
building, fence, sign, tree, shrubbery or other property of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow, in any manner whatsoever, shall be liable to a fine not
A. The Village or in conjunction with the ESCO will notify its residential
and small commercial customers, by letter notice, of the Village's
decision to establish the CCA Program, of the contract terms with an
ESCO, and of the opportunity to opt out of the CCA Program.
B. The letter notice will be sent to each customer at the address provided
by the distribution utility and explain the CCA Program and the
material provisions of the ESCO contract, identify the methods by
which the customer can opt out of the CCA Program, and provide
information on how the customer can access additional information
about the CCA Program.
C. The opt-out period shall be 20 days.
D. CCA Program bundled customers, upon enrollment, will receive a
welcome letter that will explain the customers' options for canceling
the enrollment if they believe they were enrolled incorrectly or
otherwise decide to withdraw from the CCA Program in favor of another
supplier. The welcome letter also will explain that residential customers
are entitled to the added protection of the mandated three-day
rescission period as detailed in § 5(B)(3) of the Uniform Business
Practices.
A. Sustainable Westchester shall be responsible for filing an annual report
with the Public Service Commission, which identifies the number of
customers enrolled in the CCA Program by municipality and customer
class, the number of customers who returned to utility service or
service with another supplier during the reporting period, and the
average cost of commodity supply by month for the reporting period.
§ 158-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 165-2
1:110
exceeding $30 and in addition thereto shall be made to reimburse the
Village for the damage so sustained by it.
§ 165-3. Trees and shrubs.
No person shall cut down, lop, girdle, destroy or injure any tree or shrub
now growing or hereinafter to grow in any of the public streets, highways,
alleys or public grounds of this Village without permission of the Board of
Trustees. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine in the sum of $25 for each and every offense.
Chapter 167
DANCE HALLS AND DANCING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 119.
Fees — See Ch. 200.
Public gatherings — See Ch. 268.
§ 167-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC DANCE HALL — Any public room or place in the Village of Sleepy
Hollow in which dancing is permitted, or any public room or public place
in which dances are held daily or weekly or at stated times or at regularly
recurring intervals and to which the public is invited or admitted, with or
without payment of admission.
§ 167-2. Permit required; application; fee. [Amended 8-16-1994 by
L.L. No. 11-1994]
A. It shall be unlawful to hold any public dance or ball or to permit dancing
in any public hall or public place to which the public is admitted, with or
without the payment of admission, unless and until a permit shall have
been issued by the Village Clerk of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, upon
application made therefor and upon payment of a fee in a sum to be
established and determined by the Board of Trustees from time to time
and set forth in the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200,
Fees.
B. Every application shall set forth the name and address of the sponsors
of said dance or ball, together with the date, time and place where the
same is to be held. Before any permit shall be granted by the Village,
said application must be approved by the Sleepy Hollow Fire Chief.
§ 165-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-2
1:111
§ 167-3. Building standards.
No dance shall be held in any hall until it shall be found that such place
complies with and conforms to all laws and health and fire regulations of
this Village and that it is properly ventilated and supplied with sufficient
toilet conveniences and is a safe and proper place for the purpose for which
it is to be used.
§ 167-4. Hours of closing. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
All public dance halls and public dances or balls shall be closed on or before
the hour of 12:00 midnight, except that any public dance held on a Saturday
night shall cease at 2:00 a.m.
§ 167-5. Yearly permits; inspections. [Amended 8-16-1994 by L.L.
No. 11-1994]
§ 167-6. Revocation of permit and closing of dances.
The Chief of Police or any member of the police force shall have the power,
and it shall be his duty, to cause the place, hall or room where any dance
or ball is held or given to be vacated whenever provisions of this or of any
other law of this Village are being violated or whenever any indecent act
C. In addition, the applicant shall be required to furnish to the Village an
insurance policy naming the Village of Sleepy Hollow as an insured and
holding the Village harmless from any liability which may be
subsequently incurred. The policy shall be in an amount determined
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. Any person, firm or corporation having a business incidental to which
dancing is invited or permitted nightly, weekly or at stated intervals,
with or without the payment of admission, may procure a yearly permit
upon payment of a fee in a sum to be established and determined by the
Board of Trustees from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule
included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
B. In addition, any premises which permits dancing on a nightly, weekly or
interval basis must be inspected by the Fire Department at least once a
year, and the Fire Department must provide a written report to the
Building Department of its findings.
C. Said permit, however, is personal and not transferable and may be
forfeited or revoked by the Board of Trustees for disorderly or immoral
conduct on the premises or for violation of any of the provisions of this
or any other laws of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.10
10.Editor's Note: Original § 14-6, Dancing prohibited in barrooms, of the 1965 Code, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013.
§ 167-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 167-6
1:112
shall be committed or whenever disorderly, violent or vulgar acts shall take
place therein.
§ 167-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $250, 15 days' imprisonment,
or both, for each offense.
Chapter 175
DUMPSTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 148.
Fees — See Ch. 200.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
Solid waste — See Ch. 347.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 362.
§ 175-1. Permit required.
No dumpster shall be kept, maintained, used or operated on a Village street
unless the owner or user thereof shall first obtain a permit from the Village
Clerk of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 175-2. Permit terms and conditions; fees and deposits.
A permit shall be issued upon the following terms and conditions:
A. An application shall be made by such person to the Village Clerk for
said permit upon blanks to be furnished by said Clerk. Said application
shall give the name and address of the applicant, the location by street
and number where the dumpster will be located, the number of days the
dumpster will be located on a Village street and such further
information as the Village Clerk or the Board of Trustees may require.
B. Said permit shall allow the owner or user of the dumpster to keep or
maintain a dumpster on a Village street for a period of time not to
exceed five consecutive days. Said permit may not be renewed.
C. A cash bond is required to be posted with the Village as established in
the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees, to ensure
compliance with this chapter. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
D. A permit fee in a sum to be established and determined by the Board of
Trustees from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule included at
§ 167-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-2
1:113
§ 175-3. Forfeiture of bond.
No person shall keep, maintain, use or operate a dumpster on a Village
street for more than five consecutive days, as provided in § 175-2B
aforesaid, and in the event that a dumpster is located on a Village street for
more than five days, he shall forfeit the cash bond provided for in § 175-2C
at the rate of $50 per day, in addition to the statutory penalties prescribed
herein.
§ 175-4. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine
not to exceed $250 for each offense.
Chapter 182
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Housing standards — See Ch. 245.
Plumbers — See Ch. 304.
the end of Chapter 200, Fees, is required. [Amended 8-16-1994 by
L.L. No. 11-1994]
E. Before any permit shall be granted, the applicant shall provide and
deposit with the Clerk a public liability insurance policy in the amount
of $1,000,000, single limit, naming the applicant and the Village of
Sleepy Hollow as coinsureds. This subsection does not apply to
dumpsters located on private property. [Added 8-16-1994 by L.L. No.
11-1994]
§ 175-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 175-4
1:114
ARTICLE I
Legislative Intent
§ 182-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life and property by regulating
the manner of installation, alteration, removal and inspection of all
electrical work in existing or proposed buildings and structures and the
materials to be used therefor, and prohibiting any installation, alteration
or removal or the use of any materials which do not comply with such
regulations; providing for the licensing of electrical contractors and giving
to the Building Inspector of the Village of Sleepy Hollow the authority and
power to enforce this chapter.
§ 182-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-1
1:115

ARTICLE II
Wiring in Residence and Business Buildings
§ 182-2. Conformity to standards. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
All electrical wiring for electric light, heat and power, and signal systems
must conform to the rules and regulations of the National Electrical Code
and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.11
11.Editor's Note: Original Art. III of the 1965 Code, Board of Electrical Code Control, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013.
§ 182-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-2
1:117

ARTICLE III
Duties and Authority of Building Inspector
§ 182-3. Enforcement authority. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
§ 182-4. Conflict of interest.
It shall be unlawful for the Building Inspector or any of his deputies to
engage in the business or the sale, installation or maintenance of electrical
wiring, electrical devices or electrical equipment, either directly or
indirectly, and he shall have no financial interest in any concern engaged in
such business in the Village of Sleepy Hollow at any time while holding the
office of Building Inspector.
§ 182-5. Powers and authority.
The inspector or his authorized deputy shall have the right during
reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of his official duties,
or for the purpose of making any inspections or tests of the installation
of electrical wiring, electrical material, apparatus, fixtures or appliances
contained therein, and shall have the authority to order the turning off
or disconnecting by the utility from the source of supply of all electrical
currents after notice to the landlord, tenants and occupants, and cause to be
cut or disconnected in cases of emergency any wire where such electrical
currents are dangerous to life and property or may interfere with the work
of the Fire Department until such wiring, devices and equipment and their
installation have been made safe as directed by him.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector of the Village
of Sleepy Hollow. The Building Inspector shall deputize one or more
regular certified inspectors as his electrical inspector or electrical
inspection agency for the purposes of all electrical installations
provided for in this chapter.
B. The electrical inspector shall be a person who is a member of the
International Association of Electrical Inspectors (IAEI) and applies the
National Electrical Code (NEC) as the standard for inspection and
certification, who is authorized by the Building Inspector to make
inspections and reinspections of all electrical installations described in
this chapter and to recommend approval or disapproval of the same.
§ 182-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-5
1:119

ARTICLE IV
Inspection Certificates
§ 182-6. Issuance; notice of defects.
A. Upon the completion of the installation of the electrical wiring, devices
and equipment, it shall be the duty of the person, firm or corporation
installing the same to notify the Building Inspector, or his legal deputy,
who shall inspect or cause to be inspected the installation promptly
after such notice is given, and issue to such person, firm or corporation
his temporary or final certificate and authorizing connection to the
electrical service and the turning on of the current and the use of the
installation, and shall send written notice of such authorization to the
public utility corporation furnishing the electrical service. When a
certificate is issued authorizing the connection and use of temporary
work, such certificate shall be issued to expire at a stated time and shall
be revoked by the Building Inspector at his discretion. A temporary or
final certificate may be issued authorizing the connection and use of
certain specified portions of any uncompleted installation. Such a
temporary certificate shall be revocable at the discretion of the Building
Inspector or his legal deputy.
B. If, upon inspection, the installation is not found to be fully in compliance
with this chapter, the Building Inspector or his legal deputy shall
forward to the person, firm or corporation installing the wiring a
written notice stating the defects which have been found to exist.
§ 182-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-6
1:121

ARTICLE V
Review of Decisions
§ 182-7. Procedures for review. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
When the Building Inspector or his legal deputy condemns all or part of
any electrical installation, the owner may, after receiving written notice
from the Building Inspector or his legal deputy, file a petition in writing
for review of said action of the Building Inspector or legal deputy with the
New York State Department of State, Division of Code Enforcement and
Administration, to determine if the electrical installation complies with this
chapter, and shall make a decision in accordance with its findings.
§ 182-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-7
1:123

ARTICLE VI
Concealed Wiring
§ 182-8. Inspection required before completion.
When any part of a wiring installation is to be concealed from view by
the permanent placement of parts of the building, the person, firm or
corporation installing the wiring shall notify the Building Inspector or his
authorized deputy, and such parts of the wiring installation shall not be
concealed until they have been inspected, provided that on large
installations where the concealment of parts of the wiring proceeds
continuously, the person, firm or corporation installing the wiring shall give
the Building Inspector or his legal deputy due notice, and inspection shall
be made periodically during the process of work.
§ 182-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-8
1:125

ARTICLE VII
Permits
§ 182-9. Permit required; exceptions. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
No wiring device or equipment for the transmission, distribution or
utilization of electrical energy or light, power and/or heat shall be installed
in or on any building or structure or premises, nor shall any alteration
or addition be made in any such existing wiring devices or equipment,
without first securing a permit therefor from the Building Inspector, except
as follows:
§ 182-10. Fees. [Amended 8-16-1994 by L.L. No. 11-1994]
The fee for each permit shall be based on the cost of the job. The fee shall
be established and determined by the Board of Trustees from time to time
and set forth in the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
§ 182-11. Copy of application for inspection required. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A copy of the application for inspection must be submitted when applying
for a permit for electrical work to be done in the Village of Sleepy Hollow,
New York.
A. No permit or notice shall be required for minor repair work, such as
repairing flush or snap switches, replacing fuses, changing lamp
sockets and receptacles, taping bare joints and repairing drop cords or
the connection of portable devices to suitable receptacles which have
been permanently installed.
B. No permit shall be required for the installation of electrical wiring,
devices or equipment to be installed by or for a public utility
corporation for the use of such corporation in the generation,
transmission, sale or use of electrical energy or for the use of such
corporation in the transmission of intelligence.
C. No permit shall be required for electrical work done for the United
States Government, the State of New York or its political subdivisions,
provided that such work is performed by the employees of said
government or political subdivisions or that such work is inspected by
said government or political subdivisions if done by a licensed electrical
contractor.
§ 182-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-11
1:127

ARTICLE VIII
Connection to Installation
§ 182-12. Certificate of approval required.
§ 182-13. Temporary permit may be issued.
The Building Inspector or his legal deputy shall have power to issue a
temporary permit for connection service in time of emergency.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or institution to
make connection from a source of electrical energy to any electrical
wiring, device or equipment until a certificate of approval has been
issued by the Building Inspector authorizing such connections and the
use of such wiring devices or equipment. [Amended 1-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or institution to
make connection from a source of electrical energy to any electrical
wiring, device or equipment which has been disconnected or ordered to
be disconnected by the inspector, or the use of which has been ordered
by the Building Inspector or his legal deputy to be discontinued, until a
certificate of approval has been issued by him authorizing the
reconnection and use of such wiring, device or equipment.
§ 182-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-13
1:129

ARTICLE IX
Electrical Contractors
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 182-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR — Any person, firm or corporation who or
which is licensed in Westchester County, engaged in the business of
installing or altering, by contract or otherwise, electrical wiring, devices or
equipment for the utilization of electricity supplied for light, heat or power,
and the term "electrical contractor" does not include employees employed
by such contractor to do or supervise such work.
§ 182-15. Licenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or institution to engage
in the business of electrical contractor, as herein defined, without being
licensed as an electrical contractor in Westchester County.
§ 182-16. License restricted to individual.
No electrical contractor shall directly or indirectly allow his license to be
used in connection with work not actually done by him and under his
supervision.
§ 182-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-16
1:131

ARTICLE X
Liability for Damages
§ 182-17. Responsibility.
A. This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or
installing any electrical devices and/or equipment, or damages to
persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the Village
be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection
authorized herein, or certificate approval issued as herein provided.
B. Any person, firm, corporation or institution applying for a permit must
file with the permit application a certified copy of liability and
workmen's compensation insurance with minimum per-occurrence
limits of $500,000. The permit shall be immediately revoked upon
failure to maintain said insurance. [Amended 7-18-1989 by L.L. No.
8-1989; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 182-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-17
1:133

ARTICLE XI
Penalties
§ 182-18. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Any person, firm, corporation or institution who or which shall fail to comply
with any of the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to a fine or civil penalty of not less than $250 nor more than $1,500 for
each offense, together with the costs of prosecution, or to imprisonment
not exceeding six months, or both. Each and every day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 182-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182-18
1:135
Chapter 190
EXCAVATION, FILLING AND TOPSOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 148.
Explosives and blasting — See Ch. 193.
Fees — See Ch. 200.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 358.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 418.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 425.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 182-18 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 182-18
1:136
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 190-1. Findings and intent.
§ 190-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXCAVATION — An operation for the purpose of movement or removal of
earth, rock, asphalt, concrete, or other materials in or on the ground, or
otherwise disturbing the subsurface of the earth, by the use of powered
or mechanized equipment, including but not limited to digging, blasting,
auguring, backfilling, test boring, drilling, pile driving, grading, plowing in,
A. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow that the natural topography of the land of the
Village is a public asset which should be preserved and safeguarded;
that topsoil, trees or other materials which constitute the land, its
plants and wildlife are of vital concern to the people of the Village; and
that no changes shall be permitted in such topography except those
which are absolutely necessary in order to permit the proper and
appropriate use of the land and water.
B. It is the intent of this chapter to regulate or prohibit excavation, the
removal of trees, topsoil or other materials or the filling up, draining,
cleaning, operating and using of any land, whether for commercial or
noncommercial purposes, in any manner which:
(1) Tends to create hazardous or dangerous conditions by creating
pits, holes or hollows in the earth, by creating or leaving
unprotected banks or ledges of exposed earth or by permitting or
creating conditions which cause the collection of water.
(2) Impairs the usefulness of the property involved or any surrounding
properties for the purposes for which it was zoned; fails to take into
consideration the relation of residential and commercial areas and
the contouring of land with relation to remaining portions of the
land affected or neighboring areas; interferes with the zoning plan
of the Village and tends to reduce the value for taxation purposes of
the property in question or other property in the Village.
(3) Causes soil erosion which depletes the land of vegetative cover and
supply of organic material and results or tends to result in the
washing of the soil, erosion or interference with normal drainage.
(4) Diverts or causes water to collect on the property of others,
interferes with or overloads any existing or planned drainage
facilities of the Village, causes unnatural runoff or results in the
collection of pools of water, with the possibility of health and safety
hazards or the lowering of the taxable value of property affected.
§ 190-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-2
1:137
hammering, pulling in, trenching, and tunneling; excluding the movement
of earth by tools manipulated only by human or animal power and the tilling
of soil for agricultural purposes.
A lowering of existing grade in excess of two feet, regardless of the area
involved in such change, or any lowering of existing grade or stripping
of topsoil over an area of 4,000 square feet or more, regardless of
whether or not, in either such case, any topsoil or fill is removed from
the premises for commercial sale or otherwise.
A.
Any excavating operation in which fill or other material is removed from
the premises, except, as to both Subsections (1) and (2):
Where a building permit shall have been duly issued, excavation
limited in area and bulk to that strictly essential for and limited to
the extent of the foundation, walls and basement of such building
or for the construction of a wall, driveway, sidewalk, swimming
pool, service connections or other structure or underground tank
and which, including from consideration soil removed which is
actually replaced by a basement foundation, wall, swimming pool,
tank or other underground structure, does not involve any change
in the existing grade and contour in excess of two feet, regardless
of the area involved in such change, or any change in the existing
contour and grade over an area of 4,000 square feet or more,
shall not require a permit. Any change in the existing grade and
contour in excess of two feet or over an area of 4,000 square feet
or more, regardless of the depth of the cut, shall be permitted only
if the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector that an excess amount of excavation is necessary and
proper in order to permit reasonable use of the property and will
not contravene the policy set forth in § 190-1, and the Building
Inspector shall so endorse the building permit and may impose
conditions appropriate, in his discretion, to carry out the policy set
forth in § 190-1.
(1)
In connection with a site plan which has been duly approved by
the Planning Board and which makes specific provision for grading,
contouring and drainage in the manner deemed by the Planning
Board appropriate to carry out the declaration of policy set forth in
§ 190-1.
(2)
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to prevent the
owner or occupant of premises from moving topsoil, excavating or
filling his property by his own handwork, provided that no power
tools, other than garden tractors not exceeding six horsepower, are
used and that materials are not removed for the purposes of sale or
enhancing the value of other property.
(3)
B.
Notwithstanding the exceptions provided for by Subsection B(1), (2) or
(3) above, if the operation as carried out creates conditions contrary
to the policies specifically enumerated in § 190-1B(1), (3) or (4), the
C.
§ 190-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 190-2
1:138
FILLING OPERATION — A raising of the existing contour of the land in
excess of two feet, regardless of the area involved in such change, and
any raising of such existing contour in excess of two feet over an area of
400 square feet or more, and any raising of existing contour over an area
of 1,000 square feet or more, regardless of whether the filling operation
is carried out by placing on the land fill or other materials from other
properties or redistributing the earth and soil on the land itself, by bulldozer
or other means, except that in connection with construction for which a
building permit shall have been issued, fill in excess of those limits shall be
permissible if the applicant has demonstrated that it will not contravene the
policy set forth in § 190-1.
GRADE or CONTOUR — The actual existing grade or contour of the land
involved at any point thereof and shall not mean the grade of the street or
streets adjoining said land.
Building Inspector or the Planning Board, either on his or its own
motion or upon complaint, may require that a permit be issued under
the appropriate article subject to the imposition of conditions as therein
provided, and the Building Inspector on his own motion may, or upon
request of the Chairman of the Planning Board shall, issue a stop order
pending the issuance of a permit and, if the person in question does not
choose to apply for a permit, may compel restoration of the premises
and may require corrective action with respect to drainage, exposed
banks and other conditions to the extent necessary to fulfill the policy
considerations set forth in § 190-1B(1), (3) or (4), and failure to comply
with such stop order or requirements shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
§ 190-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-2
1:139

ARTICLE II
Excavation, Tree Removal or Topsoil Stripping Permits
§ 190-3. Permit required.
Excavation of land, removal of trees or stripping of topsoil as defined in
§ 190-2 above, subject to the exceptions therein set forth, where fill or other
material is to be removed from the premises, shall be unlawful without a
permit for the purpose granted in accordance with the provisions of § 190-4
through 190-9, which permit shall be a permit issued by the Planning Board
as a special permit.
§ 190-4. Application for permit.
Each application for an excavation permit or site plan approval shall contain
the specific location of all live trees six inches in diameter or larger,
measured at a point three feet above existing ground level, prior to
regrading the area and along the twenty-five-foot-wide boundary strip
around the grading area, with a note for each tree indicating removal
or not. Each application shall be on a form prepared by the Building
Inspector, shall be filed in triplicate, shall be signed by the owner or lessee
or agent of either or by the building contractor, engineer or architect
employed in connection with the proposed work, and shall contain or shall
be accompanied by the following:
A. The name and address of the property affected.
B. A description of the property in sufficient detail to identify the same.
C. The name and address of the person or corporation who or which will
carry out the operation.
D. A description of the proposed operation; the extent, in three
dimensions, of the proposed excavation; the volume of material
proposed to be removed; and the condition of the premises before the
commencement of and the proposed condition of the premises after the
completion of the proposed operation.
E. A site plan, prepared by a licensed engineer, registered architect, or
land surveyor, drawn to scale, showing the location and dimension of
the premises to a point 10 feet beyond the boundaries thereof and
showing existing and proposed contours at five-foot levels, showing
distances from street or highway lines, distances from boundary lines of
other owners, the proposed location, size and use of any existing
buildings thereon and cross sections and elevations appropriate to
indicate the effect of the operation upon the contour and grade of the
premises and upon the relationship in contour and grade between the
affected portion of the premises and the remainder of such property
and any abutting land and highways after completion of the operation;
provided, however, the Building Inspector shall have the right to waive
the necessity of furnishing a topographic map.
§ 190-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-4
1:141
§ 190-5. Fees.
The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.12
§ 190-6. Bond or cash deposit.
Before issuing any permit under this article, the Planning Board shall
require the applicant to file with the Village a suitable surety bond, payable
to the Village, in an amount fixed by the Building Inspector and in a
form approved by the Village Attorney, with a surety company as surety
and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the conditions contained
in this article, the observance of all municipal laws and performance of
conditions imposed in connection with the granting of the permit to
indemnify the Village for any damages to Village property and to cover
the cost to the Village of completing the work in accordance with the
approved grading or restoring the premises and/or the replacing of topsoil
and reseeding in the event that the applicant fails to do so. In lieu of such
bond, a deposit of cash or negotiable securities may be made with the
Village Clerk upon the same conditions.
§ 190-7. Release or forfeiture of bond or deposit.
F. A duly acknowledged written consent of the owner and mortgagee, if
any, of the premises to the proposed operation.
G. Certificates of the Village Treasurer and the Receiver of Taxes of the
town showing payment of all taxes and assessments to date against the
premises.
H. A certificate of the project engineer approving the proposed site plan
and stating that the proposed operation and the finished grades of the
premises after the completion thereof will not interfere with or overload
any existing or planned drainage facilities of the Village and will not
cause erosion or other problems, will not cause water to accumulate
and will not result in the outpouring of water or otherwise have an
adverse effect on any thoroughfares or on the lateral stability or
drainage of adjoining properties, and is not contrary to the policy of
§ 190-1 above.
A. Any surety bond filed or deposit made in accordance with the foregoing
shall be released when there shall have been filed with the Building
Inspector a certificate from the project engineer to the effect that, in all
respects, the work proposed under the approved plan has been
satisfactorily completed in full compliance with all provisions of this
chapter.
B. If no such certificate shall have been filed within 60 days after
completion of the operation or the end of the period for reseeding
12.Editor's Note: See the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
§ 190-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 190-7
1:142
§ 190-8. Permit conditions.
provided for pursuant to this chapter, whichever is later, the bond or
the deposit shall be forfeited, and the Village shall be entitled to the full
amount thereof for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this
chapter.
A. The operations under a permit granted pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) No excavation shall be made within a horizontal distance of 10 feet
of any public road or highway or within a horizontal distance of 10
feet of any adjoining boundary line of other owners without the
consent of the Planning Board.
(2) No excavation shall be made below the grade of surrounding
property to a depth greater than two feet, unless the excavation is
properly guarded and protected by a substantial fence of proper
height and strength which will prevent children from climbing over
such fence and with gates, which gates shall be locked at all times
when the property is not being worked.
(3) All excavations and all conformations resulting from grading or
filling operations shall be drained so that water or pools gathering
in the bottom of such excavations shall not be greater in depth than
one foot.
(4) The excavated portions shall be refilled with clean, nonburning fill
containing no garbage, refuse or deleterious matter and shall be
graded to the level of the adjoining property and shall be reseeded
with a mixture of rye and clover sufficient to stabilize the soil.
(5) In the case of a permit for the removal of topsoil, at least two inches
of topsoil shall be left upon the surface from which topsoil has been
removed, and the area from which said topsoil has been taken shall
be reseeded with a mixture of rye and clover sufficient to stabilize
the soil.
(6) Processing of any kind or the erection or use of any structure, such
as, but not limited to, hoppers, strainers, washers, crushers or
sheds, shall be deemed to be a commercial use; provided, however,
that where a permit has been issued under this chapter, power
equipment for the purpose of excavation and loading shall be
allowed.
(7) No operations shall be permitted on Sundays or legal holidays nor
before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. on other days.
(8) No excavation slope shall be cut in excess of the permanent stable
slope of the soil involved, and the exposed slope shall be required
to be seeded or protected by other means to prevent its subsequent
§ 190-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-8
1:143
§ 190-9. Duration of permit.
Permits under this article shall be for a period of no longer than one year
or such shorter period as may be prescribed by the Planning Board with
a view to having substantially continuous operations in connection with
the excavation covered by the permit, subject only to interruption of work
caused by seasonal conditions, such permits to be subject to termination
if work is interrupted for a period of more than 60 days due to causes
other than the weather or other seasonal conditions. Where work under
the initial or renewal permit issued under this chapter has been pursued
with reasonable diligence, a renewal permit may be issued without a new
application upon payment of a fee in an amount set by resolution of the
Board of Trustees, provided that the required bond or cash deposit shall
remain in force and that the other requirements in connection with the
application are currently up to date.
erosion. In the event of any dispute as to the stability of the slope,
the determination of the Building Inspector shall be conclusive.
(9) Dust down or similar dust layer shall be spread on access roads and
any traveled areas used in connection with any work under this
chapter to protect the public and surrounding area against
windblown sand and dust.
(10)No removal of earth from the ground shall be made so as to prevent
or interfere with the orderly development of residential, business,
manufacturing or public purposes or other land in the vicinity or so
as to render unreasonable delay in travel from place to place or to
render unduly difficult or to substantially increase the cost of the
installation of public utilities or other public services or so as to
substantially depreciate the value of property in the vicinity.
(11)No stripping of topsoil or tree removal shall be made within 10 feet
of any property line unless permitted by the Planning Board.
Permits by the Planning Board shall take into consideration the
intent of this chapter regarding the replacement of topsoil and the
restoration, reseeding and stabilization of the land.
(12) Such conditions as the Planning Board may deem appropriate as to
the time in which the work is to be completed.
(13) Such other conditions as the Planning Board may deem appropriate
to carry out the purposes of this chapter and the broad statements
of policy as enumerated in § 190-1 hereof, as if those purposes were
specifically enumerated hereunder.
B. The Board retains the power to impose additional conditions during the
terms of the permit if in its opinion or in the opinion of the Building
Inspector additional conditions are necessary.
§ 190-8 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 190-10
1:144
§ 190-10. Minor excavations.
Excavation involving the removal from the premises of fewer than 40 cubic
yards of fill or other material or the removal of topsoil from an area less
than 4,000 square feet shall be governed by the provisions of Article III.
§ 190-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-10
1:145

ARTICLE III
Permits for Nonremoval of Fill or Filling Operations
§ 190-11. Permit required. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Excavations not involving removal of fill or other material from the premises
in excess of 40 cubic yards or removal of topsoil from an area of 4,000
square feet or more and filling operations shall be unlawful without a permit
for the purpose granted in accordance with the provisions of §§ 190-12
through 190-14, which permit shall either be a minor excavation or fill
permit issued by the Building Inspector or a permit issued by the Planning
Board as a special permit.
§ 190-12. Application for permit. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Each application for issuance of a permit under this article shall be made
on the same form and in the same manner as an application for permit
under Article II hereof, with such changes therein as may be required by
the following modifications of those provisions.
A. All applications shall be made to the Building Inspector. If the amount of
fill to be excavated and removed from the premises or brought onto the
premises from outside the boundaries thereof does not exceed 40 cubic
yards, or 1,000 cubic yards if the excavation or deposit of fill is the
result of a grading operation limited to the premises [in each case
without considering material removed pursuant to exception under
Subsection B(1) of the definition of "excavation" in § 190-2], or if the
amount of topsoil to be moved is less than 4,000 square feet, the
Building Inspector may, in his discretion, either issue a minor
excavation or fill permit or refer the matter to the Planning Board for
consideration of the issuance of a permit. In all other cases, the
Building Inspector shall refer the matter to the Planning Board for
consideration of the issuance of a permit.
B. In the discretion of the Building Inspector, if the volume of the material
to be excavated or fill deposited or placed on the premises shall not
exceed 40 cubic yards if the excavated material is to be removed from
the premises or fill is to be brought onto the premises from outside the
boundaries thereof or 1,000 cubic yards if the excavation or deposit of
fill is the result of a grading operation limited to the premises [in each
case without considering material removed pursuant to exception
under Subsection B(1) of the definition of "excavation" in § 190-2] or, if
topsoil is to be removed, the amount thereof is less than 4,000 square
feet, the requirements that a licensed engineer, registered architect, or
land surveyor present the material listed in § 190-4E may be eliminated,
but the same basic information shall be required from the applicant.
§ 190-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-13
1:147
§ 190-13. Minor excavation or fill permit. [Amended 1-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
Where application has been made for a building permit under the provisions
of Chapter 450, Zoning, and the documents submitted with that application
show that, as an incident to the construction, fill is to be deposited, moved
or placed on the premises or fill or material is to be excavated or topsoil
moved in an amount not exceeding 40 cubic yards if the excavated material
is to be removed from the premises or fill is to be brought onto the premises
from outside the boundaries thereof or 1,000 cubic yards if the excavation
or deposit of fill is the result of a grading operation limited to the premises
[in each case without considering material removed pursuant to exception
under Subsection B(1) of the definition of "excavation" in § 190-2] or, if
topsoil is to be removed, the amount thereof is less than 4,000 square
feet, such application for a building permit shall, without the payment
of any additional fee, be considered an application under this Article III
for a minor excavation or fill permit, and the pertinent provisions hereof
shall be applicable thereto, including the reference of the application to
the Planning Board and the payment of an additional fee in connection
therewith, in an amount set by resolution of the Board of Trustees, if the
Building Inspector, in his discretion, determines that the application shall
be considered by the Planning Board.
§ 190-14. Fee.
The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.13
§ 190-15. Bond or cash deposit release. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
The provisions of §§ 190-6 and 190-7 of Article II shall be applicable in the
event that the volume of material to be excavated, fill deposited or topsoil
removed shall exceed 40 cubic yards if the excavated material is to be
removed from the premises or fill is to be brought onto the premises from
outside the boundaries thereof or 1,000 cubic yards if the excavation or
deposit of fill is the result of a grading operation limited to the premises
[in each case without considering material removed pursuant to exception
under Subsection B(1) of the definition of "excavation" in § 190-2] or, if
topsoil is to be removed, the amount thereof is less than 4,000 square feet
and in such other cases as, in the discretion of the Building Inspector and/
or Planning Board, bond is required.
§ 190-16. Permit conditions.
A. The operations under a permit granted pursuant to the provisions of
this Article III shall be subject to the following conditions:
13.Editor's Note: See the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
§ 190-13 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 190-16
1:148
(1) No excavation shall be made below the grade of surrounding
property to a depth greater than three feet unless the excavation is
properly guarded and protected by a substantial fence of proper
height and strength which will prevent children from climbing over
such fence and with gates, which gates shall be locked at all times
when the property is not being worked.
(2) All excavations and all conformations resulting from filling or
grading operations shall be drained so that water or pools
gathering in the bottom of such excavations shall not be greater in
depth than one foot.
(3) No excavation shall be made nor shall any filling operation be
conducted which results in the deposit of topsoil, earth, sand,
gravel, rock or other substance upon or shall interfere with any
natural watercourse on or the natural drainage of the property,
and, at the termination of the permit, the premises shall be roughly
graded and, if necessary, other provisions made of a permanent
nature so that the natural drainage shall be fully restored.
(4) No filling operation shall be conducted within a horizontal distance
of 10 feet of any public road or highway which raises the level of
the filled land above the grade of the public road or highway nor
within a horizontal distance of 10 feet of adjoining boundary lines
of other owners which raises the level of the filled property above
that of the adjoining owners without the consent of the Planning
Board.
(5) There shall be no interference with existing drainage, nor shall the
filling operation divert or cause water to collect on the property of
others or interfere with or overload any existing or planned
drainage facilities of the Village, endanger any road, street or
highway within the limits of the Village or produce or enlarge areas
from which water will not drain, and provision shall be made for the
temporary drainage of the property during the filling operation and
for the restoration of permanent drainage to be effective upon
completion of the operation.
(6) The filled or excavated portion shall be seeded with a mixture of rye
and clover or, in appropriate cases, lawn grasses sufficient to
stabilize the soil and shall be graded to the level of and in relation
to the contour of adjoining property.
(7) Such conditions as the Planning Board may deem appropriate as to
the time in which the work is to be completed.
(8) Such other conditions as the Planning Board may deem appropriate
to carry out the purposes of this chapter and the broad statements
of policy as enumerated in § 190-1 hereof, as if those purposes were
specifically enumerated hereunder.
§ 190-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-16
1:149
§ 190-17. Duration of permit.
Except for a minor excavation or fill permit in connection with a building
permit, as provided for in § 190-13 of this article, which shall be coextensive
with the building permit, permits under this Article III shall be for a period
of no longer than three months or such shorter period as may be prescribed
by the Building Inspector or the Planning Board, as the case may be, with
a view to having substantially continuous operations covered by the permit.
The permit may be renewed by the Building Inspector or, if granted by
the Planning Board, without hearing for a single additional period of three
months, upon presentation of reasons deemed sufficient by the Building
Inspector or Planning Board as to why the work could not be completed
during the original period.
B. The Planning Board retains the power to impose additional conditions
during the term of the permit if, in its opinion or in the opinion of the
Building Inspector, additional conditions are necessary.
§ 190-16 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 190-17
1:150
ARTICLE IV
Commercial Excavations
§ 190-18. Permit required; conditions.
Clay, sand, gravel, topsoil or other natural mineral deposits may not be
excavated for commercial purposes except by a temporary special permit
issued after public hearing by the Planning Board and subject to compliance
with the following conditions:
A. The surface of all spoil banks wherein topsoil has been stripped or
removed shall be graded so as to reduce the peaks thereof and reduce
the depressions between the peaks of such spoil banks to a gently
rolling, sloping or terraced topography, as may be appropriate, which
grading shall be done in such a fashion as will minimize erosion due to
rainfall, break up long, uninterrupted slopes, leave the surface free of
large rocks or other obstructions and make the surface suitable for
revegetation and as nearly level as possible.
B. Loose refuse and debris on the bottom of a final cut shall be graded so
that a uniform topography, level and suitable for revegetation, is
present.
C. Drainage of water from the spoil bank or cut harmful to any adjoining
streams or land is prohibited.
D. Trees, shrubs, legumes or a mixture of rye and clover, together with any
other material which, in the opinion of the Planning Board, is necessary
to stabilize the soil, shall be planted upon the spoil banks and upon final
cuts.
E. Appropriate drainage shall be constructed so that no noxious liquid or
water is permitted to accumulate in any final cut.
F. As a condition precedent to the issuance of temporary special permit by
the Planning Board as herein provided, the owner, lessee or agent
thereof of the land in question shall file a preliminary plan for the
reclamation of the land proposed to be excavated, which plan must be
approved by said Board. The Board shall have the right to offer an
alternative plan.
G. The preliminary plan shall contain a certification of the amount of land
involved, an estimate of the duration of the excavation, and a time
schedule for the reclamation and subsequent replanting of the land.
The reclamation of land shall commence after the excavation of 10
acres.
H. To ensure adherence to the reclamation and planting plan, the owner,
lessee or agent shall forward to the Village a surety bond in the amount
of $1,000 for each acre of land involved.
§ 190-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-18
1:151
I. No surety bond required under this article shall be discharged or
released until final approval of the reclamation and planting by the
Planning Board, without limitation as to time.
J. The Village, upon recommendation of the Planning Board, shall have
the right, if the final reclamation and planting are found by the Building
Inspector as not likely to be successful and after rejection by the owner,
lessee or agent concerned of an alternate plan suggested by the
Planning Board, to enter upon the land, reclaim and replant it, and
assess the entire cost of such reclamation and replanting, plus costs
and expenses, against the land, and all costs shall be a lien thereon
enforceable in the same manner as any lien or real property tax.
§ 190-18 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 190-18
1:152
ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 190-19. Protection of adjoining property.
Whether or not a permit is required under this chapter, any person causing
any excavation to be made shall provide such sheet piling and bracing as
may be necessary to prevent the earth of adjoining property from caving
in before permanent supports have been provided for the sides of such
excavation; and whenever provisions are lacking for the permanent support
of the side of an excavation, the person causing or having caused such
excavation to be made shall build a retaining wall at his own expense on his
own land, such retaining wall to be carried to a height sufficient to retain
the adjoining earth and to be in accordance with specifications acceptable
to the Building Inspector.
§ 190-20. Powers of Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall have the same duties, powers, rights of
inspection, power to issue stop orders, right to revoke permits and other
rights, duties and powers with respect to enforcement of this chapter as
those possessed by him under Chapter 450, Zoning.
§ 190-21. Penalties for offenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner, general agent or
contractor of a building with respect to the premises concerned, the lessee
or tenant of the premises or any part thereof and the general building
contractor, general agent, architect, engineer or any person who owns,
permits, takes part or assists in, or who maintains any premises in which
any violation of this chapter shall exist, to violate any provision of this
chapter, the requirements of the Building Inspector and/or Planning Board
pursuant to this chapter and the acts of the Building Inspector pursuant
to § 190-20, and any such person who shall violate this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties provided by § 450-64. Each and every day that such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 190-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-21
1:153
Chapter 193
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 148.
Dumpsters — See Ch. 175.
Excavation, filling and topsoil removal — See
Ch. 190.
Fees — See Ch. 200.
Noise — See Ch. 272.
§ 193-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum safeguards to protect
human health, safety and welfare, as well as property, by establishing
reasonable regulations governing the possession and use of explosive
materials. To ensure that the possession and use of explosive materials does
not result in physical injury or property damage, the Village Board hereby
asserts its right to designate acceptable hours for blasting operations, set
levels for the ignition and discharge of explosive materials and establish
acceptable standards governing consequential vibrations resulting from all
blasting conducted within the Village.
§ 193-2. Applicability and scope; technical standards.
§ 193-3. Exceptions; application for exemption; notification.
A. This chapter shall apply to each and every person, corporation and
business engaged in the manufacture, sale, transportation, storage,
handling or use of explosives in the Village. This chapter sets forth
procedures for the issuance of permits, payment of fees, recordkeeping,
reporting and monitoring compliance. In addition, this chapter
establishes penalties for the failure to comply with these requirements.
B. The technical standards set forth in this chapter are based upon
generally recognized criteria and accepted industry standards. See
New York State Labor Law, Article 16; 12 NYCRR Part 39; NFPA No.
495-1973; 27 CFR 55; 49 CFR 171 through 178; and 49 CFR 390
through 397 for other additional standards that may be applicable.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
(1) The military forces of the United States or its allies, the duly
authorized militia of any state or any police force or fire
department, provided that the same is acting in its official capacity
and in the performance of its public duties.
§ 190-21 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 193-3
1:154
§ 193-4. Definitions.14
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AIR BLAST — The airborne shock wave or acoustic transient generated by
an explosion.
APPEALS BOARD — The Police Chief, Village Engineer and the Fire Chief
convened under § 193-7C to hear appeals regarding the revocation of any
permit issued under this chapter.
APPROVED — Acceptable to the Building Inspector or appeals board.
BLACK POWDER — A deflagrating or low-explosive compound composed
of an intimate mixture of sulfur, charcoal and an earth nitrate, usually
potassium nitrate or sodium nitrate.
(2) The transportation of explosives in interstate or intrastate
commerce regulated by the United States Department of
Transportation or the New York State Department of Labor.
(3) Model rocketry.
(4) Employee safety regulated under the Occupational Safety and
Health Act, 29 U.S.C. § 651 et seq.
(5) Fireworks subject to regulation under Penal Law § 270.00 and
Article 405.
(6) Small arms ammunition, including smokeless or black powder
when possessed for noncommercial purposes in quantities of five
pounds or less.
(7) Pharmaceutical uses as formulated and prescribed by the official
United States Pharmacopeia, USPC-1980, 20th Edition.
B. Where an individual makes a written application to the Building
Inspector for an exemption, the Building Inspector may grant an
exemption where it is evident that compliance would cause an undue
hardship and that public safety would not be compromised by granting
relief. Any exemption granted under this section must be as limited in
scope and duration as possible, balancing the hardship caused by
compliance versus the potential danger and threat to public safety of
granting relief. If the Building Inspector grants an exemption under this
section, he shall immediately notify the Chief of Police of his decision
and within five business days notify the Village Board, stating the facts,
the nature of the exemption and the underlying rationale.
14.Editor's Note: This section was amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013 to delete the
following definitions: "blasting machine," "blasting mat," "Class C explosive," competent
person," "inhabited building," "initiating primer," magazine," "motor vehicle,"
"semiconductive hose," "sensitivity," "single delay," "stray current," and "USDOT."
§ 193-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-4
1:155
BLASTER — A person who holds a valid permit to perform blasting
operations.
BLASTING — The fracture of any heavy mass by detonation of explosive
materials.
BLASTING AGENT — Any material or mixture consisting of a fuel and
oxidizer, intended for blasting, not otherwise classified an explosive,
provided that the finished product, as mixed and packaged for use or
shipment, cannot be detonated by means of a No. 8 test blasting cap when
unconfined.
BLASTING CAP — A detonator.
BLAST ZONE — The area surrounding a blast site subject to the influence
of flying debris generated by the detonation of an explosive charge.
BUILDING — Includes, but is not limited to, any structure or assembly
used for occupancy or storage and subject to the jurisdiction of the Village
Building Department.
BURDEN — That dimension of a medium to be blasted measured from the
borehole to the face at right angles to the spacing. It also means the total
amount of material to be blasted by a given hole, usually measured in cubic
yards or in tons.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPETENCY — Any authorization to keep, store,
transport, manufacture or use explosives issued under New York State
Labor Law Article 16.
CFR — The Code of Federal Regulations in effect on the date this chapter
was last amended.
CLASS A EXPLOSIVE — An explosive possessing detonating or maximum
hazard and means an explosive which is described in 49 CFR 173.53.
CLASS B EXPLOSIVE — An explosive possessing flammable hazard such
as propellant explosives and photographic flash powders and means an
explosive described in 49 CFR 173.88.
COMMERCIAL EXPLOSIVE — Any explosive except a propellant and
nitrocarbonitrate, including but not limited to dynamite, black blasting
powder, pellet powder, initiating explosive, blasting cap, electric blasting
cap, safety fuse, fuse igniter, fuse lighter, squib, cordeau detonant fuse,
instantaneous fuse, igniter cord and igniter.
DELAY INTERVAL — The time interval in milliseconds between successive
detonations of the delay devices used.
DETONATOR — Any device containing a detonating charge that is used for
initiating detonation in an explosive. The term includes, but is not limited
to, electric blasting caps of instantaneous and delay types, blasting caps
for use with safety fuses, detonating-cord delay connectors and nonelectric
instantaneous or delay blasting caps.
ELECTRIC BLASTING CAP — A blasting cap designed for, and capable of,
initiation by means of an electric current.
§ 193-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 193-4
1:156
EXPLOSIVE —
FIREWORKS — Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance
or combination of substances or articles prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration
or detonation.
FLY ROCK — Rock propelled from the blast area by the forces of an
explosion.
FUEL — A substance that may react with the oxygen in the air or with
the oxygen or other oxidizing material yielded by an oxidizer to produce
combustion.
HERTZ — Cycles per second.
HIGH EXPLOSIVE — Any explosive material which can be caused to
detonate by means of a blasting cap when unconfined.
HIGHWAY — Any public street, road, highway, alley or part of a navigable
stream which is used as a highway of commerce.
LOW EXPLOSIVE — An explosive material which can be caused to
deflagrate when confined.
MISFIRE — An explosive material charge that fails to detonate after an
attempt at initiation.
Any chemical compound or mixture that is commonly used or intended
for the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing
and combustible materials or other ingredients, in such proportions,
quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion
or by detonation of any part of the compound or mixture may cause
such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant
gaseous pressure is capable of producing destructive effects on
contiguous objects.
A.
The term "explosive" includes, but is not limited to:
(1) A commercial explosive, propellant or nitrocarbonitrate.
(2) A high explosive or a low explosive.
(3) An explosive material, blasting agent, water gel or detonator.
B.
The term "explosive," except as specifically stated herein, does not
include:
Small arms ammunition, including smokeless or black powder
when possessed for noncommercial purposes in quantities of five
pounds or less.
(1)
An explosive in a form prescribed by the United States
Pharmacopeia.
(2)
(3) Fireworks regulated under state law.
C.
§ 193-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-4
1:157
NFPA — The National Fire Protection Association.
NITROCARBONITRATE — An explosive classified as a blasting agent.
NO. 8 TEST BLASTING CAP — A cap containing two grams of a mixture of
80% mercury fulminate and 20% potassium chlorate or a cap of equivalent
strength.
OXIDIZER — A substance such as a nitrate that yields oxygen or other
oxidizing substance readily to stimulate the combustion of organic matter
or other fuel.
OXIDIZING MATERIAL — An oxidizer.
PEAK PARTICLE VELOCITY — The peak particle velocity recorded on any
one of the three mutually perpendicular components of blasting vibrations
in the vertical and horizontal directions.
PERMIT — Written authorization issued by the Village or other appropriate
governmental agency to manufacture, sell, possess, store or use explosives.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation.
PROPELLANT — Any solid chemical or solid chemical mixture which
functions by rapid combustion of successive layers and includes, but is
not limited to, smokeless powder for small arms, smokeless powder for
cannons, smokeless powder or solid propellant for rockets, jet thrust units
or other devices.
SEISMOGRAPH — An instrument which records ground vibration by
measuring and recording particle velocity, displacement or acceleration in
three mutually perpendicular directions.
SMALL ARMS AMMUNITION — A cartridge for a shotgun, rifle, pistol
or revolver and a cartridge for propellant-actuated power devices and
industrial guns. Military-type ammunition containing explosive bursting
charges or any incendiary, tracer, spotting or pyrotechnic projectile is
excluded from this definition.
SMOKELESS PROPELLANT — A solid propellant, commonly called
"smokeless powder" in the trade, used in small arms ammunition, cannon,
rockets or propellant-actuated power devices.
STEMMING — An inert material placed in a bore hole after the explosive
for the purpose of confining explosive materials or to separate charges of
explosive material in the same bore hole.
U.S.C. — The United States Code.
VIBRATION — The energy from a blast that manifests itself in earthborne
vibrations which are transmitted through the earth away from the
immediate blast area.
WATER GEL — Any of a wide variety of materials used for blasting that
contain substantial proportions of water and high proportions of ammonium
nitrate, some of which is in solution in the water. Two broad classes of
§ 193-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 193-4
1:158
water gels are those which are sensitized by a material classed as an
explosive, such as TNT or smokeless powder, and those which contain no
ingredient classified as an explosive; these are sensitized with metals such
as aluminum or with other fuels. Water gels may be classified as Class A
explosives, Class B explosives or blasting agents.
§ 193-5. Permit requirements.
A. No person shall manufacture, sell, possess, store, use or detonate
explosives within the Village unless a permit has been issued by the
Building Inspector.
B. Permit to manufacture, sell, possess or store. An application for a
permit to manufacture, sell, possess or store explosives shall require
the following information, as well as any other information the Building
Inspector deems necessary to ensure public health and safety:
(1) The applicant's full name, address and telephone number. If the
applicant is a corporation, partnership or other business entity, the
name of each officer shall be separately stated. If the applicant is
an out-of-state corporation, partnership or other business entity,
the applicant must submit proof of filing with the New York State
Secretary of State to do business in New York. No permit may be
issued unless the applicant is authorized to do business in New
York.
(2) The location where applicant proposes to manufacture, sell,
possess or store explosives.
(3) A statement as to the purpose and need to manufacture, sell,
possess or store explosives.
(4) Where the manufacture, sale, possession or storage of explosives is
subject to state or federal regulation and licensing, a copy of any
state or federal license or permit shall be provided, together with
the application for a local permit, unless the use is specifically
exempted by § 193-3A above.
(5) The quantity of explosives to be manufactured, sold, possessed or
stored.
C. The application for a permit shall be signed by the applicant. In
addition, the applicant shall sign an acknowledgment, under the
penalties of perjury, stating that all information provided in the
application or in support of the application is true and accurate.
D. Permit to use or detonate. An application for a permit to use or detonate
explosives shall require the following information, as well as any other
information the Building Inspector deems necessary to ensure public
health and safety:
§ 193-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-5
1:159
(1) The applicant's full name and address. If the applicant is a
corporation, partnership or other business entity, the name of each
officer shall be separately stated. If the applicant is an out-of-state
corporation, partnership or other business entity, the applicant
must submit proof of filing with the New York State Secretary of
State to do business in New York. No permit may be issued unless
the applicant is authorized to do business in New York.
(2) A designated, on-site representative who will be present at the
location during all blasting and authorized to act on behalf of the
applicant for all administrative purposes.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
conducting the blasting, and a copy of the blaster's license to
purchase, own, possess, transport and use explosives and a
certificate of competency.
(4) An estimate of how much blasting is anticipated and the type and
amount of material to be ignited or discharged. Where more than
one blast is anticipated, the applicant shall estimate how many
separate blasts are expected and the approximate duration blasting
activity will continue.
(5) The time, date and location blasting is scheduled to begin.
(6) A list of all landowners, including name and address, within a fivehundred-
foot radius of the proposed blast site.
(7) A preblast survey of the site, where one inch equals 30 feet in scale,
showing all structures within a five-hundred-foot radius of the
proposed blast site, together with a description of each structure
within such radius. Any property owner subject to a preblast
property description shall be furnished a copy of the description of
his property upon request. The Building Inspector may, in his sole
discretion, require that the preblast survey be accompanied by a
DVD showing each building and structure and any particular
features as he may direct. The Building Inspector may, in his sole
discretion, waive all or any portion of the preblast survey
depending on the particular characteristics of the site, the
surrounding area and the type of blasting proposed. The applicant
shall, upon request, make a copy of the preblast survey available to
the Building Inspector. Where a preblast survey indicates electric
transmission lines within 500 feet of a proposed blast site, the
Building Inspector or his representative may require testing to
determine the presence and level of errant electrical current in the
area. If testing indicates the presence of errant electrical current in
the vicinity where explosives are to be detonated at a level
sufficient to pose a potential threat to public safety, the Building
Inspector may require that any blasting be conducted solely by use
of nonelectrical detonation. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
§ 193-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 193-5
1:160
E. Based on the application and the preblast survey, if any, the Building
Inspector shall estimate the cost of monitoring compliance with this
chapter and furnish such estimate, together with a basis for his
calculation, to the applicant. Before any permit is issued, the estimated
cost of inspection services shall be deposited with the Village, held in
escrow, and applied to reimburse the Village for costs and expenses
actually incurred in connection with administering compliance with this
chapter. Where the estimated amount deposited is insufficient to cover
the Village's costs, the property owner shall be responsible for any
balance due. Where the estimated amount deposited with the Village
exceeds the costs incurred, the balance shall be refunded.
F. The application for a permit to use explosives shall be signed by both
the applicant and the blaster. In addition, the applicant shall sign an
acknowledgment stating, under the penalties of perjury, that all
information provided in the application or in support of the application
is true and accurate. The blaster shall also sign an acknowledgment
stating that he has read the entire application, that in his opinion
blasting at the particular location can be conducted safely, without
unreasonable risk, and that, under the penalties of perjury, the blaster's
state license is valid, that he is fully authorized to conduct the type of
activity set forth in the application and that he agrees to abide by all
state and federal safety standards.
G. A permit to conduct blasting shall be effective for a specific project and
specific period of time, not to exceed one year. The Building Inspector
shall have sole discretion to set the term of any permit issued under this
section.
H. Expiration, revocation or cancellation of the blaster's state license shall
automatically void any permit issued under this chapter.
I. No blast shall be initiated at any location within the Village unless a
written permit to conduct blasting has first been obtained and signed by
the Building Inspector authorizing blasting at the specific location.
J. The Building Inspector may add to any permit issued under this chapter
whatever terms and conditions deemed necessary to protect public
health, safety and welfare.
K. No permit holder shall transfer or assign a permit issued under this
chapter.
L. The failure of an applicant to provide any information requested by the
Building Inspector in support of an application for a permit shall be
grounds to deny an application or revoke a permit.
M. Each applicant must furnish proof of insurance as set forth in § 193-6
herein.
N. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee in an
amount set by resolution of the Board of Trustees.15
§ 193-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-5
1:161
§ 193-6. Insurance; defense and indemnification.
§ 193-7. Inspections; permit revocation or modification; appeals.
O. The Building Inspector or his representative may also request the
applicant to supply any other, additional information that may be
deemed necessary to protect the health and safety of the public or to
prevent damage to property.
A. Before any permit is issued pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall
submit proof of insurance by supplying a certificate of insurance, issued
by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of New
York, stating that the applicant has insurance coverage in effect for
workers' compensation, liability and property damage and a specific
endorsement stating that coverage includes liability arising from
handling or using explosive materials and conducting blasting activity.
Insurance coverage shall be not less than $3,000,000 for general
liability, including bodily injury to any one person, and, subject to the
same limit for each person, not less than $10,000,000 for any
occurrence, plus insurance for property damage of not less than
$2,000,000. The insurance certificate shall name the Village as an
additional insured. In addition, the certificate shall contain a statement
that the policy or policies covering the insured will not be canceled,
terminated or modified by the insurance company unless 30 days'
notice is given to the Village and such change or modification is
mutually agreed to.
B. The applicant shall also furnish a notarized statement agreeing to
indemnify and hold the Village harmless from any and all claims,
actions and proceedings brought by any person, firm or corporation for
any injury to any persons or property resulting, directly or indirectly,
from the applicant using, storing, handling, transporting or
manufacturing explosive material or conducting blasting activity and,
moreover, stating the applicant will defend and indemnify the Village
against any action brought by any third parties as a result of operating
under a Village permit issued under this chapter.
C. No permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant has complied
with these insurance requirements and provided an agreement
indemnifying and holding the Village harmless for any and all damage
and injury.
A. Inspection. Because of the compelling and overriding public safety
issues involved in the handling and use of explosives, the Building
Inspector, Village Engineer, Fire Chief, Code Enforcement Officer or
any member of the Police Department may inspect any vehicle,
structure, dwelling, construction site, workplace or other area where
explosives are manufactured, sold, possessed, stored or used within the
15.Editor's Note: See the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
§ 193-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 193-7
1:162
§ 193-8. Blasting operations.
Village for the limited purpose of ascertaining and verifying compliance
with this chapter.
B. Permit revocation. The Building Inspector may, on his own initiative or
at the request of any other official, revoke or modify a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter where it appears the permit holder has
violated any local, state or federal rule or regulation, including but not
limited to a false statement or representation on the application for a
blasting permit or violation of any applicable safety standard or where
the Building Inspector determines that public safety has been
compromised. The Building Inspector may modify or revoke a permit by
notifying the permit holder or his representative, orally or in writing,
that the permit has been modified or revoked. Where a permit has been
revoked, the Building Inspector shall send a written notice of
revocation to the permit holder by first class mail without unnecessary
delay, but not later than five working days after revocation, setting forth
the reasons the permit was revoked. The notice of revocation shall
include a statement informing the permit holder of his right to appeal
such revocation by filing a notice of appeal with the Village Clerk within
20 working days. Where a permit is modified, the Building Inspector
shall give the permit holder written notice of the modifications.
C. Appeals. A permit holder who has had his permit revoked or modified by
the Building Inspector may appeal and seek relief from the
modifications or reinstatement of the permit. An appeal pursuant to this
section shall be heard by the Chief of Police, the Village Engineer and
the Fire Chief, or any of their deputies, sitting as a board of appeals.
The Building Inspector shall appear and state his findings and the
reasons for revoking or modifying the permit. The permit holder and/or
the blaster shall be offered the opportunity to appear and present
evidence why the permit should not be modified or revoked. The appeal
board may sustain the Building Inspector's decision to revoke a permit,
reinstate any permit or amend any modifications imposed by the
Building Inspector. Where the board reinstates a permit, the board may
amend the permit by adding whatever terms and conditions it deems
necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare. The decision of
the appeal panel shall be final.
A. No blast shall be initiated at any location within the Village limits unless
a written permit has first been obtained from Building Inspector
authorizing blasting at the specific location.
B. Blasting conducted within the Village must comply with the terms of the
permit and, in addition, all applicable state and federal heath and safety
standards.
C. At least five business days prior to the scheduled start of blasting, the
permit holder shall request a preblast meeting with the Building
Inspector to review and finalize the proposed blasting plan. No blasting
§ 193-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-8
1:163
shall be conducted unless a preblast meeting has been held with the
Building Inspector and the Building Inspector is satisfied that the
proposed blasting plan is reasonable.
D. Each blasting permit holder shall establish and delineate a blast zone
prior to detonating a blast. The blast zone must be clearly marked and
adequate precautions must be implemented to prevent unauthorized
entry into the area.
E. Prior to each blast, the blaster or his designee shall be responsible for
notifying all persons in the general area that blasting operations are
scheduled to begin within a specified period of time. In addition, the
blaster shall sound a recognized whistle, siren or horn loud enough to
be heard throughout the designated blast zone approximately three
minutes prior to blasting and again 30 seconds prior to blasting,
warning all persons that blasting is imminent.
F. The Building Inspector or his representative shall be permitted access
to observe all aspects of the blasting operation, including but not
limited to observation of all preblast preparatory site work, the
explosion/detonation and access to the postblast site. The property
owner shall reimburse the Village for the cost of all inspection services,
including the cost of retaining an on-site inspector to monitor all
aspects of blasting, where the Building Inspector deems such services
necessary, by depositing the estimated cost of inspection services in a
designated account to be held in escrow by the Village and applied to
reimburse the Village for costs incurred in administering compliance
with this chapter. The permit holder and the blaster shall, upon request,
make available to the Building Inspector a copy of all seismic readings
and any and all other documentation and data collected regarding any
blast.
G. The blasting permit holder shall notify the Building Inspector or his
designated representative and the Police Department of an impending
blast at least two hours, but not more than 12 hours, prior to the time
each blast is scheduled.
H. The applicant shall be responsible for any costs incurred by the Village
in providing police, emergency services or any other personnel deemed
necessary to ensure public safety.
I. Notwithstanding any other regulations, no blasting shall be performed
in such manner or under such circumstances as to eject debris into the
air so as to constitute a hazard or danger or do harm or damage to
persons or property. Before firing a blast which could cause injury to
persons or damage property from fly rock, the material to be blasted
shall be properly covered or screened by a buffer of sufficient mass and
strength to prevent, with a margin of safety, the ejection of any material
capable of causing any injury or damage.
§ 193-8 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 193-8
1:164
J. No person shall use a quantity of explosives greater than necessary to
break or move the target material or use an amount of explosives that
poses a risk of injury to persons or property.
K. Unless otherwise permitted by the Building Inspector, all holes drilled
or otherwise excavated for holding an explosive charge shall be at least
six feet deep. If, however, the permit holder/blaster can demonstrate a
need to use a hole less than six feet deep and that such a cavity will not
endanger public safety, the Building Inspector or his designated
representative may, in his discretion, authorize the use of blast holes
less than six feet deep.
L. The blaster shall plan each blast and take every precaution in loading,
delaying, initiation, confinement and stemming to control the throw of
rock fragments and debris and limit ground vibrations and the effect of
air concussions to the greatest extent possible. When blasting is to be
conducted within 50 feet or less of a property line and the adjacent
property owner is not a party to the blasting operation, the blaster shall
take all precautions practicable, utilizing any combination of
recognized methods, to control blasting effects to the greatest degree
possible.
M. A record of each blast shall be kept by the blaster on a form approved
by the Building Inspector. All such records shall be retained by the
permit holder and blaster as prescribed by state law and made available
for inspection as a matter of public record.
(1) The permit holder shall record the following information for each
blast and provide the Building Inspector with a duplicate copy at
the end of each day:
(a) The name and license number of the blaster.
(b) The location of the blast.
(c) The date and time of each blast.
(d) The number of blasts.
(e) The number, diameter and depth of each hole and distance
between holes.
(f) The burden depth.
(g) The stemming length.
(h) The make and type of explosives.
(i) The delay make, number and period.
(j) The weather conditions, including temperature, wind direction
and speed.
§ 193-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-8
1:165
§ 193-9. Vibration and concussion standards.
(2) In addition, the following seismograph information must be
recorded for each blast, with a duplicate copy provided to the
Building Inspector:
(a) The seismograph serial number.
(b) The range/gain setting.
(c) The date of last shake table calibration and microphone
calibration.
(d) The air channel low frequency limit.
(e) The exact seismograph location and location in relation to the
blast.
(f) The peak over pressure readout.
(g) The peak particle velocity readout.
(h) The name of the operator.
N. Where an accident involves personal injury, the permit holder shall
immediately notify the Building Inspector that an accident has
occurred, and no further blasting shall be conducted until the Building
Inspector has had an opportunity to review the accident report and the
permit. Any injury, accident or misfire involving explosives shall be
recorded, and a full written report shall be attached to the blast report
filed with the Building Inspector, including the names of all participants
and witnesses and remedial actions taken. The Building Inspector may
require such additional, specific information from the blaster as he
deems necessary and appropriate to assure the public health and safety.
Following an accident involving personal injury, the Building Inspector
may amend the permit by adding whatever additional restrictions are
deemed necessary to assure public health and safety is maintained and
another similar accident does not reoccur.
A. The maximum allowable concussion or air blast resulting from blast
operations shall not exceed 130 decibels peak, measured at a flat
frequency response (PMS two decibels) over the range of at least six
hertz to 200 hertz.
B. When blasting is of a continuing nature, 124 decibels to 130 decibels
shall be the acceptable range.
C. The permit holder shall report each blast exceeding acceptable
parameters to the Building Inspector within 24 hours. Following a blast
exceeding acceptable parameters, the Building Inspector shall have the
authority to order blasting operations to be suspended, altered or
stopped.
§ 193-8 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 193-9
1:166
D. When no instrument is used to measure the seismic effect of a blast, the
maximum amount of explosives detonated shall not exceed the limits
shown in the following table: [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Table 1
Distance Versus Weight of Explosives Method*
Distance to
Nearest
Building
(feet)
Number of
Pounds per
Delay
Distance to
Nearest
Building
(feet)
Number of
Pounds per
Delay
0 to 5 1/4 More than 250
to 260
45
More than 5 to
10
1/2 More than 260
to 280
49
More than 10 to
15
3/4 More than 280
to 300
55
More than 15 to
60
0.1 per foot D More than 300
to 325
61
More than 60 to
70
6 More than 325
to 350
69
More than 70 to
80
7 1/4 More than 350
to 375
79
More than 80 to
90
9 More than 375
to 400
85
More than 90 to
100
10 1/2 More than 400
to 450
98
More than 100
to 110
12 More than 450
to 500
115
More than 110
to 120
13 3/4 More than 500
to 550
135
More than 120
to 130
15 1/2 More than 550
to 600
155
More than 130
to 140
17 1/2 More than 600
to 650
175
More than 140
to 150
19 1/2 More than 650
to 700
195
More than 150
to 160
21 1/2 More than 700
to 750
220
More than 160
to 170
23 1/4 More than 750
to 800
240
More than 170
to 180
25 More than 800
to 850
263
§ 193-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-9
1:167
Table 1
Distance Versus Weight of Explosives Method*
Distance to
Nearest
Building
(feet)
Number of
Pounds per
Delay
Distance to
Nearest
Building
(feet)
Number of
Pounds per
Delay
More than 180
to 190
28 More than 850
to 900
288
More than 190
to 200
30 1/2 More than 900
to 950
313
More than 200
to 220
34 More than 950
to 1,000
340
More than 220
to 240
39 More than 1,000
to 1,100
375
More than 240
to 250
42 More than 1,100
to 1,200
435
More than 1,200
to 1,300
493
NOTE:
* Distances over 60 feet are based on the formula W = D x 1.5/90,
where W = weight and D = distance.
E. When an instrument is used to measure the seismic effect of a blast, the
maximum peak particle velocity on any one component of an instrument
measuring three-component motion shall not exceed the limits of the
following table: [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Table 2
Distance Versus Peak Particle Velocity Method
Distance
(feet)
Peak Particle Velocity of any One
Component*
(inches per second)
0 to 100 1.50
More than 100 to 200 1.25
More than 200 to 500 1.00
More than 500 to 1,000 0.50
Over 1,000 0.25
NOTE:
* The measuring instrument's transducer shall be firmly coupled to
the ground.
§ 193-9 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 193-10
1:168
§ 193-10. Permitted blasting hours.
Blasting may be conducted when authorized by permit Monday through
Friday between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. Blasting is prohibited
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.
§ 193-11. Notice of intent to blast; posting.
§ 193-12. Rules and regulations.
The Police Chief, Village Engineer and Fire Chief, sitting as a Board of
Standards, may supplement this chapter by promulgating whatever
additional rules and regulations are deemed necessary or desirable to
protect the public health, safety and welfare. No rule or regulation may be
effective unless approved by the Building Inspector. A copy of all rules and
regulations promulgated under this section are to be provided with each
application for a permit.
§ 193-13. Applicant responsible for review costs.
Any person applying to use explosives to demolish any structure in excess of
25 feet in height must agree to assume the cost of any engineering analysis,
A. Not more than 20 days nor less than three days prior to a scheduled
blast, the permit holder shall serve a notice of intent to blast, stating
when and where blasting activity is scheduled to occur, on each
occupant or user of each structure, commercial or residential, within
300 feet of the proposed blast site and upon the owner or owners of any
parcel of property immediately adjoining or abutting the parcel of
property on which the blasting is to take place, regardless of the
distance an adjoining owner is from the blast site. The notice shall
include the blasting permit number, the permit holder's name,
emergency telephone numbers for police, fire and ambulance service
and the time and location of each scheduled blast. A copy of the notice
of intent to blast must be submitted to the Building Inspector for his
review and approval prior to distribution.
B. The notice of intent to blast may be served by either personal service or
certified mail. In the event that neither personal service nor certified
mail can be effected, the applicant may request authorization from the
Building Inspector to serve the notice of intent to blast by posting a
copy of such notice in each building or dwelling in a conspicuous place
where it is reasonable to believe that persons entering or leaving the
premises will see such notification.
C. In the case of multi-occupancy structures, residential and commercial,
located within 300 feet of the blast site, the notice of intent to blast
shall be conspicuously and continuously posted at all commonly used
entrances to the structure at least 20 days and not less than three days
prior to blasting. It shall be the blaster's responsibility to ensure that
notice is unobstructed and remains posted at the structure.
§ 193-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-13
1:169
public safety survey, environmental review or other technical study deemed
necessary by the Building Inspector to determine if and how blasting can be
conducted safely.
§ 193-14. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
Chapter 200
FEES
§ 200-1. Establishment by resolution. [Amended 4-7-2003 by L.L.
No. 3-2003; 6-15-2004 by L.L. No. 4-2004]
Notwithstanding the language relating to fees and charges appearing in any
local law or resolution, such fees and charges henceforth shall be fixed by
resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 200-2. Building permit fees.
Building permit fees shall be established and determined by the Board of
Trustees from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule included at
the end of this chapter and shall be due upon the filing of an application
for a building permit with the Building Inspector, plus a fee based on the
total cost of the proposed construction to be established and determined by
the Board of Trustees from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule
included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-3. Review fees. [Amended 4-7-2003 by L.L. No. 4-2003]
A. Any person, including any owner or agent or corporation, who shall
violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply with any
provision shall, following conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1) The first violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,500
and subject to a period of incarceration not to exceed 10 days.
(2) A second and each subsequent offense shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed $5,000 and subject to a period of incarceration not to
exceed 20 days.
B. Any person, including any owner or agent or corporation, who supplies
false information to the Building Inspector in support of a blasting
permit shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to
a fine not to exceed $5,000 and a period of incarceration not to exceed
20 days.
C. The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by either the Building
Inspector or the Village police.
A. Site plan review. No site plan shall be considered for review by the
Planning Board until the applicant for such site plan review submits,
§ 193-13 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 200-3
1:170
§ 200-4. Professional and consulting fees. [Amended 6-15-2004 by
L.L. No. 4-2004]
along with the site plan, the required fees for such review, to be
established and determined by the Board of Trustees from time to time
and as set forth in this chapter.
B. Subdivision review. No subdivision shall be considered for review by the
Planning Board until the applicant for such subdivision review submits,
along with the subdivision application, the required fees for such
review, to be established and determined by the Board of Trustees from
time to time and as set forth in this chapter.
C. Special permit review. No special permit shall be considered for review
by the appropriate Village Board until the applicant for such special
permit review submits, along with the special permit application, the
required fees for such review, to be established and determined by the
Board of Trustees from time to time and as set forth in the fee schedule
included at the end of this chapter.
A. The Village Board of Trustees, Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Appeals, Fire Prevention Board, Architectural Review Board,
Waterfront Advisory Committee and the Building Department, in the
review of any application, request, plan or project, may refer any of the
aforementioned applications, requests, plans or projects presented to
them to such engineering, planning, technical, environmental,
architectural or legal consultant as such board or department shall
deem reasonably necessary to enable it to review such application,
request, plan or project as required by law.
(1) The charges made by such consultants shall be in accord with
charges usually made for such services in the metropolitan New
York region or pursuant to an existing contractual agreement
between the Village and such consultant.
(2) All such charges shall be paid upon submission of a Village voucher.
The applicant shall reimburse the Village for the cost of such
consultant services upon submission of a copy of the voucher. Such
costs will be payable within 30 days of that submission.
Commencing on the 31st day, interest will be charged at the rate of
1% per month that the voucher remains unpaid. No permits may be
issued to the applicant until such charges are paid in full.
(3) In the event that an application is required to be reviewed by both
the Village Board and the Planning Board, then, in such event and
to the extent applicable, both the Village Board and the Planning
Board shall use the same consultants, who shall in such case
prepare one report providing the date, information and
recommendations requested. In all instances, duplications of
consultants' reports shall be avoided wherever possible in order to
minimize the cost of such consultants' reports to the applicant.
§ 200-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:171
§ 200-5. Recreation fund fees.
§ 200-6. Escrow account for professional consultation fees.
B. Notwithstanding the above, with regard to legal consulting fees, this
section shall not apply to applications, requests, plans or projects
pertaining to one- and two-family dwellings.
C. All Planning Board escrow agreements shall be amended to eliminate a
$10,000 maximum initial amount and include a reference to § 200-6 as
controlling for all initial escrow payments.
A. Approval of all development subject to site plan review or subdivision
approval for all subdivisions which would result in the creation of three
or more lots shall be conditioned upon payment by the applicant of a
recreation fee to a Village Recreation Fund which may be established
by the Board of Trustees. The purpose of the Village Recreation Fund
shall be for the acquisition and improvement, but not maintenance, of
recreation space and facilities, including but not limited to parks and
other passive recreation facilities, throughout the Village of Sleepy
Hollow.
B. Amount.
(1) In all residential development, the recreation fee shall be based
upon the number of dwelling units or potential dwelling units which
could be placed upon the site in accordance with maximum density
provisions, as determined by the Planning Board, of the particular
district or districts within which the site is located.
(2) In all nonresidential development, the recreation fee shall be based
upon the number of parking spaces required.
(3) The monetary amount per dwelling unit for residential
development and per parking space for nonresidential
development shall be as determined and maintained in the Village
fee schedule as may be defined and established from time to time
by the Board of Trustees.
C. An applicant shall have the option of offering the dedication of land for
public recreation purposes in lieu of payment of the recreation fee.
Acceptance of any land offering by an applicant shall be at the
discretion of the Board of Trustees. In coming to a determination
regarding the acceptance of land proposed by an applicant for public
recreation, the Board of Trustees shall first request a recommendation
from the Planning Board, but shall not be bound by the Planning Board
recommendation in its ultimate decision.
A. In addition to the collection of fees specified in § 200-3 above, the
permitting authority shall adjust the application review fees sufficiently
to reimburse the Village for the cost of professional consultation
charges which exceed the fees stipulated in § 200-3. For this purpose,
§ 200-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 200-6
1:172
the permitting authority shall establish an escrow account funded by
the applicant for deposit in a Village of Sleepy Hollow escrow account,
maintained by the Village Treasurer for custody of funds collected. This
amount of money shall be calculated in accordance with the following
schedule: [Amended 6-1-2000]
(1) For all subdivisions and for residential site plan applications:
Number of Lots or Dwelling
Units Amount of Initial Deposit
1 to 4 $2,500
5 to 10 $7,500
11 to 20 $15,000
21 to 30 $25,000
31 to 40 $35,000
41 to 50 $40,000
Over 50 $50,000, plus $50 per unit
(2) For nonresidential site plan applications: [Amended 6-15-2004
by L.L. No. 4-2004]
Gross Floor Area (GFA)
(square feet) Amount of Initial Deposit
Up to 1,250 $2,500
1,251 to 20,000 $2 per square foot
20,001 to 50,000 $20,000 plus $1 per square foot
Over 50,000 $45,000 plus $0.50 per square foot
(3) For Zoning Board, Fire Prevention Board and Building Department
(in the event that the Building Inspector determines that an escrow
account is necessary) applications and requests: $500.
(4) Residential swimming pools: a minimum escrow fee of $500.
[Added 6-15-2004 by L.L. No. 4-2004]
(5) Site plan amendments: a minimum escrow fee of $500. [Added
6-15-2004 by L.L. No. 4-2004]
B. The applicant shall be required by the permitting authority from time to
time to deliver additional funds to the Village for deposit in the escrow
account if such additional funds are required to pay for professional
consultation services rendered to the Village or anticipated to be
rendered. If such additional funds are not provided to the Village as
required by this chapter, any action on the part of the Village may be
suspended until said funds are provided.
§ 200-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-6
1:173
§ 200-7. Environmental quality review; escrow account.
If the permitting authority is the lead agency in the environmental review of
an application in accordance with the State Environmental Quality Review
(SEQR) Act, the permitting authority shall impose the fees authorized by
Part 617 of Title 6 of the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations (the
implementing regulations pertaining to Article 8 of the Environmental
Conservation Law) in connection with the environmental review of the
application. The permitting authority shall utilize an escrow account in
accordance with the procedures in § 200-6 above for this purpose.
C. In the event that any application before any board or department is
withdrawn prior to any action being taken, the applicant is nevertheless
responsible for any expenses incurred by the Village with regard to said
application prior to such withdrawal.
D. No application for review before any of the above-mentioned boards
shall be accepted unless signed and executed by the current owner of
the premises subject to said review.
E. The permitting authority shall not make any final determination on an
application until all review fees imposed upon the applicant have been
paid in full to the Village. However, if at the termination of any
application the applicant is indebted to the Village for any fees, the
amount of money still owed shall be added to the real property Village
tax of the premises and shall become a lien against the property.
F. The Village Treasurer shall provide the applicant with a monthly
statement indicating any expenses incurred with regard to said
application.
G. Escrow funds may be refunded to the applicant only when the applicant
formally withdraws the application from consideration by the
permitting authority or when the applicant receives a final
determination from the permitting authority; in either case, all
reimbursable charges incurred by the Village shall be first deducted
from the escrow account, leaving an unencumbered balance that is not
required by the permitting authority to pay consulting costs
attributable to the application. Fees collected in accordance with this
section shall not be refunded.
H. The imposition of escrow account fees are in addition to, and not in
place of, other fee schedules currently in force.
I. A nonrefundable administrative fee shall be chargeable to every
applicant who is required to deposit escrow funds as set forth in this
section. The nonrefundable administrative fee shall be 2% of the total
amount of escrow funds deposited. The administrative fee of 2% will be
deducted immediately upon the deposit of the escrow funds and used to
reimburse the Village for the management of the escrow accounts.
[Added 4-7-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003]
§ 200-6 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 200-8
1:174
§ 200-8. Authority of Board of Trustees to amend terms and
conditions. [Added 9-18-2001 by L.L. No. 12-2001]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Board of Trustees,
at its discretion and for good cause shown, may, by resolution, vary the
terms and conditions set forth herein, provided that the fees and charges
due to the Village are not in any way reduced.
Chapter 208
FILMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Fees — See Ch. 200.
Public gatherings — See Ch. 268.
Noise — See Ch. 272.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 208-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the Village of Sleepy Hollow to encourage, but not solicit,
producers and others within the mass communications industries, including
filming, television, advertising and commercial photography, to make use of
the Village and its environs as a setting for motion-picture films, television
shows, commercials and photographs, but only insofar as such use is at all
times compatible, and does not unduly interfere, with the lifestyles and dayto-
day activities of the Village's citizens and merchants.
§ 208-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
FILMING — The recording on film or other medium of movies, commercials,
documentaries, serials, shows, performances or other similar events or
activities, including still photography, but not to include the coverage of
news, political, cultural, local sports or school district events.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any realty or personalty or interest therein owned by
the Village of Sleepy Hollow, including all streets, parks and public places,
lands, lands under water, waterfront property, and every estate, interest and
right, legal or equitable, therein.
§ 208-3. Permit required.
No person or entity shall, for commercial purposes, cause, direct, or
conduct movie filming, videotaping, videorecording, television, still
photographing, or other recording of visual images and/or audio sounds
on private or public property in the Village of Sleepy Hollow without first
§ 200-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-3
1:175
applying for and obtaining a filming permit therefor from the Village
Administrator.
§ 208-4. Application requirements.
The application for the filming permit shall contain the following at a
minimum:
§ 208-5. Filing of application; issuance of permit; contents.
A. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. Name, address, consent of the property owner and tenant (the latter, if
any).
C. Name, address and telephone number of persons in charge [director,
production manager, and contact person(s)].
D. Street address.
E. Date(s) and hours of filming.
F. Type of production, including title and celebrities, if any.
G. If for advertising purposes, name of product.
H. Scene description.
I. List of equipment and generator, if any.
J. Number of persons, cast and crew.
K. Number and type of vehicles.
L. Safety precautions to be undertaken by the applicant in the event that
explosive devices, fire and/or hazardous chemicals, demolition of
buildings or structures, and/or use of residential vehicles is proposed.
M. Plan to minimize disruption of traffic.
N. Certificate(s) of insurance naming the applicant, property owner, and
the Village of Sleepy Hollow as insureds, with the type(s) of insurance
and amounts of minimum coverage to be determined at the discretion
of the Village Administrator, to be contained in a written rider attached
to the application and signed by the applicant. Such insurance coverage
shall contain an endorsement that the applicant shall defend, hold
harmless, and indemnify (including reimbursement of attorneys' fees)
the Village of Sleepy Hollow against any and all claims, proceedings, or
actions, including, but not limited to, bodily injury, death, and property
damage, that is brought in connection with or as a result of or arising
out of any of the filming and/or recording activities.
O. Anticipated viewing place and date for filmed and/or recorded material.
§ 208-3 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 208-5
1:176
§ 208-6. Notice to property owners in vicinity of filming.
A permittee under a filming permit shall be required to personally deliver
or to mail a photocopy of the filming permit to all owners of real property
located within 100 feet of a property line of the filming and/or recording
site as shown on the latest assessment roll of the Town of Mt. Pleasant
Assessor and to all owners of real property located on the same street as the
filming and/or recording site who are located within 500 feet of a property
line of such site, all at least two calendar days for personal delivery or four
postmarked mail delivery days for mailing prior to the first day of filming
and/of recording. The Village Administrator may require notice to additional
owners of real property in the vicinity if conditions of the filming and/or
recording so warrant.
§ 208-7. Restrictions.
A. An application for a filming permit shall be filed with the office of the
Village Administrator in completed form, together with all applicable
fees, at least one week prior to the first day of the proposed filming and/
or recording date(s).
B. A separate permit shall be required for each calendar day, but an
applicant may apply for permits for consecutive days on one
application.
C. The Village Administrator may deny a permit in his or her sole and
absolute discretion.
D. The filming permit shall contain the following information at a
minimum:
(1) Date and time of the permitted event.
(2) A description of the event.
(3) The name and telephone number of persons who can be contacted
by residents who have questions or problems prior to, during or
after the event, including the names of a Village administration
contact and the applicant's responsible representative.
A. Filming and/or recording as permitted under a filming permit, including
all setup and takedown activities, shall only be conducted between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Saturday.
B. No filming and/or recording shall be permitted on Sundays and legal
and religious holidays.
C. Filming and/or recording as permitted under a filming permit shall
comply with all requirements and standards of Chapter 272, Noise, of
the Village Code.
§ 208-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-7
1:177
§ 208-8. Fees.
The Village Administrator shall determine the proper fee for each filming
permit, which shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Trustees as set forth in the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter
200, Fees. Fees may include a basic fee for filming conducted on private
property plus additional fees depending on the magnitude of the filming
and/or recording project, the burden of such filming and/or activities on
Village services, and the impact on the surrounding neighborhood, together
with fees for filming and/or recording on public property, including setup
and takedown time.
§ 208-9. Suspension or revocation of permit.
D. Filming and/or recording as permitted under a filming permit shall
comply with all requirements of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic
Law and the vehicle and traffic provisions of the Village.16
E. No more than 12 filming permits shall be issued for any given filming
and/or recording site address in any given calendar year.
F. A separate permit shall be required for each calendar day of filming
and/or recording.
G. The Village Administrator may require the applicant to hire one or more
off-duty police officers as a condition of the permit to assist with traffic
and crowd control during the event.
H. The Village Administrator may require the applicant to obtain
certification from the Village of Sleepy Hollow Fire Department that the
filing and/or recording will not block emergency vehicle access to the
filming and/or recording site and/or adjoining areas.
I. The Village Administrator may require the applicant to post reasonable
bond naming the Village as beneficiary thereof to assume adherence to
the permit conditions and restrictions of the filming location.
J. No permit shall be issued for filming on a property with open Zoning
Code, Building Code, Property Maintenance Code and/or Fire Code
violations.17
A. The Village Administrator, on his own initiative or upon notice from any
public official of the Village, is empowered to suspend or revoke, upon
written notice, a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for any of the
following reasons:
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Vehicles and Traffic.
17.Editor's Note: See Chs. 450, Zoning, 145, Building Construction, and 310, Property
Maintenance.
§ 208-7 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 208-9
1:178
§ 208-10. Authority to promulgate regulations; waiver of provisions.
§ 208-11. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Village Administrator or his
designated agent in connection with the denial of an application for a
filming permit may take an appeal therefrom to the duly constituted Board
of Trustees. After review of said appeal, the Board of Trustees shall affirm
the action of the Village Administrator or his designated agent or may
reverse or modify the action of the Village Administrator or his designated
agent based upon a finding that such determination was arbitrary,
capricious or not supported by substantial evidence.
§ 208-12. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Village Administrator and the Village
Police Department.
§ 208-13. Penalties for offenses.
(1) Violation by the permittee of any law or any rule or regulation of
any agency of the state, county or Village pertaining to the filming
at the permitted location.
(2) Conviction of a felony.
(3) Permittee has permitted disorderly conduct at the permitted
location or conduct detrimental to the health and safety of others or
constituting a breach of the public peace.
(4) Abrogation of any agreement, written or oral, between the
permittee and the Village Administrator or any other public official
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
B. Revocation of a permit pursuant to the above conditions shall bar such
offender from applying for a new permit within one year from the date
of revocation.
A. Additional regulations. The Village Administrator may promulgate
additional regulations in furtherance of the findings and purpose of this
chapter.
B. Waiver of all or part of chapter. All or part of this chapter may be waived
by the Board of Trustees for a particular filming and/or recording event
on the Board's finding that such waiver would be in the public interest
of the surrounding neighborhood and/or Village as a whole.
A. Each and every violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor
and shall be punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not less than $250
nor more than $1,000 for each and every day of violation under this
chapter.
§ 208-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-13
1:179
Chapter 216
FISHING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 200. Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 295.
§ 216-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Sleepy Hollow is encouraging the
recreational sport of fishing at the Pocantico River; and the Board finds
there is potential and/or actual abuse of the "catch and release" program
set up for fishing at the Pocantico River. The Board wishes all residents
of the community to have the opportunity to enjoy the pleasures of sport
fishing and, in order to minimize the threat of abuse of the recreational
activity of sport fishing, the Board of Trustees desires to establish rules
and regulations for trout fishing between the Old Croton Aqueduct and the
Philipsburg Restoration Mill Pond.
§ 216-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public awareness of the sport
of fishing through a catch-and-release program and at the same time to
teach and foster concerns for the protection of our environmental and local
habitat by provisions designed to:
§ 216-3. Applicability.
This chapter pertains to the area of the Pocantico River between the Old
Croton Aqueduct and the Philipsburg Restoration Mill Pond.
§ 216-4. Prohibited acts.
B. The imposition of such fine shall not be the Village's exclusive remedy in
the event of violation, and the Village shall have the right to pursue any
and all other legal and equitable remedies available to it in connection
with any violation of this chapter.
A. Regulate the conduct of anglers regarding the sport of fishing.
B. Regulate the areas where fishing is permitted.
C. Limit the number of fish caught per day and the conditions under which
fishing is permitted.
D. Educate the public as to the proper handling of fish and encourage the
following rules and regulations pertaining to the catch-and-release
program.
§ 208-13 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 216-4
1:180
§ 216-5. Permit fees. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Applications for fishing permits issued under this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee as set forth in the fee schedule included at the end of
Chapter 200, Fees. There is no fee for permits issued to persons under the
age of 16.
§ 216-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $200 for a first offense and not less than $250 nor more
than $350 for a second offense. Any person violating any of the regulations
set forth under this chapter a third time shall forfeit his/her right to a
Village fishing permit for a period of five years and be subject to a fine in an
amount not less than $1,000 nor more than $1,500.
Chapter 220
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Excavation, filling and topsoil removal — See
Ch. 190.
Fees — See Ch. 200.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 353.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 358.
Waterfront consistency review — See Ch. 414.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 418.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 425.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
A. No person over the age of 16 years shall:
(1) Fish with bait that is not artificial.
(2) Fish without a New York State fishing license.
B. No person shall:
(1) Fish without a fishing permit issued by the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
(Note: Because it is a catch-and-release program, there is no
restriction on the fishing season. However, for the purposes of
licensing and annual regulations, the fishing season begins on the
first day of April of each year.)
(2) Take fish caught from the Pocantico River. All fish must be returned
immediately to the water.
(3) Fish with any hook other than a barbless hook. (Note: Barbs may be
crimped down with a pair of pliers.)
(4) Fish with more than one treble hook (barbless) at one time.
§ 216-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-6
1:181
§ 220-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Sleepy Hollow finds that the
potential and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a
problem to the residents of the Village of Sleepy Hollow and that such
damages may include destruction or loss of private and public housing,
damage to public facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and injury to
and loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and
to achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is
adopted.
§ 220-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas, by provisions designed to:
§ 220-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
§ 216-6 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 220-3
1:182
§ 220-4. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30,
A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base
floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain." For purposes of this chapter,
the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with
the phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18
inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the
lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above
the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be
properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic forces which
would be experienced during periods of flooding.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 220-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-4
1:183
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to have the top
of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zone V1-V30, VE, or V, to
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated
floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zone A1-A30,
AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
In the case of Zone V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes
a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even
though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet
the federal standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates
a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood
Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of
flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as
Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
A.
§ 220-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 220-4
1:184
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities.
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales, or
service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion
or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm,
or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in flooding as defined in Subsection A above.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 220-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-4
1:185
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the Building
Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of an engineering
department.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other
than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — Has
the same meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value of
the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
§ 220-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 220-4
1:186
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or by other agencies as
provided in § 220-13B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided
that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition placement, or other improvement is within 180 days after the date
of issuance. The "actual start of construction" means the first placement
of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home)
on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings
or construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation (such as clearing, excavation, grading, or filling), or the
installation of streets or walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation
of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 220-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-4
1:187
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this chapter.
§ 220-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, Westchester County.
§ 220-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 220-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 220-8. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Village of Sleepy Hollow,
Community Number 361515, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
[Amended 3-12-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Panel Numbers 36119C0251
and 36119C0253, whose effective date is September 28, 2007, and
any subsequent revisions to these map panels that do not affect
areas under our community's jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Westchester County, New York, All Jurisdictions" dated September
28, 2007.
(3) Letter of Map Revision 04/19/2009, FEMA Case #08-02-1382P,
revising FIRM Panel No. 36119C0253.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the
Department of Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings and
Building Compliance located at 28 Beekman Avenue.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through March 20, 1997, and shall supersede all previous laws
adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or local laws, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 220-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 220-8
1:188
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person or
corporation who or which commits an offense against any of the provisions
of this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall be
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $250 and not more than $2,000 for the first offense
in a twenty-four-month period, not less than $500 and not more than
$2,000 for the second offense in a twenty-four-month period, not less than
$750 and not more than $2,000 for the third offense in a twenty-fourmonth
period, and not less than $1,000 and not more than $2,000 for
the fourth and subsequent offenses in a twenty-four-month period, or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both. The twentyfour-
month period shall commence on the date of the initial violation.
Every violation of this chapter shall be a separate and distinct offense;
and in the case of continued violation, every day's continuance thereof
shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. A violation of this
chapter shall constitute disorderly conduct. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the Village of Sleepy Hollow from taking such other lawful action
as necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not
compliant with the requirements of this chapter for which the developer
and/or owner has not applied for and received an approved variance under
§ 220-19, will be declared noncompliant and notification will be sent to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 220-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 220-10. Designation of local administrator.
The Building Inspector is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain
development permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 220-11. Floodplain development permits; fees.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
§ 220-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-11
1:189
§ 220-12. Application for permit.
The applicant for a permit shall provide the following information as
appropriate. Additional information may be required on the permit
application form.
citizens from increased flood hazards and ensuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure
to flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an
area of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 220-6, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans drawn to
scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of
the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee as set forth in the fee schedule
included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees. In addition, the applicant
shall be responsible for reimbursing the Village of Sleepy Hollow for
any additional costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of
the project. The local administrator may require a deposit into an
escrow account to cover these additional costs. [Amended 1-22-2013
by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
C. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 220-15C, utilities.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 220-17, Nonresidential structures.
E. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
§ 220-11 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 220-12
1:190
§ 220-13. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 220-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
F. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
G. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 220-12, Application for permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of § 220-14, General construction standards,
and, in particular, § 220-14A, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
§ 220-14, General construction standards, no permit shall be
issued. The applicant may revise the application to include
§ 220-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-13
1:191
measures that mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and
resubmit the application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
(5) Refer all applications and site plans to the Sleepy Hollow Planning
Board for review and approval. Said site plan shall, in addition to
the information required under other laws, show the information
required by this chapter.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 220-12G, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meets the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, the local administrator shall obtain from the permit
holder a certification of the as-built elevation of the lowest floor or
floodproofed elevation in relation to mean sea level. The certificate
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed
§ 220-13 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 220-13
1:192
land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. For
manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate
of elevation upon placement of the structure on the site. A
certificate of elevation must also be submitted for a recreational
vehicle if it remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer
(unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator or his agent, and/or the developer's
engineer or architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate
times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor
compliance with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify,
if requested, that the development is in compliance with the
requirements of the floodplain development permit and/or any variance
provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 220-8 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 220-8 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 220-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in Subsection E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
§ 220-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-13
1:193
§ 220-14. General construction standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 220-6.
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to Subsection D(1) and D(2), and whether or not
the structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to Subsection D(1),
and whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to § 220-19, Appeals board; and
(5) Notices required under Subsection C, Alteration of watercourses.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Village of Sleepy Hollow agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
§ 220-13 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 220-14
1:194
§ 220-15. Construction standards for all structures.
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and
reimburses the Village of Sleepy Hollow for all fees and other
costs in relation to the application. The applicant must also
provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the
Village of Sleepy Hollow for all costs related to the final map
revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 220-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Village of Sleepy Hollow agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and
the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the Village of Sleepy Hollow for all
fees and other costs in relation to the application. The
applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the Village of Sleepy Hollow for all costs related to
the final map revisions.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zone A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation data
are available, new and substantially improved structures shall have
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement, and which are subject to flooding, designed to
§ 220-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-15
1:195
§ 220-16. Elevation of residential structures.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in §§ 220-14A,
Subdivision proposals, and 220-14B, Encroachments, and 220-15,
Construction standards for all structures, apply to structures located in
areas of special flood hazard as indicated:
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
(a) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding; and
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all
sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air-conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at or above the base flood elevation.
Electrical wiring and outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels
shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation unless they
conform to the appropriate provisions of the electrical part of the
Building Code of New York State or the Residential Code of New
York State for location of such items in wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
§ 220-15 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 220-16
1:196
§ 220-17. Nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures, in addition to
the requirements in §§ 220-14A, Subdivision proposals, and 220-14B,
Encroachments, and 220-15, Construction standards for all structures.
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to or above two feet above the base flood level.
B. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
C. Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 220-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water. All structural components located below the
base flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in Subsection A(2).
§ 220-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-17
1:197
§ 220-18. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 220-14, General
construction standards, and § 220-15, Construction standards for all
structures, apply, as indicated, in areas of special flood hazard to
manufactured homes and to recreational vehicles which are located in areas
of special flood hazard:
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
Subsection A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and
AH shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in § 220-17B,
C and D.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnecttype
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and
is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
C. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such
that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to
§ 220-17 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 220-18
1:198
§ 220-19. Appeals board.
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 220-6 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified).
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Village of Sleepy
Hollow shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from
the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
§ 220-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-19
1:199
§ 220-20. Conditions for variances.
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of
this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes
of this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
including technical information and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided items (1) through (12)
in § 220-19D have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met;
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
§ 220-19 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 220-20
1:200
Chapter 225
LANDSCAPERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumpsters — See Ch. 175.
Noise — See Ch. 272.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Solid waste — See Ch. 347.
§ 225-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
LANDSCAPER — Includes any person who engages in the tending, planting,
preparation, installation, maintaining, managing, creating or laying out
of lawns, gardens, flower beds, shrubbery, trees or landscaping of every
nature and description on real property on which such person does not
reside.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws.
G. Notification.
(1) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
(2) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required in § 220-13H of this chapter.
§ 220-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-1
1:201
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or
business entity of any form, style or nature.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Includes all real property, improved or unimproved,
owned by any municipal corporation, corporation, person, partnership, firm,
association or otherwise which is not included in the definitions of "public
highway" or "public place" in this section.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — Includes any street open to the public for its full width
from property line to property line, including the sidewalk area, whether or
not installed.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes any real property available to or open to use by
all or a majority of the property owners or residents of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow.
§ 225-2. Compliance required; permit required; fee; bond;
exemptions.
§ 225-3. General regulations.
The following regulations shall be observed by all landscapers and their
employees:
A. No person or employee or any person shall perform or cause, suffer or
permit others to perform or work as a landscaper within the Village of
Sleepy Hollow, except when such performance or work is done in
compliance with the regulations set forth in § 225-3 below.
B. No landscaper shall perform work within the Village of Sleepy Hollow
unless duly permitted pursuant to this chapter.
C. Permits. All landscapers shall complete the necessary permit
application on the form provided by the Village Clerk. All applications
are subject to review and approval by the Sleepy Hollow Chief of Police.
A nonrefundable application fee to be established and determined by
the Board of Trustees from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule
included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees, shall be paid on presentment
of said completed form.
D. All landscapers shall be required to post a bond in an amount set forth
in the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees, to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
E. Sleepy Hollow residents under the age of 18 years shall be exempt from
Subsection D but must comply with the regulations enumerated in
§ 225-3 of this chapter.
A. No person shall operate any power or manual lawn mower or other
gardening equipment at any time except between the hours of 8:00
a.m., prevailing time, and 9:00 p.m., weekdays, 9:00 a.m., prevailing
time, and 8:00 p.m. Saturdays, and 12:00 noon, prevailing time, and
6:00 p.m., Sundays and holidays.
§ 225-1 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 225-3
1:202
§ 225-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation committing an offense against any provision
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 for each offense.
Chapter 229
GASOLINE STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 110.
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Signs — See Ch. 338.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 229-1. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to establish a precise and detailed schedule
for the construction and location of gasoline canopies within the Village of
Sleepy Hollow.
§ 229-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the aesthetic qualities of the
Broadway (Route 9) Corridor in the Village of Sleepy Hollow by limiting the
size and extent of gasoline canopies. This chapter will protect the character
of the Broadway (Route 9) area and will promote orderly and beneficial
commercial development within this area. As a result, the value of land
within this area and the overall aesthetic appearance will be enhanced.
§ 229-3. Automatic fire extinguishing system required. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
All gasoline stations within the corporate limits of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow are required to have, within the dispensing area of the gasoline
B. Landscapers and their employees must comply with the noise
restrictions set forth in Chapter 272, Noise, of the Village Code.
C. No person shall burn any wastepaper, rubbish, leaves, cuttings, wood or
other waste materials at any time.
D. No person shall place any garbage, refuse, cuttings, leaves, wood or
other materials upon any public highway, public place or private
property unless secured in a sealed biodegradable paper bag or
secured receptacle for the storage of refuse.
E. No person shall scatter any garbage, refuse, cuttings, leaves or other
waste materials on any public highway, public place or private property.
§ 225-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-3
1:203
station, an automatic fire extinguishing system meeting the requirements of
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
§ 229-4. Yard setback requirements for canopies.
§ 229-5. Fire suppression system required for canopy.
All canopy installations shall contain an approved fire suppression system.
The system must be arranged and installed for both automatic and manual
operation in accordance with NFPA 17, Section 6-4, and NFPA 71, where
electric actuation is used. A continuous backup power source capable of
operating the system for at least 24 hours is required. Manual actuation
shall be either mechanical or electric. Automatic system operation shall be
accomplished pneumatically, using Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. listed
heat-activated devices, or electric, using Underwriters' Laboratories listed
thermostats.
§ 229-6. Canopy lighting.
All canopy lighting shall be installed by a licensed electrician and comply
with all state and local codes.
§ 229-7. Drawings.
§ 229-8. Canopy height.
The maximum height of a canopy shall be the height required for area
coverage by the fire suppression system.
§ 229-9. Signs.
All letters, logos and insignias shall meet the requirements of Chapter 338,
Signs, of the Code of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
A. All canopy installations shall comply with existing front, rear and side
yard setback requirements of Chapter 450, Zoning, of the Code of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow.
B. A proposed canopy installation which shall violate existing front, rear
and side yard setback requirements shall require the prior written
approval of the Board of Trustees, as well as a variance from Chapter
450, Zoning, of the Village Code.
A. All canopy applications shall include drawings to scale showing the
foundation, structure, wiring and a site plan.
B. All drawings shall be signed and stamped by a professional engineer
who is registered in the State of New York.
§ 229-3 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 229-10
1:204
§ 229-10. Architectural Review Board approval required.
All canopy installations must be approved by the Architectural Review
Board of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 229-11. Site plan review.
All canopy installations must receive final site plan approval from the
Planning Board of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, pursuant to Chapter 450,
Zoning, of the Code of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 229-12. Canopy dimensions.
§ 229-13. Nonconforming canopies.
Those canopies erected prior to the effective date of this chapter that do not
conform to the provisions and standards of this chapter shall be permitted
to remain until such time when the use of the property shall change.
§ 229-14. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be liable to a fine in an amount not to exceed $250, 15 days'
imprisonment, or both, for each offense. Said fine shall be assessed weekly
until such violation(s) is corrected.
Chapter 240
HANDBILLS AND POSTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 263.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Signs — See Ch. 338.
A. A canopy installed over a pump island shall not exceed 12 feet per side
from the center line of the island to the drip edge of the canopy. The
total width of the canopy shall not exceed 24 feet. The maximum length
of the canopy shall not exceed 24 feet, measured from drip edge to
opposite drip edge. The maximum permitted dimensions of a canopy
shall be: length: 24 feet; width: 24 feet. The total area coverage shall be
576 square feet, 24 feet by 24 feet.
B. Gasoline stations with multiple islands shall be permitted to construct
canopies over each pump island, provided that the total square footage
of all canopies on the site is 576 square feet or less.
§ 229-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-1
1:205
§ 240-1. Posting of handbills prohibited.
No person or persons shall post any handbills, notices or advertisements of
any nature or description on any telephone or electric light poles or other
property of this Village, throw any handbills, notices or advertisements or
other throwaways on any private property in this Village, or print, paint,
stamp or otherwise mark any flagstone, curbstone, sidewalk or other public
property of this Village.
§ 240-2. Throwing of show bills prohibited.
No person shall cast, throw or scatter or cause to be cast, thrown or
scattered in or upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public places of
this Village any show bills, posters, dodgers or other handbills or paper of
any description.
§ 240-3. Hanging or posting of advertising prohibited; exception for
tag sales.
§ 240-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not to exceed $250 for each offense.
A. No person shall hang or place any goods or merchandise of any
description or any sign or advertising matter of any description on any
of the electric light poles or lampposts, fire alarm boxes or devices,
telephone poles or bridge railings of this Village, nor place any goods,
boxes, wood or heavy material upon or against the same.
B. For those events prominently described as "tag sales" conducted in
private residences and on private property, owners and residents will
be permitted a maximum of seven signs per sale. There will be a grace
period of three days following the actual tag sale date during which
period no fine will be applicable, provided that all posted signs are
removed prior to the expiration of that grace period. Signs remaining
after the three-day grace period will subject the residents of the
address listed on the sign therein to a penalty as set forth in § 240-4.
§ 240-1 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 240-4
1:206
Chapter 245
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 110.
Boardinghouses — See Ch. 139.
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 148.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 182.
Nuisances — See Ch. 280.
Plumbers — See Ch. 304.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Residential occupancy restrictions — See Ch.
319.
Sewers — See Ch. 330.
Solid waste — See Ch. 347.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 358.
Water — See Ch. 411.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 240-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-4
1:207

Part 1
[Adopted 6-22-196R4es(iCdhe.n 3ti0a,l PParretm 1i,s eOsf The 1965 Code)]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 245-1. Title.
Parts 1 and 2 of this chapter shall be known as "Housing Standards
Applicable to Residential Premises."
§ 245-2. Purpose.
The purpose of Parts 1 and 2 of this chapter is to provide basic and uniform
standards, in terms of performance objectives implemented by specific
requirements, governing the condition, occupancy and maintenance of
residential premises, and to establish reasonable safeguards for the safety,
health and welfare of the occupants and users thereof.
§ 245-3. Effective date.
Parts 1 and 2 of this chapter shall take effect June 22, 1964.
§ 245-4. Scope.
Parts 1 and 2 of this chapter shall apply to residential premises as follows:
§ 245-5. Nonapplicability.
Parts 1 and 2 of this chapter shall not apply to mobile homes and mobile
home courts, or to transient-type occupancies and uses including, but not
limited to, nursing and convalescent homes, hotels, motels, tourist camps,
farm labor camps, travel trailers and trailer parks, and other forms of
temporary housing.
§ 245-6. Effect on other laws and regulations.
A. Lots, plots or parcels of land on which residential buildings, buildings of
mixed occupancy or accessory structures are located.
B. Residential buildings, including one- and two-family dwellings and
multiple dwellings, except as specifically excluded in § 245-5.
C. Residential occupancies in buildings of mixed occupancy.
D. Accessory structures, accessory to residential occupancies.
A. The provisions of Parts 1 and 2 of this chapter shall supersede local
laws, codes or regulations to the extent that such laws, codes or
regulations are inconsistent with the provisions of Parts 1 and 2;
provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent
the adoption and enforcement of a law, code or regulation which is
§ 245-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-6
1:209
§ 245-7. Conformity with state law.
Installations, alterations and repairs to residential premises, and materials,
assemblies and equipment utilized in connection therewith, shall be
reasonably safe to persons and property, and in conformity with applicable
statutes of the State of New York, and orders, rules and regulations issued
by authority thereof. Conformity of such work, materials, assemblies or
equipment with the applicable requirements of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code shall be prima facie evidence that the
same is reasonably safe to person and property.
§ 245-8. Definitions.
As used in Parts 1 and 2 of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental to
that of the residential building, and which is located on the same premises.
ACCESSORY USE — A use, occupancy or tenancy customarily incidental
to the principal use or occupancy of a residential building. Such accessory
uses may include, among others, the following:
APPROVED — Approved by the administrative officer under the regulations
of Parts 1 and 2 of this chapter, or approved by an authority designated by
law or Parts 1 and 2 of this chapter.
more restrictive or establishes a higher standard than those provided in
Parts 1 and 2 of this chapter, and such more restrictive requirement or
higher standard shall govern during the period in which it is in effect.
B. Where a provision of Parts 1 and 2 of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of a zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire,
safety, health, water supply or sewage disposal law or law, code or
regulation, the provision or requirement which is the more restrictive
or which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
A. Offices for the building management.
B. Dining rooms, banquet rooms, public kitchens and ballrooms.
C. Recreation and play rooms.
Laundries for the use of tenants and occupants, and in connection with
the management and operation of a residential building.
D.
Maintenance and work shops, storage rooms for linen, bedding,
furniture, supplies and tenants' equipment and effects.
E.
Rooms or space for the incidental sale or display of merchandise to
occupants and tenants, such as newspaper, candy and cigar stands.
F.
Garages within a residential building or on the premises thereof used
primarily for the storage of passenger-type motor vehicles.
G.
§ 245-6 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-8
1:210
BASEMENT — That space of a building that is partly below grade which
has more than half its height, measured from floor to ceiling, above the
average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building.
BATHROOM — Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs or
showers, or both, and which may also contain water closets, lavatories or
fixtures serving similar purposes. (See definition of "toilet room.")
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls,
or within exterior or party walls, and a roof, affording shelter to persons,
animals or property.
CELLAR — That space of a building that is partly or entirely below grade,
which has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, below
the average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining
the building.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building containing not more than one
dwelling unit occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing not more than two
dwelling units occupied exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provisions for living, cooking,
sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one family.
EXIT — A way of departure from the interior of a building or structure to
the exterior at street or grade, including doorways, passageways, hallways,
corridors, stairways, ramps, fire escapes and all other elements necessary
for egress or escape.
FAMILY — A household constituting a single housekeeping unit occupied by
one or more persons.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARD — A specification, code, rule, guide
or procedure in the field of construction or related thereto, recognized and
accepted as authoritative.
GRADE, FINISHED — The natural surface of the ground, or surface of
ground after completion of any change in contour, abutting a building or
premises.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space occupied by one or more persons living,
sleeping, eating or cooking therein. Kitchenettes shall not be deemed to be
habitable space. See definitions of "nonhabitable space," "public space" and
"exit."
INFESTATION — The presence within or contiguous to a dwelling, dwelling
unit, lodging house, lodging unit or premises of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests.
KITCHEN — Space, 60 square feet or more in floor area, with a minimum
width of five feet, used for cooking or preparation of food.
KITCHENETTE — Space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used for
cooking or preparation of food.
§ 245-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-8
1:211
LODGING HOUSE — A multiple dwelling used primarily for the purpose of
furnishing lodging, with or without meals, for compensation.
LODGING UNIT — A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit, used or intended to be used for lodging.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Occupancy of a building in part for residential use
and in part for some other use not accessory thereto.
MULTIPLE DWELLING —
MULTIPLE RESIDENCE — See definition of "multiple dwelling."
MUNICIPALITY — A city, town or village.
NONHABITABLE SPACE — Space used as kitchenettes, pantries, bath,
toilet, laundry, rest, dressing, locker, storage, utility, heater and boiler
rooms, closets and other spaces for service and maintenance of the
building, and those spaces used for access and vertical travel between
stories. See definitions of "habitable space," "public space" and "exit."
PLUMBING SYSTEM — The water supply system, the drainage system,
the vent system, fixtures and traps, including their respective connections,
devices and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises.
POTABLE WATER — Water which is approved for drinking, culinary and
domestic purposes.
PUBLIC SPACE — Space within a residential building for public use, such
as lobbies, lounges, reception, ball, meeting, lecture and recreation rooms,
banquet and dining rooms and their kitchens, and swimming pools.
SEWAGE — Liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in
suspension or solution, and which may include industrial wastes and liquids
containing chemicals.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials, forming a construction framed of
component structural parts for occupancy or use, including buildings.
A. A building containing three or more dwelling units.
A building containing living, sanitary and sleeping facilities occupied by
one or two families and more than four lodgers residing with either one
of such families.
B.
A building with one or more sleeping rooms, other than a one- or twofamily
dwelling, used or occupied by permanent or transient paying
guests or tenants.
C.
A building with sleeping accommodations for more than five persons
used or occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, or
for similar uses.
D.
A building used or occupied as a convalescent, old-age or nursing home,
but not including private or public hospitals or public institutions. (See
§ 245-5 for certain multiple dwellings not within scope of Parts 1 and 2
of this chapter.)
E.
§ 245-8 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-8
1:212
TOILET ROOM — Enclosed space containing one or more water closets,
which may also contain one or more lavatories, urinals and other plumbing
fixtures. See definition of "bathroom."
VENTILATION — Supply and removal of air to and from a space by natural
or mechanical means.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer air through
windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks, with or without wind-driven
devices.
§ 245-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-8
1:213

ARTICLE II
Space Requirements
§ 245-9. General requirements.
§ 245-10. Occupancy classification of buildings.
Buildings for the purpose of Parts 1 and 2 of this chapter shall be classified
in respect to their occupancies as follows:
§ 245-11. Maximum occupancy.18
A. Buildings occupied in whole or in part as defined in Parts 1 and 2 of this
chapter shall comply with the requirements hereinafter set forth
concerning occupancy, size, light and ventilation in order to provide
safe and healthful environment.
B. The term "accessory use" shall have a uniform meaning and shall apply
in the same manner and under the same conditions or restrictions on all
residential buildings.
A. One- and two-family dwellings: buildings containing one or two
dwelling units with no more than four lodgers residing with a family in
either one of such dwelling units.
B. Multiple dwellings:
(1) Buildings containing one or two dwelling units with more than four
lodgers with a family in either one of such dwelling units.
(2) Buildings containing three or more dwelling units.
(3) Apartment houses and apartment hotels.
(4) Lodging houses.
(5) Buildings with sleeping accommodations for more than five persons
used or occupied as a club, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house,
or for similar uses.
(6) Garden apartments.
C. Accessory structures: garages, carports and similar type structures on
residential premises.
A. In dwelling units, the maximum number of occupants shall be limited to
the number determined on the basis of the floor areas of habitable
rooms, other than kitchens, as follows:
(1) One occupant per room having floor area of at least 80 square feet
but less than 120 square feet;
18.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 319, Residential Occupancy Restrictions.
§ 245-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-11
1:215
§ 245-12. Prohibited uses.
§ 245-13. Habitable space.
(2) Two occupants per room having floor area of at least 120 square
feet but less than 180 square feet; and
(3) Three occupants per room having floor area of 180 square feet or
more.
B. In lodging units, the maximum number of occupants shall be limited to
the number determined on the same basis as for dwelling units.
C. In buildings occupied as clubs, dormitories, sorority or fraternity
houses and providing sleeping accommodations for more than five
persons, the maximum number of occupants so accommodated in any
habitable room shall be limited to the number determined on the basis
of the floor area, in square feet, of the room divided by 50 square feet
per occupant.
A. It shall be prohibited to use for sleeping purposes any kitchen,
nonhabitable space or public space.
B. It shall be prohibited, in lodging houses, to use for dining purposes any
communal kitchen containing fewer than 100 square feet of floor area,
or any nonhabitable space or public space other than dining space.
C. It shall be prohibited to prepare or eat meals in lodging units.
D. It shall be prohibited to use any cellar space as habitable space.
A. Size.
(1) Habitable space shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet
six inches over 50% of the floor area; and the floor area where the
ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered in
computing floor area.
(2) A dwelling unit shall contain at least one habitable room having a
minimum of 150 square feet of floor area and a minimum horizontal
dimension of 10 feet.
(3) Kitchens shall have a minimum of 60 square feet of floor area, and
other habitable spaces shall contain not less than 80 square feet of
floor area and shall have a minimum horizontal dimension of seven
feet.
(4) Every alcove less than 60 square feet in area, except a cooking
space or foyer, shall be deemed to be part of a habitable room. The
area of the opening in the dividing partition between the alcove and
the room shall be at least 80% of the wall area of such partition,
measured on the alcove side, but not less than 40 square feet. The
depth of such alcove shall not exceed half its width. The floor area
§ 245-11 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-13
1:216
§ 245-14. Light and ventilation.
§ 245-15. Separation and accessibility requirements.
§ 245-16. Public space.
of the alcove shall be added to the floor area of the room in
determining light and ventilation requirements for the room. An
alcove with an area of 60 square feet or more, but less than the
required area of a habitable room, shall be separately lighted and
ventilated as required for habitable space.
B. Basements. Basements shall not be deemed habitable space where
required windows are located only on one wall and the depth of the
basement space exceeds four times its clear height.
A. Habitable space shall be provided with natural light through one or
more windows, skylights, transparent or translucent panels, or any
combinations thereof, that face directly on legal open spaces at least six
inches above the adjoining finished grade, or are above a roof. The
amount of light shall be equivalent to that transmitted through clear
glass equal in area to 10% of the floor area of the habitable space.
B. Habitable space shall be provided with artificial light.
C. Habitable space shall be provided with natural ventilation through
openable parts of windows or other openings in exterior walls that face
legal open spaces above the adjoining finished grade or above a roof, or
through openable parts of skylights, providing total clear ventilation
area equal to not less than 5% of the total floor area of each habitable
space.
D. Habitable space may also be provided with mechanical ventilation, in
addition to natural ventilation.
A. Dwelling units shall be separated from each other and from other
spaces outside the dwelling unit.
B. Sleeping rooms within dwelling units shall be separated from each
other and from other spaces outside the sleeping rooms to provide
privacy.
C. Lodging units shall be separated from each other and from other spaces
outside the lodging units.
D. A communal kitchen or dining room in a lodging house shall be
accessible to the occupants sharing such kitchen or dining room
without going through a dwelling unit or lodging unit of another
occupant.
A. Height. Public space shall have a minimum height of seven feet six
inches measured from finished floor to finished ceiling.
§ 245-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-16
1:217
§ 245-17. Nonhabitable space.
B. Light and ventilation.
(1) Public space shall be provided with artificial light.
(2) In public stairs, stairways and passageways, artificial light shall be
electric lighting available at all times so as to afford safe passage
for occupants and users. Such lighting shall conform to the
following:
(a) A sufficient number of fixtures shall be provided so that the
distance between fixtures is not more than 30 feet and so that
no wall is more than 15 feet distant from a fixture.
(b) Incandescent lighting shall be based on not less than 1/4 watt
per square foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have
a lamp or lamps with a total of not less than 25 watts.
(c) Fluorescent lighting shall be based on not less than 1/10 watt
per square foot of floor area, except that each fixture shall have
a lamp or lamps of a total of not less than 15 watts.
(d) Where under these formulas the calculated wattage does not
correspond to that of a standard lamp, the next larger size shall
be used.
(3) Public spaces shall be provided with either natural ventilation,
conforming to the requirements for habitable space, or with
mechanical ventilation.
A. Height. Nonhabitable space, except crawl spaces and attics, in multiple
dwellings shall have a minimum height of seven feet measured from
floor to ceiling.
B. Toilet rooms and bathrooms.
(1) Toilet rooms and bathrooms in one- and two-family dwellings shall
have provisions for privacy.
(2) Toilet rooms and bathrooms for dwelling units in multiple dwellings
shall be located within the dwelling units and shall be accessible
from any sleeping room without passing through any other sleeping
room.
(3) Unless located within dwelling units or directly connected with
sleeping rooms, toilet rooms and bathrooms in multiple dwellings
shall be provided in each story containing habitable space and shall
be accessible thereto.
(4) Toilet rooms for employees in multiple dwellings shall be in
separate rooms for each sex where there are five or more
employees, shall be readily accessible to such employees and shall
§ 245-16 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-17
1:218
§ 245-18. Access and vertical travel between stories.
not open directly into any public kitchen or other public space used
for the cooking or preparation of food.
(5) In one- and two-family dwellings, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall
be provided with floors of moisture-resistant material.
(6) In multiple dwellings, floors of bathrooms, toilet rooms and similar
spaces shall be waterproof; such waterproofing shall extend six
inches or more above floors except at doors, so that floors can be
flushed or washed without leaking.
C. Light and ventilation.
(1) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
artificial light.
(2) Laundry rooms, furnace rooms and similar nonhabitable space
shall be provided with artificial light appropriate for the intended
use of such rooms.
(3) Stairs shall be provided with artificial light to allow safe ascent or
descent.
(4) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
ventilation in accordance with either of the following:
(a) Natural ventilation as required for habitable space, except that
such openable areas shall be not less than 1 1/2 square feet for
bathrooms or toilet rooms and not less than three square feet
for kitchenettes; or
(b) Mechanical ventilation exhausting not less than 25 cfm for
bathrooms and toilet rooms and not less than 100 cfm for
kitchenettes.
(5) Spaces in multiple dwellings which contain central-heat-producing,
air-conditioning and other equipment shall be ventilated to the
outer air, and air from these spaces shall not be recirculated to
other parts of the building.
(6) Ventilation shall be provided in unheated attics, spaces below flat
roofs and crawl spaces. Location and net areas of ventilation
openings shall be such as to minimize deterioration of structural
members from condensation or other causes, in conformity with
generally accepted standards.
A. Stairs, both interior and exterior, shall be of sufficient width in
conformity with generally accepted standards so as to serve the
occupants.
§ 245-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-18
1:219
§ 245-19. Exits.
B. Railings shall be provided on open portions of stairs, balconies,
landings and stairwells.
A. Safe, continuous and unobstructed exit shall be provided from the
interior of the building to the exterior at street or grade level.
B. Exits shall be arranged, constructed and proportioned so that
occupants may escape safely from the building in case of emergency.
C. In one- and two-family dwellings, in addition to a primary exit from the
building there shall be provided a secondary exit or, in lieu thereof, one
or more exit openings for emergency use.
D. In multiple dwellings, approved exits shall be provided.
§ 245-18 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-19
1:220
ARTICLE III
Structural Requirements
§ 245-20. General requirements.
§ 245-21. Exterior protection.
§ 245-22. Interior protection.
A. Buildings and parts thereof shall be maintained so as to be capable of
sustaining safely their own weight and the loads to which they may be
subject.
B. Buildings shall be maintained so that loads are transmitted to the soil
without undue differential settlement, unsafe deformation or movement
of the building or of any structural part.
C. Buildings shall be maintained so that protection is provided for all
structural members which may become structurally unsound if left
unprotected. Causes of such deterioration include, among others,
action of freezing and thawing, dampness, corrosion, wetting and
drying, and termites and other destructive insects.
D. Buildings built in soil which is water-bearing at any season of the year
shall be maintained so that groundwater and surface water will not
penetrate into habitable spaces, basements and cellars.
A. Foundation walls shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound and
to prevent entrance of moisture, termites and vermin. Such protection
shall consist of shoring where necessary, subsoil drains at footings,
grouting of masonry cracks, waterproofing of walls and joists and other
suitable means.
B. Exterior walls and wall components shall be maintained so as to prevent
deterioration due to the elements and destructive insects. Such
maintenance shall consist of painting, installation or repair of termite
shields, poison treatment of soil or other suitable means.
C. Roofing shall be maintained in watertight condition so as to prevent
leakage into the building. Such maintenance shall consist of repairs of
roofing, flashings, waterproof coatings or other suitable means.
A. Crawl spaces shall be maintained free of moisture, and the flow of air
from such spaces into walls above shall be effectively barred so as to
prevent deterioration of structural members. Such provisions shall
consist of maintenance of openings in foundation walls to provide
adequate circulation of air in the crawl space, covering the ground in
the crawl space with a moisture barrier, installation of drains outside
the structure if the crawl space is below surrounding grade, blocking
openings in stud walls to prevent flow of air and moisture into walls,
frequent destruction of termite tubes from the soil to wood floor
members above, poison treatment of soil and other suitable means.
§ 245-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-22
1:221
B. Structural members shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound.
Such protection shall consist of shoring, reinforcement or repair where
necessary, frequent destruction of termite tubes or other appropriate
means.
C. Chimneys and flues shall be maintained so as to be structurally sound
and to prevent leakage of gases into the structure. Such maintenance
shall consist of clearing flue stoppages, sealing open joints, repairing
masonry where necessary and other suitable means.
D. Ceilings and walls shall be maintained so that parts which become loose
or defective do not constitute a hazard to occupants. Such maintenance
shall consist of removing and replacing loose or defective sections.
E. Toilet room and bathroom floors shall be maintained so as to prevent
leakage of water through the floor, under normal conditions of use and
floor washing, and resultant deterioration or defects in structural
members and ceilings below. Maintenance shall consist of repairs which
effectively provide the moisture and waterproof qualities required for
the particular floor.
§ 245-22 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-22
1:222
ARTICLE IV
Fire Safety Requirements
§ 245-23. Prohibited accumulations and storage.
It shall be prohibited:
§ 245-24. Prevention of fire spread.
§ 245-25. Interior finishes, trim and decorative materials.
Interior finish materials for acoustical correction, surface insulation and
decorative treatment on the surfaces of walls and ceilings, and interior trim
shall be of materials that will not, in burning, give off excessive amounts of
smoke or objectionable gases.
§ 245-26. Fireplaces.
A. To accumulate or store on residential premises, except in approved
locations, any highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints,
volatile oils, cleaning fluids and similar materials, or any combustible
refuse liable to spontaneous combustion, such as wastepaper, boxes,
rags or similar materials; and
B. To accumulate or store materials on fire escapes or stairs, in stairways
or passageways, at doors or windows or in any other locations where in
the event of fire such materials may obstruct egress of occupants or
interfere with fire-fighting operations.
A. Walls and ceilings shall be maintained free from cracks and openings
which would permit flame or excessive heat to enter the concealed
space.
B. In buildings of mixed occupancy, nonresidential space shall be
separated from residential space by approved fire separations which
will retard the spread of fire.
C. Garages in or attached to a residential building shall be separated from
other spaces in the building by approved fire separations which will
retard the spread of fire and prevent flammable or toxic vapors
originating within the garage from being transmitted to other parts of
the building.
A. Fireplaces and similar construction used, or intended to be used, for
burning fuel in open fires shall be connected to approved chimneys and
shall be installed so that nearby or adjacent combustible material and
structural members shall not be heated to unsafe temperatures.
B. Hearths and linings or other parts of fireplaces exposed directly to
flame shall be of materials that will not melt, disintegrate, spall or
shatter at high temperatures.
§ 245-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-26
1:223
C. Wood mantels and trim on fireplaces shall be placed and attached so
that they cannot be heated to unsafe temperatures or ignited by sparks
or embers from the fire.
§ 245-26 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-26
1:224
ARTICLE V
Equipment Requirements
§ 245-27. General requirements.
§ 245-28. Plumbing.19
A. Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, air-conditioning,
refrigerating, cooking, fire-protection and radiation-production
equipment, elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators and other mechanical
additions, installations or systems for the use of the building shall be
installed, located and maintained so that under normal conditions of
use such equipment and systems will not be a danger to health or
welfare, a danger because of structural defects or a source of ignition,
or a radiation hazard, and will not create excessive noise or otherwise
become a nuisance. Equipment and systems include, but are not limited
to, apparatus, devices, fixtures, piping, pipe hangers, pipe covering,
wiring, fittings and materials used as part of, or in connection with,
such installations.
B. Equipment and systems subject to damage from freezing shall be
adequately protected against freezing.
C. Moving parts of equipment which may be a potential hazard shall be
guarded to protect against accidental contact.
A. General requirements.
(1) Plumbing systems shall be maintained in sanitary and serviceable
condition.
(2) Plumbing systems shall be maintained so as not to weaken
structural members nor cause damage or deterioration to any part
of the building through fixture usage.
B. Water supply.
(1) Potable water from an approved source shall be available at all
times in residential buildings. The domestic water supply system of
the building shall be connected to such approved source, and shall
not be subject to contamination. When supplied from a public
source, the potable water supply system shall not be connected to
private or unsafe water supplies.
(2) Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
provide at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices
and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate
to enable them to function satisfactorily and without undue noise
under all normal conditions of use.
19.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 304, Plumbers; Ch. 330, Sewers; Ch. 353, Storm Sewers; and
Ch. 411, Water.
§ 245-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-28
1:225
(3) Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so that
water used for purposes of cooling or heating shall not be
reintroduced into the domestic water supply system nor be
distributed through such equipment to plumbing fixtures.
(4) Hot water supply systems shall be provided with safety devices
arranged to relieve hazardous pressures and excessive
temperatures.
C. Sewage drainage system.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be drained to a sewage drainage system,
and such system shall be connected to a public sewer or to an
adequate and approved system of sewage disposal.
(2) Where a public sewer is not available, a system shall be provided to
receive and dispose of sewage without health hazard or nuisance.
(3) Sewage or other waste which may be deleterious to surface or
subsurface waters shall not be discharged into the ground or into a
waterway unless it has first been rendered harmless through
subjection to treatment in conformity with generally accepted
standards.
(4) Substances which will clog the pipes, produce explosive mixtures,
destroy the pipes or their joints or interfere unduly with the sewage
disposal process shall not be discharged into the building drainage
system unless it is provided with approved devices suitable for
intercepting such substances.
(5) Each fixture directly connected to the sewage drainage system
shall be equipped with a water-seal trap.
(6) Adequate cleanouts shall be provided and maintained so that the
pipes may be readily cleaned.
(7) The drainage system and its attendant vent piping shall be
maintained so as to provide adequate circulation of air in all pipes
in order that siphonage, aspiration or pressure will not cause a loss
of trap seal under ordinary conditions of use.
(8) Each vent terminal to the outer air shall be installed and
maintained so as to minimize the possibilities of clogging, frost,
closure, the return of foul air to the building or the creation of a
nuisance to adjacent premises.
(9) Drains provided for fixtures, devices, appliances or apparatus
containing food, water, sterile goods or similar materials shall be
equipped with air breaks, adequate to prevent contamination of
such contents from any possible backup of sewage through the
direct or indirect drainage piping.
D. Storm drainage.
§ 245-28 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-28
1:226
(1) Roofs and paved areas, including yards and courts, shall be
drained. Storm drainage shall be conveyed to an adequate and
approved system of stormwater disposal where available. Storm
drains shall be discharged in such manner that water will not flow
onto sidewalks.
(2) Where a drainage system may be subject to backwater, suitable
provision shall be made to prevent its overflow into the building.
(3) Leaders and gutters, if used, shall be constructed of
noncombustible material, except that wood leaders and gutters
may be used for buildings not more than three stories high.
E. Plumbing facilities.
(1) Buildings and portions thereof shall be provided with plumbing
systems designed to dispose of the sewage from all fixtures and to
furnish cold water to every water closet and urinal, and hot and
cold water to every sink, lavatory, bathtub and shower required
therein. In multiple dwellings, hot water shall be furnished at a
temperature range of 130° F. to 140° F. from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00
midnight.
(2) There shall be provided within each dwelling unit plumbing fixtures
consisting of at least:
(a) One kitchen sink;
(b) One water closet;
(c) One bathtub or shower; and
(d) One lavatory.
(3) Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations
arranged as individual rooms or suites, for each multiple of six
sleeping rooms, or fraction thereof, there shall be provided
plumbing fixtures consisting of at least:
(a) One water closet;
(b) One bathtub or shower; and
(c) One lavatory.
(4) Where multiple dwellings contain sleeping accommodations
arranged as a dormitory, for each multiple of 15 persons or fraction
thereof so accommodated, there shall be provided and located
adjacent thereto plumbing fixtures consisting of at least:
(a) One water closet;
(b) One bathtub or shower; and
(c) One lavatory.
§ 245-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-28
1:227
(5) Urinals may be substituted in men's toilet rooms for not more than
1/3 of the required number of water closets.
(6) Privies, privy vaults and outhouses shall be prohibited on
residential premises.
F. Plumbing fixtures.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be made of smooth nonabsorbent material
and shall be free from concealed fouling surfaces.
(2) Plumbing fixtures shall be so spaced as to be reasonably accessible
for their intended use.
(3) Plumbing fixtures shall be located in spaces that are accessible,
lighted and ventilated.
G. Swimming pools.
(1) Water supply used for filling or for cleaning of the pool shall be
clean. Water supply shall be protected against potential pollution
from all sources, including cross-connection and backflow.
(2) Drains shall be provided so that the pool can be safely and
adequately drained. Drains shall be provided in floors surrounding
the swimming pool and arranged so that water from such areas will
drain without entering the pool.
(3) Filtering, sterilizing and auxiliary equipment, where required, shall
be adequate to maintain the sanitary quality of water during each
period the pool is in use. Equipment containing gases or
disinfectants capable of giving off irritating, toxic or flammable
fumes shall be located in ventilated rooms.
(4) The installation shall be arranged and maintained to prevent dirt,
sand or other foreign matter from entering the bathing area.
H. Water supply tanks.
(1) Water supply tanks shall be installed and maintained so as to be
watertight, verminproof, rodentproof, resistant to corrosion and
capable of withstanding the working pressures under normal
operation.
(2) Supports for tanks shall be of noncombustible construction.
(3) Tanks and their supports shall not be used to support equipment or
structures other than for tank use, except where specially designed
for such other use.
(4) Means for emptying water supply tanks shall be provided and
maintained in proper working condition.
§ 245-28 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-28
1:228
§ 245-29. Fuel gas.
(5) Potable water supply tanks for domestic supply and standpipe or
automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained to
furnish water in sufficient quantity and pressure for such systems.
A. General requirements.
(1) Fuel gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
remain gastight, safe and operative under conditions of use.
(2) Fuel gas piping systems shall provide a supply of gas sufficient to
meet the maximum expected demand of the installed gas-burning
appliances connected thereto.
B. Shutoff valves.
(1) Gas piping systems shall have at least one accessible means for
shutting off all gas supply, and such means shall be maintained in
good operating condition.
(2) An easily accessible shutoff valve or cock shall be provided in the
piping in close proximity to, and ahead of, every outlet for a gas
appliance.
C. Service equipment for gas supplied from utility mains. Gas services, gas
meters and gas pressure regulators shall be located so that they are
protected from damage.
D. Gas refrigerators and ranges. Gas refrigerators and ranges shall be
installed with clearance for ventilation and shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
E. High-pressure gas. Any service connection supplying gas at a pressure
in excess of one psi gauge shall be provided with a device to reduce
such pressure to not more than 1/2 psi gauge prior to entering the
meter, except where such service supplies equipment using gas at high
pressures.
F. Liquefied petroleum gas.
(1) Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be
conveyed through piping equipment and systems in buildings.
(2) Liquefied petroleum gas shall not be vaporized by devices utilizing
open flame or open electrical coil.
(3) Where two or more containers are installed, connection shall be
arranged so that containers can be replaced without shutting off
the flow of gas to equipment.
(4) Containers shall be designed, stored and located so as not to be a
hazard to the premises served or to the surrounding property.
§ 245-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-29
1:229
§ 245-30. Heating.
(5) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive
pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at
a safe location.
(6) Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off
the gas. Such means shall be located outside the building and shall
be maintained in good operating condition.
A. General requirements.
(1) Residential buildings intended for occupancy between the first day
of November and the first day of May of the following year shall be
provided with heating equipment designed to maintain a
temperature of not less than 70° F. at a distance of three feet and
more from exterior walls, and at a level of five feet above the floor,
in habitable spaces, kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms. The
capability of the heating equipment to maintain such indoor
temperature shall be based on the average of the recorded annual
minimum outside temperatures for the locality.
(2) In multiple dwellings, adequate heat shall be provided to maintain
the indoor temperature in habitable spaces, kitchenettes,
bathrooms and toilet rooms at 70° F. from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
when the outside temperature falls below 55° F.
B. Smoke control. Fuel-burning heat-producing equipment shall be
installed and maintained so that the emission or discharge into the
atmosphere of smoke, dust, particles, odors or other products of
combustion will not create a nuisance or be detrimental to the health,
comfort, safety or property of any person.
C. Warm-air heating. Ducts and other air-handling equipment used for
heating shall conform to the requirements of such equipment used for
ventilating purposes.
D. Prohibited locations for heat-producing equipment. Fuel-burning water
heaters shall not be located in sleeping rooms, bathrooms or toilet
rooms.
E. Fuel supply connection. Fuel-burning equipment shall be permanently
fastened and connected in place. Fuel supply connections to such
equipment shall be made with pipe or tubing of solid metal.
F. Installation and clearance. Where heat-producing equipment is
installed on, or adjacent to, combustible materials, the location,
insulation, clearance and the control of the equipment shall be such
that the temperature on the surface of the combustible materials will
not exceed a safe temperature.
G. Air supply.
§ 245-29 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-30
1:230
§ 245-31. Chimneys, flues and gas vents.
(1) Direct-fired heat-producing equipment and the enclosure in which
it is located shall be provided with a supply of air adequate both for
complete combustion at the rated gross output of the equipment
and for the ventilation of the enclosure to prevent the accumulation
of heat.
(2) Rooms containing fuel-burning equipment shall have such air
supply provided by means of one or more openings to the exterior,
or by means of fixed openings to interior spaces which open to the
exterior.
H. Removal of products of combustion.
(1) Equipment for burning solid or liquid fuel shall be connected to
suitable chimneys or flues and shall not be connected to gas vents.
Unvented heaters burning liquid fuel shall be prohibited.
(2) Fuel-burning space heaters located in sleeping rooms or rooms
normally kept closed shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue
or gas vent.
(3) Gas-fired equipment shall be connected to a suitable chimney, flue
or gas vent when the discharge of products of combustion into the
space where the equipment is installed would be a hazard.
I. Safety devices.
(1) Equipment capable of developing hazardous pressures or
temperatures shall be provided with means to relieve safely such
pressures and temperatures.
(2) Controls for the safe operation of automatically operated heatproducing
equipment shall be provided to function as follows:
(a) When failure or interruption of flame or ignition occurs, the
fuel supply shall be cut off. When a predetermined temperature
or pressure is exceeded, the input of additional heat shall be
prevented or reduced to a safe rate. When the water level in a
steam boiler drops below a predetermined level, the fuel
supply shall be cut off. When failure or interruption of pilot
light or main burner of liquefied petroleum gas equipment
occurs, the fuel supply to each pilot light and main burner shall
be cut off.
J. Heating of garages. Fuel-burning equipment for garages servicing
multiple dwellings shall be located in heater rooms, except that
equipment burning gas or liquid fuel, located in the vehicle storage
space, shall be permitted in stories at or above grade where elevated so
as not to be exposed to possible accumulation of flammable gases.
A. General requirements.
§ 245-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-31
1:231
§ 245-32. Incinerators.
(1) Chimneys, flues, gas vents and their supports shall be installed and
maintained so as to be structurally safe, durable, smoketight,
noncombustible and capable of withstanding the action of flue
gases without softening, cracking, corroding or spalling.
(2) Such facilities shall effectively convey the products of combustion
to the outer air.
(3) Masonry chimneys, except approved prefabricated chimneys, shall
have noncombustible foundations.
(4) Flue linings shall be capable of withstanding the action of flue gas
without softening, cracking, corroding or spalling at the
temperature to which they will be subjected.
(5) Openings for smoke pipes or gas vent connections shall be
provided with means for easy connection without restriction of flue.
(6) No flue shall have smoke-pipe or gas vent connections in more than
one story of a building.
(7) Fuel-burning equipment and fireplaces located in different
tenancies shall not be connected to the same flue.
B. Fire safety. Chimneys, flues and gas vents shall be installed and
maintained so that under conditions of use the temperature of any
combustible material adjacent thereto, insulated therefrom or in
contact therewith does not exceed a safe temperature.
C. Spark arresters. A chimney or flue connected to an incinerator and a
chimney or flue which may emit sparks shall be provided with a spark
arrester of noncombustible construction. Spark arresters shall have
sufficient total clear area to permit unrestricted passage of flue gases.
Openings in spark arresters shall be of such size as to prevent passage
of embers and to minimize clogging by soot.
A. General requirements.
(1) Incinerators shall be of adequate capacity for the intended use.
(2) Flue-fed incinerators shall be equipped with means for burning
auxiliary fuel in sufficient quantity to assure complete combustion
of refuse.
(3) A flue serving an incinerator shall be provided with a substantially
constructed spark arrester.
(4) Incinerators shall be connected to a suitable noncombustible
chimney, smokestack or flue.
(5) Connections to incinerators shall provide free passage of refuse
without clogging.
§ 245-31 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-32
1:232
§ 245-33. Electrical.
B. Service openings.
(1) Service openings shall be readily accessible to the building
occupants.
(2) Durable signs with plainly legible letters prohibiting disposal of
highly flammable substances in incinerators shall be provided near
service openings.
A. General requirements.
(1) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be installed in conformity
with generally accepted standards and maintained so as not to be a
potential source of electrical hazard.
(2) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be firmly secured to the
surface on which it is mounted.
(3) Electrical wiring and equipment installed in damp or wet locations
or where exposed to explosive or flammable gases, or to excessive
temperatures, shall be of a type approved for the purpose and
location.
(4) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be protected against
excessive current by properly rated overcurrent devices.
(5) Electrical wiring and equipment shall be grounded or otherwise
protected by insulation, isolation or guarding so as to minimize the
danger of high voltages from lightning or other causes.
(6) Electrical equipment which in ordinary operation produces arcs or
sparks shall be enclosed unless separated and isolated from all
combustible material.
(7) Service equipment and overcurrent protection devices shall be
installed and maintained in a readily accessible location.
B. Artificial lighting.
(1) Residential buildings and occupancies shall be wired for electricity,
and lighting equipment shall be installed throughout to provide
adequate illumination for the intended use of each space. Electric
wiring systems shall be connected to an adequate source of supply.
(2) There shall be a switch or other means for controlling a light in
each dwelling unit near the point of entrance to such unit.
C. Exit and directional signs.
(1) Exits in multiple dwellings shall be provided with exit and
directional signs, visible from the approach to the exits, except that
such signs shall not be required in those portions of a building
§ 245-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-33
1:233
§ 245-34. Cooking and refrigeration.
§ 245-35. Air conditioning and mechanical ventilation in one- and
two-family dwellings.
which contain dwelling units only, or in which exit from sleeping
rooms is directly to the outside.
(2) Directional signs shall be provided at locations from which the exit
doorway is not readily discernible.
(3) Such signs shall be worded in plainly legible block letters with the
word EXIT for exit signs and the words TO EXIT, with a suitable
pointer or arrow indicating the direction of exit, for directional
signs. Letters for signs shall be conspicuous, readily discernible
and at least six inches high, except that for internally illuminated
signs the height of such letters shall be at least 4 1/2 inches.
(4) Exit and directional signs shall be illuminated either externally or
internally by electric lights, and shall be kept illuminated at all
times when the building is occupied.
A. General requirements.
(1) Each dwelling unit shall be provided with appropriate cooking and
refrigeration equipment.
(2) Cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
(3) Gas-burning cooking equipment shall be permanently fastened and
connected in place. Gas-supply connection to such equipment shall
be made with pipe or tubing of solid metal.
(4) Solid-fuel-burning cooking equipment shall be appropriately
vented.
B. Communal cooking and dining facilities. Communal kitchens and dining
rooms shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Communal kitchens shall contain: at least one kitchen sink; at least
one kitchen gas or electric stove equipped with an oven and not
less than four top burners; and at least one electric or gas-type
refrigerator with adequate food storage capacity, but in no case
less than eight cubic feet nominal size. Dining space and eating
facilities, where provided in the kitchen area, shall comply with the
requirements for communal dining rooms.
(2) Communal dining rooms shall contain at least one dining chair and
two lineal feet of dining space for such occupant permitted in a
dining room at any particular time.
§ 245-33 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-35
1:234
§ 245-36. Air conditioning and mechanical ventilation in multiple
dwellings.
A. Exhaust air from a dwelling unit shall not be circulated to another
dwelling unit.
B. Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately firestopped.
A. Refrigerants.
(1) Refrigerants that are highly flammable shall not be used in multiple
dwellings.
(2) Direct systems using refrigerants that are flammable or toxic shall
not be used for air-conditioning purposes.
B. Ventilating systems.
(1) Ventilating systems shall be installed and maintained so that the
rapid spread of heat, flame or smoke through the system will be
prevented, and so that under conditions of use the temperature of
any combustible material adjacent thereto, or in contact therewith,
will not exceed a safe temperature.
(2) Stairways, passageways, exits, shafts, hoistways or attics shall not
be used as plenum chambers.
(3) Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately firestopped.
(4) Ducts and other air-handling equipment shall be of noncombustible
material.
(5) Filters shall be installed and maintained so as not to constitute a
fire or smoke hazard.
(6) Ducts passing through or located within combustible construction
shall be separated from such construction by a clearance of at least
1/2 inch or by a noncombustible insulating material at least 1/4
inch thick.
(7) Air required for ventilation shall be taken from the exterior or shall
be quality-controlled.
(8) Exhaust air from a dwelling unit or a space whose contents may
emit odors, fumes or vapors shall not be circulated to other
occupied spaces within the building.
C. Air intake and exhaust openings.
(1) Air intake and exhaust openings shall be installed, located and
maintained so as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance, and so as
§ 245-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-36
1:235
§ 245-37. Fuel oil.
to prevent the possibility of fire, smoke, fumes or foreign matter
being drawn into the system.
(2) Ventilating system shall be provided with adequate openings for
incoming and outgoing air to obtain the required circulation. Intake
openings shall provide air from an uncontaminated source.
(3) Where openings for mechanical exhaust are located in spaces that
also contain fuel-burning equipment, there shall be provided fixed
intake openings from the exterior to supply sufficient air so that the
fuel-burning equipment is not adversely affected.
(4) Exhaust openings shall be located so that the exhaust air will not
create a nuisance.
D. Ventilation requirements.
(1) Enclosures or spaces where heat, gases, vapors or odors may
accumulate and become a potential source of hazard or nuisance
shall be provided with adequate means of ventilation to remove
such excess.
(2) Public spaces shall be provided with means for obtaining air supply
for the maximum number of persons for which such spaces are
designed.
E. Safety controls.
(1) Manually operated controls shall be provided to stop the operation
of all central fan equipment. Such controls shall be conspicuously
identified and in readily accessible locations outside the fan room.
(2) Every system using recirculated air and serving an assembly space
or more than one fire area, or more than one story of a building
shall be provided with controls arranged so that under abnormal
rise in temperature of the air in the system the fans causing normal
circulation shall stop and require manual restart.
(3) Every system for ventilating an assembly space shall be provided
with an emergency switch conveniently located and with a durable
sign giving instructions for shutting down the system in case of fire.
A. General requirements. Fuel oil shall be received, stored and conveyed
by means of fixed liquidtight equipment.
B. Storage tanks.
(1) Tanks shall be provided with means for venting.
(2) Tanks shall be installed and maintained so as not to be a hazard to
the premises served or the surrounding property.
§ 245-36 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-37
1:236
§ 245-38. Fire protection in multiple dwellings.
§ 245-39. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators in multiple
dwellings.
C. Piping.
(1) Automatically operated boilers and furnaces using fuel oil shall be
provided with remote controls to stop the flow of oil during a fire or
other emergency.
(2) Filling, emptying and venting of tanks shall be by means of fixed
piping. Pipes to underground tanks shall be pitched toward tanks.
Terminals of fill and vent pipes shall be located outside buildings at
a safe distance from building openings.
A. Fire-alarm systems. Required fire-alarm systems shall be maintained in
proper operating condition at all times.
B. Sprinkler equipment.
(1) Required sprinkler equipment shall be maintained in proper
operating condition at all times. Storage of materials shall cause
minimum interference to effective discharge of water.
(2) Valves controlling water supply to sprinklers shall be secure in the
open position.
(3) Sprinkler heads shall be maintained free of corrosion and paint.
C. Standpipe systems.
(1) Standpipe systems shall be maintained in proper operating
condition at all times.
(2) Gate valves at hose stations shall be maintained tight against leaks.
(3) Hose shall be in proper position ready for operation, dry and free of
deterioration.
D. Portable extinguishers.
(1) Each oil burner for a boiler, furnace or central hot water heater
shall be provided with an approved hand fire extinguisher or two
rounded-bottom pails filled with sand.
(2) Portable extinguishers required for fire protection shall be in their
designated locations and in a condition which will permit efficient
operation without delay.
A. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained so as to be
free from physical and fire hazards.
§ 245-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-39
1:237
B. Elevator and power-operated dumbwaiter cars shall be provided with
durable signs in conspicuous locations on which the rated capacity shall
be indicated.
C. Elevator cars shall be provided with approved means for transmitting a
signal outside the hoistway in case of emergency.
D. Hoistways and pits shall be maintained free of refuse.
E. Machine rooms shall be maintained free of oil and grease and shall not
be used for storage of articles or materials unnecessary for the
maintenance of the elevator or dumbwaiter. Flammable liquids shall not
be kept in such rooms.
F. No person shall at any time make any required safety device or
electrical protective device inoperative, except where necessary during
tests, inspections or maintenance.
§ 245-39 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-39
1:238
ARTICLE VI
Property Maintenance Requirements
§ 245-40. General requirements.20
Residential premises shall be maintained in conformity with the provisions
of Parts 1 and 2 of this chapter so as to assure the desirable residential
character of the property.
§ 245-41. Open areas.
§ 245-42. Buildings and structures.
§ 245-43. Infestation and screening.
A. Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect
buildings and structures and to prevent development of stagnant ponds.
Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers,
approved combined storm and sanitary sewers or other satisfactory
drainage systems shall be utilized where deemed necessary.
B. Fences and other minor constructions shall be maintained in safe and
substantial condition.
C. Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas shall
be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and
weather conditions.
D. Yards and courts shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards.
E. Heavy undergrowths and accumulations of plant growth which are
noxious or detrimental to health shall be eliminated.
A. Exterior wood surfaces of buildings and structures that are not
inherently resistant to deterioration shall be periodically treated with a
protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative.
B. Floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures of residential buildings
shall be maintained in clean and sanitary condition.
C. Accessory structures shall be maintained so as to be free of conditions
detrimental to safety or health.
A. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
exterminating insects, vermin and rodents shall conform with generally
accepted practice.
B. Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows
and other openings in basements and cellars shall be appropriately
screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
20.Editor's Note: See Also Ch. 310, Property Maintenance.
§ 245-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-43
1:239
§ 245-44. Garbage and refuse.21
§ 245-45. Domestic animals and pets.22
Domestic animals and pets shall be kept in an appropriate manner and shall
not be permitted to run at large.
C. From May 1 to October 1, entrances to residential buildings shall be
provided with self-closing-type devices or screens, and windows and
other openings used for ventilation shall be appropriately screened.
Screens shall not be required in rooms located sufficiently high in the
upper stories of multiple dwellings as to be free of mosquitoes, flies,
and other flying insects.
A. Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and refuse.
B. In multiple dwellings, it shall be prohibited to store or accumulate
garbage or refuse in public halls and stairways.
21.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 347, Solid Waste.
22.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 123, Animals.
§ 245-43 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-45
1:240
Part 2
[Adopted 6-2A2d-m19in6i4st(rCahti.o 3n0 A, nPdar Ct o2m, Opfli aTnhcee 1965 Code)]
ARTICLE VII
General Provisions
§ 245-46. Title.
This Part 2 shall be known as "Administration and Compliance Provisions
Supplementary to Applicable Housing Standards."
§ 245-47. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 2 is to provide basic and uniform administration
of, and compliance with, applicable housing standards, and to establish the
responsibilities of parties concerned therewith.
§ 245-48. Effective date.
This Part 2 shall take effect on June 22, 1964.
§ 245-49. Scope.
This Part 2 shall apply to administration of, and compliance with, applicable
housing standards.
§ 245-50. Nonapplicability.
This Part 2 shall not apply to premises which are not within the scope of
applicable housing standards.
§ 245-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-50
1:241

ARTICLE VIII
Administration
§ 245-51. Administrative agency.
§ 245-52. Powers and duties of agency.
A. There shall be established or designated by local law in the Village of
Sleepy Hollow an agency to administer and secure compliance with the
applicable housing standards. Such agency is hereinafter referred to as
"the agency."
B. The agency shall be under the direction and charge of a chief officer
who shall have as his representatives such assistants and inspectors as
may be necessary to carry out effectively the powers and duties of the
agency.
C. All personnel of the agency shall be qualified and appointed as
prescribed by local law, and shall be furnished with appropriate official
badges or identification cards.
D. All personnel of the agency shall be free from personal liability for acts
done in good faith in the performance of their official duties.
E. The agency shall become part of the Sleepy Hollow Department of
Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings and Building
Compliance. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
F. The chief officer shall be the Superintendent of Buildings or the
Building Inspector.
A. The agency shall be charged with the duty of administering the
applicable housing standards and securing compliance therewith, and
shall be empowered to adopt rules and regulations necessary for
securing such compliance and for its own organization and internal
management, provided that such rules and regulations shall not be in
conflict with the applicable housing standards.
B. The agency shall be authorized to conduct surveys of housing in any
area of the municipality to determine the condition of premises, extent
of deterioration, lack of facilities, inadequate maintenance, unsafe and
insanitary conditions, extent of overcrowding, land use and other
relevant factors.
C. It shall be the duty of the chief officer:
(1) To cause periodic inspections to be made, not less than once every
five years, of all premises within the scope of applicable housing
standards.
(2) To cause an investigation of all complaints of alleged housing
violations or other unsafe or insanitary conditions.
§ 245-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-52
1:243
§ 245-53. Inspections.
§ 245-54. Records.
The agency shall keep records of all complaints received, inspections made
and violations found regarding premises regulated by the housing
standards. Records shall be kept in a manner and form as prescribed by
local law and shall be available for public inspection.
(3) To order in writing the remedying of all conditions found to exist in
or on any premises in violation of provisions of the housing
standards or of rules and regulations adopted by the agency, to
state in the violation order a reasonable time limit for compliance
therewith and, where necessary, to order the vacating of premises
found unfit for human habitation.
(4) To request the chief legal officer of the municipality to take
appropriate legal action in the name of the agency upon failure of
the responsible party to comply with such violation order within the
time specified therein.
(5) To cause a search of the agency's records of housing violations
existing on any premises and to issue a certified statement thereof
upon receipt of written request and payment of any fees required
by local law or resolution.
(6) To study housing conditions in the municipality.
(7) To cooperate with other municipal, governmental and private
agencies engaged in the study and improvement of housing
conditions.
(8) To publish an annual report of housing conditions in the
municipality, accomplishments of the agency and recommendations
for the future.
D. Where violations of the housing standards exist and pose an immediate
hazard or danger to the health, safety or welfare of building occupants
or of the public, the chief officer may issue an order citing the violation
and directing such action by such municipal agency as is necessary to
remove or abate the immediate hazard or danger.
A. Inspectors shall be authorized and have the right, in the performance of
their duties, to enter any premises during normal business hours and in
emergencies whenever necessary to protect the public interest.
B. Owners, agents, operators and occupants shall be responsible for
providing access to all parts of the premises within their control to
authorized agency personnel acting in the performance of their duties.
§ 245-52 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-55
1:244
§ 245-55. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-15-1985 by L.L. No.
4-1985]
For any and every violation of the provisions of this code issued by the
agency, the owner, agent, contractor or other person interested as lessee,
tenant or otherwise in any building or premises where such violation has
been committed or shall exist, and who refuses to abate said violation within
the time limit stated thereon after written notice has been served upon him,
either by mail or personal service, shall for each and every violation, and for
each and every day that such violation continues, be subject to a fine not to
exceed $250, and the collection thereof shall be prosecuted in the manner
prescribed by law effective in the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 245-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-55
1:245

ARTICLE IX
Compliance
§ 245-56. Responsibilities of owners.
§ 245-57. Responsibilities of lodging house operators.
Lodging house operators shall be responsible for compliance with the
housing standards in regard to the following:
§ 245-58. Responsibilities of occupants.
Occupants of dwelling units shall be responsible for compliance with the
housing standards in regard to the following:
A. Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with the
housing standards, and shall remain responsible therefor regardless of
the fact that Parts 1 and 2 of this chapter may also place certain
responsibilities on operators and occupants and regardless of any
agreements between owners and operators or occupants as to which
party shall assume such responsibility.
B. Owners of premises shall be responsible for proper maintenance,
condition and operation of service facilities and for furnishing adequate
heat and hot water supply in multiple dwellings.
A. Limiting occupancy to the maximum permitted by the housing
standards.
B. Maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions in all parts of lodging
house premises.
C. Maintenance and operation of all required service facilities.
D. Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances within their control, as well as other building equipment and
facilities, in an operative, clean and sanitary condition.
E. Sanitary maintenance of walls, floors and ceilings.
F. Keeping exits clear and unencumbered.
G. Disposal of building garbage and refuse in a clean and sanitary manner.
H. Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests on the premises.
I. Hanging and removing required screens.
A. Limiting occupancy of that part of the premises which they occupy or
control to the maximum permitted by the housing standards.
B. Maintenance of that part of the premises which they occupy or control
in a clean, sanitary and safe condition.
§ 245-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-58
1:247
C. Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances, as well as other building equipment and storage facilities in
that part of the premises which they occupy or control, in a clean and
sanitary condition, and providing reasonable care in the operation and
use thereof.
D. Keeping exits from their dwelling unit clear and unencumbered.
E. Disposal of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a clean and
sanitary manner.
F. Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests within their dwelling
unit if their unit is the only one infested in the premises.
G. Hanging and removing required screens.
H. Keeping their domestic animals and pets in an appropriate manner and
under control.
§ 245-58 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-58
1:248
Part 3
[Adopted 7-14-198S6upBpyleLm.Le.n Ntaol. H1-o1u9s8in6g( CShta. n3d0aAr dOsf The 1965 Code)]
ARTICLE X
Scope and Applicability
§ 245-59. Title.
This Part 3 shall be known as the "Sleepy Hollow Housing Standards Code,"
hereinafter referred to as "this Part 3."
§ 245-60. Effective date.
This Part 3 shall take effect on July 26, 1986.
§ 245-61. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 3 is to ensure that housing standards are
maintained at a level that is adequate for protection of the health, safety,
welfare and well-being of the occupants, the community and the general
public by:
§ 245-62. Applicability to residential premises.
§ 245-63. Applicability to other legislation.
The provisions of this Part 3 shall supplement any zoning, building,
electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, or health law, code or regulation of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow, the Westchester County Board of Health, the
County of Westchester and the State of New York.
A. Establishing minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for
light, ventilation and heating; for safety from fire; for use, location and
amount of space for human occupancy; and for safe and sanitary
maintenance.
B. Ascribing responsibilities of owners and occupants for maintaining
these standards.
C. Providing for the administration of and compliance with this Part 3.
A. This Part 3 shall apply to all buildings, whether in existence now or in
the future, which are used as one- and two-family dwellings, multiple
dwellings, rooming houses, group homes and mixed occupancy
buildings.
B. This Part 3 establishes minimum requirements for the initial and
continued occupancy and use of all residential structures and premises.
It does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established for
the construction, repair, alteration or use of structures, equipment or
facilities, except where obvious hazards to life, sanitation or adjoining
properties are involved.
§ 245-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-64
1:249
§ 245-64. Conflicts with other legislation.
Where a provision of this Part 3 is found to be in conflict with any of the
above laws, codes or regulations, the provision which establishes the higher
standard shall prevail.
§ 245-65. Applicability to Building Code.
Where enforcement of a provision of this Part 3 causes any repairs,
alterations or changes to buildings, such repairs, alterations or changes
shall be done in a workmanlike manner and shall comply with all applicable
laws, codes and regulations and applicable sections of the Building Code of
Sleepy Hollow.23
§ 245-66. Saving clause.
This Part 3 shall not affect violations of any other laws, codes or regulations
of Sleepy Hollow existing prior to the effective date of this Part 3, and such
violations shall be governed and punishable to the full extent of the law
under the provisions of those laws, codes or regulations in effect at the time
the violation was committed.
§ 245-67. Existing remedies.
This Part 3 shall not abolish or impair existing remedies of Sleepy Hollow
relating to the removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to
be dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Building Construction.
§ 245-64 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-67
1:250
ARTICLE XI
Definitions; Word Usage
§ 245-68. Terms defined.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this Part 3:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental to
that of the main building, and which is attached to or located on the same
premises.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly below grade, which
has more than 1/2 of its height, measured from clear floor to ceiling, above
the average finished grade of the ground abutting the building.
BULK CONTAINER — A garbage container having a capacity of two cubic
yards or greater and which is equipped with fittings for hydraulic and/or
mechanical emptying, unloading and/or removal.
CELLAR — The lowermost portion of a building, partly or totally
underground, having half or more of its height, measured from clear floor
to ceiling, below the average finished grade of the ground abutting the
building.
COMBUSTIBLE — Material or a combination of materials that will ignite
and support combustion when heated to any temperature up to 1,382° F.
(750° C.), during an exposure for five minutes.
CONDEMN — To adjudge unfit for use or occupancy.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Building of the municipality, or a
department which regulates the administration and enforcement of this Part
3.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
residential building and forming a single habitable unit, containing living,
cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
EGRESS — An arrangement of exit facilities to assure a safe means of exit
from a building.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer or other designated authority
charged with the administration and enforcement of this Part 3.
EXIT — A means of departure from the interior of a building to the exterior,
at a street or to a yard, court or passageway leading to public open areas,
including doorways, passageways, hallways, corridors, stairways, ramps,
fire escapes and all other elements necessary for egress or escape.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, vermin, rodents
and other pests by eliminating their harborage areas; by removing or
making inaccessible materials that might serve as their food; by poisoning,
spraying, fumigating, trapping or using any other recognized and legal pestelimination
methods approved by the Building Inspector.
§ 245-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-68
1:251
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING — Time in hours, or parts thereof, that a
material, construction or assembly will withstand fire exposure, as
determined in a fire test made in conformity with generally accepted
standards or as determined by extension or interpretation of information
derived therefrom.
FLAME-RESISTANT MATERIAL — Material that is flame-resistant by nature
or has been made flame-resistant, in conformity with generally accepted
standards.
FLUSH WATER CLOSET — A toilet bowl that is flushed with water supplied
under pressure and equipped with a water-sealed trap above the floor level.
FUMIGATION — Extermination by the use of fumigants. A "fumigant" is
any substance that, by itself or in combination with any other substance,
emits or liberates a gas or gases or fumes or vapors which, when liberated
and used for the destruction or control of insects, vermin, rodents or other
pests, are lethal, poisonous, noxious or dangerous to human life.
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food, trash and unwanted matter.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total area of all habitable space.
GROUP HOME — A family-type home for the care and maintenance of seven
to 12 individuals, operated by an authorized agency.
GUEST — A person who shares a dwelling unit in a nonpermanent status
for not more than 30 days.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space occupied by one or more persons for living,
sleeping, eating or cooking, excluding kitchenettes, bathrooms, watercloset
rooms, laundries, pantries, dressing rooms, storage spaces, foyers,
hallways, utility rooms, heater rooms, boiler rooms and basement or cellar
recreation rooms.
HOUSEHOLD — One or more persons living together in a single dwelling
unit and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking and eating facilities.
INFESTATION — The presence of a high incidence of insects, vermin,
rodents or other pests within a residential building or on the outdoor
premises.
INSECTICIDE — Any substance, not a fumigant, under whatever name
known, used for the destruction or control of insects and other similar pests.
INTERIOR FINISH — Material applied directly to walls or ceilings for
acoustical correction, surface insulation, decorative treatment or similar
purposes, including but not limited to veneer, wainscoting and paneling.
Surface finished of wallpaper or other materials not more than 1/28 inch
thick, having no greater fire hazard than wallpaper, shall not be deemed to
be "interior finish."
INTERIOR TRIM — Material, generally not exceeding 12 inches in width,
around openings or on a wall or ceiling, including casings, tools, aprons,
§ 245-68 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-68
1:252
baseboards, chair rails, picture moldings, cornice moldings and moldings
applied for decoration.
KITCHEN — Space, 60 square feet or more in floor area, with a minimum
width of five feet, used for cooking or the preparation of food and deemed
habitable space.
KITCHENETTE — Space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used for
cooking or preparation of food and not deemed habitable space.
MULTIPLE DWELLING —
MUNICIPALITY — A county, city, town or village.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE — Material or a combination of materials that will
not ignite and support combustion when heated at any temperature up to
1,382° F. (75° C.), during an exposure for five minutes.
NONHABITABLE SPACE OR AREA — Space used for and including but
not limited to kitchenettes; pantries, bath, toilet, laundry, rest, dressing,
locker, storage, utility, heater and boiler rooms; and other spaces for service
maintenance of the building or structure.
NUISANCE —
OCCUPANT — Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
Any of the following:
A building designed or occupied for residential purposes by three
or more families;
(1)
A series of attached, detached or semidetached buildings which are
provided as a group collectively with essential services and utilities
and which are located on a lot, plot or parcel of land under common
ownership; or
(2)
(3) The residential part of a mixed-occupancy building.
A.
Regardless of the foregoing, any residential building, other than a oneor
two-family house on a single zoning lot, shall be deemed to be a
multiple dwelling.
B.
ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE — Attractive to and detrimental to children.
This includes abandoned wells, shafts, basements and excavations;
abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; any structurally unsound
fences and structures; and lumber, trash, fences, debris and other
vegetation that may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.
A.
HEALTH NUISANCE — Dangerous to human life or detrimental to
health, as determined by the Building Inspector.
B.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — The physical condition or use of any premises
regarded as a public nuisance at common law.
C.
§ 245-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-68
1:253
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a multiple
residence or rooming house in which dwelling units or rooming units are let
or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser
estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in
control of a building.
PERMISSIBLE OCCUPANCY — The maximum number of persons
permitted, as a family or household, to reside in a dwelling unit or rooming
unit based on the square feet per person in habitable rooms.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
POTABLE WATER — Water duly approved as satisfactory and safe for
drinking.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.
PRIVACY — The ability of a person or persons to carry out an activity
without interruption or interference, either by sight or sound, by unwanted
individuals.
PUBLIC AREAS — Areas available for common usage or used for storage
purposes or for mechanical equipment of the dwelling.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer operated by a public authority or public utility
and available for public use.
RATPROOFING — A form of construction that will prevent the ingress or
egress of rats to or from a given space or building or gaining access to
food, water or harborage. It consists of the closing, and keeping closed,
of every opening in foundations, basements, cellars, exterior and interior
walls, ground or first floors, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings and
other places that may be reached and entered by rats climbing, burrowing
or other methods by the use of materials impervious to rat gnawing or by
other methods approved by the Building Inspector.
RODENTICIDE — Any substance, not a fumigant, under whatever name
known, whether poisonous or otherwise, used for the destruction or control
of rodents.
ROOMING HOUSE — A residential building or part thereof which contains
one or more rooming units and in which space is occupied or intended to
be occupied by three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or
daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator.
RUBBISH — All combustible and noncombustible waste, except garbage.
SEWAGE — Waste from a flush toilet, sink, lavatory, dishwashing or laundry
machine, or the water-carried waste from any other fixture or equipment or
machine.
§ 245-68 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-68
1:254
SPACE HEATER — A self-contained heating appliance of either the
convection type or the radiant type and intended primarily to heat only a
limited space or area such as one room or two adjoining rooms.
§ 245-69. Construal of certain words.
Whenever the words "building," "rooming house," "dwelling unit," "rooming
unit," "premises" and "structure" are used in this Part 3, they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof."
§ 245-70. Word usage.
§ 245-71. Reference to standards.
The words "approved," "adequate," "properly installed" and "properly
connected" shall refer to those standards in the Multiple Residence Law,
local building code and any other enactment of law applicable to a building
or under inspection by the Department and all rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to this Part 3. Words not specifically defined in this Part 3
shall have the common definition set forth in a standard dictionary.
A. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the
singular; the masculine gender includes the feminine and the feminine
the masculine.
B. As used in this Part 3, "shall" is always to be construed as mandatory.
§ 245-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-71
1:255

ARTICLE XII
Administration
§ 245-72. Administration and enforcement of provisions.
§ 245-73. Personnel.
§ 245-74. Rules and regulations.
The Department is empowered to adopt, revise, amend and enforce rules
and regulations necessary for securing compliance with this Part 3, and, for
its own organization and internal management; such rules and regulations
shall not be in conflict with this Part 3 or with any provision of law.
§ 245-75. Records.
An official record shall be kept of all activities of the Department specified
in the provisions of this Part 3, and all such records shall be available for
public inspection at appropriate times and under reasonable regulations
established by the Building Inspector to maintain the security and integrity
of such records.
A. The Department of Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings and
Building Compliance of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, by its chief
executive, is hereby designated responsible for administering and
enforcing the provisions of this Part 3. Such department or agency is
hereinafter referred to as "the Department." [Amended 3-23-2010 by
L.L. No. 4-2010]
B. Within the Department, the chief investigative officer for the purpose of
administering this Part 3 shall be referred to as "the Building Inspector"
and shall be under the direction and supervision of the chief executive
officer and the Building Inspector of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
C. The chief executive officer may also delegate, hire or contract with any
person, firm or body to supplement or assist the Building Inspector,
subject, however, to the approval of the local governing board.
A. Personnel qualifications. Personnel of this Department shall be
qualified and appointed as prescribed by local law and may be
furnished with appropriate official badges, identification cards, or both.
B. Administrative liability. Any personnel of this Department shall be free
from personal liability for acts done in good faith in the performance of
official duties. Further, personnel shall not be held liable for any costs in
any action, suit or proceeding that may be instituted by such person in
the enforcement of this Part 3. In any of these actions, the personnel
shall be defended or represented by the Municipal Attorney, until the
final termination of the proceedings.
§ 245-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-76
1:257
§ 245-76. Duties of Department.
It shall be the duty of the Department to:
§ 245-77. Registration of multiple dwellings.
Every owner of a multiple dwelling shall file with the Department the
following current information:
A. Suggest amendments to this Part 3 as are necessary to bring it up-todate,
when local needs dictate.
B. Cause inspections to be made of premises within the scope of this Part
3.
C. Cause an investigation of complaints of alleged violations of this Part 3.
D. Develop a system of records, inspection forms, form letters and controls
for properly carrying out departmental activities.
E. Issue written orders for the elimination of conditions in violation of this
Part 3, and, where appropriate, order the cessation of an unlawful use
or nuisance or the vacation, demolition or repair of premises found
dangerous or unsafe, and to state in the violation order a reasonable
time limit for compliance herewith and the time within which an appeal
may be made.
F. Initiate techniques that will encourage and assist owners to voluntarily
bring their property up to the standards of this Part 3.
G. Request the Municipal Attorney to take appropriate legal action upon
failure to comply with a violation notice or notices.
H. Require independent inspections and tests of equipment and systems
used in connection with premises.
I. Cooperate with other public and private agencies engaged in the study
and improvement of housing and environmental conditions.
J. Carry out any additional activities necessary to administer and achieve
compliance with this Part 3.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the owner.
B. The corporate name and names, titles, addresses and telephone
numbers of the responsible officers of the corporation if the building is
owned by a corporation.
C. The name, address and telephone number of a local responsible person
over 21 years old, residing or doing business in the municipality, who
shall be responsible for the care and management of such dwelling and
is authorized to accept legal process on behalf of the owner when the
owner lives or is out of the municipal limits.
§ 245-76 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-77
1:258
§ 245-78. Name of owner and agent of multiple dwelling to be
posted. [Amended 3-23-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
Every owner of a multiple dwelling shall post, in a conspicuous place in such
dwelling, the name, address and telephone number of a local responsible
person over 21 years old residing in or doing business in the municipality,
who shall be responsible for the care and management of such dwelling
when the owner lives or is out of the municipal limits. Except when it is
necessary to replace this information, no person shall remove, mutilate,
destroy or obliterate any such sign or the lettering thereon.
§ 245-79. Inspections.
The Department is authorized to develop, adopt and carry out plans for the
inspection and reinspection of all premises in order to safeguard the safety,
health and welfare of the public, subject to the provisions of this Part 3.
§ 245-80. Right of entry.
The Building Inspector and the assistant building inspectors shall be
authorized to enter any structure or premises at any reasonable time, upon
display of proper identification, for the purpose of making inspections under
this Part 3.
§ 245-81. Access by owner or operator.
Every occupant of a residential structure or premises shall give the owner
or operator thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such
structure or its premises at reasonable times and in emergencies at any
time for the purpose of making necessary inspections, repairs or alterations
so as to comply with the provisions of this Part 3.
D. The name, address and telephone number of the new owner within 48
hours after having sold or otherwise disposed of ownership in said
dwelling.
E. Any other changes applicable to owner registration.
A. If admission is refused or cannot be obtained from the owner, occupant
or operator of a residential structure, the Building Inspector and the
assistant building inspectors shall be authorized to obtain a search
warrant to make an inspection, provided that reasonable or probable
cause is shown.
B. In case of an emergency, the Building Inspector and the assistant
building inspectors may, without a search warrant, enter any premises
or parts of premises to inspect at any time, without the permission of
the owner, occupant or operator.
§ 245-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-82
1:259
§ 245-82. Procedures upon violation. [Amended 3-23-2010 by L.L.
No. 4-2010]
Whenever the Department finds that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this Part 3 or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, the following procedures shall be available:
§ 245-83. Notice of violation.
A notice of violation shall be in writing and shall:
A. Issue a violation notice to the person or persons responsible. The
Department shall also issue a violation notice to the person or persons
responsible for failure to register the ownership of the premises, for
furnishing of a false statement or for interference with the inspector
authorized to enter the premises, or when a structure or premises is
found to be dangerous or unsafe. Once a violation is issued, it may be
classified as either nonhazardous or hazardous and be given specific
time for correction based on the classification of the violation.
B. Issue an appearance ticket. The Building Inspector and each inspector
are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of this code.
Every appearance ticket that is issued, pursuant to the provisions of
this Part 3, shall include the following:
(1) The name and address of the party(s) to whom the ticket is issued,
when known.
(2) The appropriate section(s) allegedly violated.
(3) The place and date of the alleged violation(s).
(4) The place, date and time that the party(s) is (are) required to
appear in court.
(5) The date of issuance of the appearance ticket(s).
(6) The title and signature of the issuing officer(s).
A. Identify the premises.
B. Specify the violation of this Part 3 and may specify remedial action to be
taken.
C. Provide a time limit for compliance of no less than 15 days from the
date of the mailing of the notice in the case of nonhazardous violations.
D. State the time within which an appeal may be made.
E. If the violation constitutes a public nuisance or renders the premises
dangerous or unsafe, include a statement that if the violation is not
remedied within the time limit specified in the notice, the Department
may remedy the violation pursuant to §§ 245-90 and 245-91.
§ 245-82 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-84
1:260
§ 245-84. Service of notice.
Notices of violation shall be served as follows:
§ 245-85. Failure to comply upon reinspection.
If, upon reinspection, the alleged violation is determined by the Building
Inspector not to have been corrected, the Building Inspector may:
§ 245-86. Notice of violation to be recorded.
Whenever a notice or order has been issued for any infraction of this Part
3, the Building Inspector shall keep on file a copy of such notice or order
in the Department. This recording shall constitute notice of such violation,
infraction or order to any subsequent purchaser, grantee, mortgagee or
lessee of the property affected thereby.
A. By personal service;
B. By registered or certified mail to the person whose name and address
has been filed with the Department in accordance with this Part 3 and,
if desired, to the occupant of a copy of such notice;
C. If the current name and address of the person upon whom an order may
be served is not on file or if such person refuses acceptance of such
service or of registered or certified mail, by posting a copy to the
premises, addressed to the owner, lessor or his respective agent; or
[Amended 3-23-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
D. By regular mail.
A. Require a meeting with the property owner or violator to determine
why the notice was not honored; or
B. File an information or accusation of instrument with the Court Clerk to
seek a remedy in the courts.
§ 245-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-86
1:261

ARTICLE XIII
Remedies for Compliance
§ 245-87. Civil penalty.
§ 245-88. Criminal penalty.
A. A person who violates any requirement of this Part 3 or any order of the
Department shall be subject to a cumulative civil penalty, in the court's
discretion, of not less than $250 nor more than $1,500 per day for each
separate violation from the date set for correction in the notice of
violation until the violation is corrected. Such penalty shall increase to
not less than $500 nor more than $2,500 per day for a second or
subsequent violation. This penalty shall be paid forthwith by the
violator. If such payment is not immediately made, it may be collected
by the Department by action against the owner or his agent. A civil suit
to collect said penalty may be commenced in any court of competent
jurisdiction. In addition to the fine, the court may impose a one-year
conditional discharge requiring the defendant to permit access to the
Department to reinspect the premises from time to time during the
period of the conditional discharge.
B. The Department may bring a civil suit in any court having jurisdiction of
the amount claimed for the recovery of civil penalties, together with
costs and disbursements. If the court finds, upon a showing by the
defendant, that sufficient mitigating circumstances exist, it may remit
all or part of the accumulated civil penalties arising from the violation
with respect to which such a showing was made.
C. When the Department obtains a judgment in an action under this Part 3
either against an owner or his agent, in addition to the appropriate
methods of enforcement for judgments established in the Civil Practice
Law and Rules, such judgment for penalties shall constitute a lien and
shall be filed within one year from the entry of judgment and may be
enforced against the premises and upon the rents and compensation
due or then maturing for any rents or compensation without further
proceedings.
A. Any person who willfully or recklessly violates any provision of this Part
3 or fails to comply with any requirement of an order of the
Department, or of the Board of Appeals, or makes or causes any other
person to make any false or misleading statement on any registration
statement, notice or other document required to be filed pursuant to
this Part 3, or any other action by the Department pursuant to this Part
3, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding
$3,000 for each violation, or by imprisonment of up to one year, or by
both such fine and imprisonment. Every day the violation continues
after due notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and
provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate violation. [Amended
3-23-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
§ 245-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-88
1:263
§ 245-89. Injunctive relief.
In addition to, or in lieu of, the civil and criminal penalties provided herein,
any person may be prevented from violating the provisions of this Part 3 by
the Department's seeking injunctive relief in the manner provided by law.
§ 245-90. Dangerous structures.
B. To support a finding of willful violation, evidence that the defendant had
knowledge or notice of the violation and failed to correct the same for
more than 120 days shall be sufficient. This shall not, however, limit the
introduction of other evidence or the finding of willful violation on other
grounds.
C. A person commits a willful violation when that person's action or failure
to act results in a condition constituting a violation of this Part 3 which
will or is likely to endanger the life, health or safety of another person.
A. If all or part of any structure or the equipment for operation, including,
among others, the heating plant, plumbing, electric, wiring, stairways,
elevators and fire protection equipment, shall be found by the Building
Inspector to have significant defects hereinafter described, it shall be
deemed a dangerous structure. [Amended 3-23-2010 by L.L. No.
4-2010]
B. A dangerous structure shall include:
(1) One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary,
difficult to heat, structurally unsafe or vermin-infested that it
creates a hazard to the safety or welfare of the occupants or to the
public or which contain lead-based paint that is dangerous or likely
to become dangerous to the health of small children;
(2) One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitary facilities
adequate to protect the safety or welfare of the occupants or to the
public;
(3) One which, because of its general condition or location, is
unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to the safety or welfare to the
occupants or to the public;
(4) One which is so overcrowded with occupants that it constitutes a
public nuisance or is a health hazard to its occupants;
(5) One which is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
faulty construction such that the removal, movement or instability
of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of
supporting such building or the deterioration, decay or inadequacy
of its foundation or other similar cause is likely to partially or
completely collapse the structure;
§ 245-88 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-90
1:264
§ 245-91. Condemnation of unfit dwelling unit or structure.
[Amended 3-23-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
(6) One in which the exterior and interior walls or other vertical
members lean, buckle or twist to such an extent as to endanger life,
limb and property;
(7) One which is being used in such a manner and condition to
constitute a public nuisance;
(8) One which is vacant, open to trespass, unoccupied and an
attractive nuisance to anyone on or near the premises, thereby
endangering life, health and property; or
(9) One which has been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to
no longer provide shelter from the elements and has become or
threatens to become dangerous to life, safety or the general health
and welfare of anyone on or near the premises.
A. Notice. Whenever the Building Inspector determines that a structure or
dwelling unit is dangerous and unfit for human habitation, the Building
Inspector shall give notice of condemnation to the owner and of his
intent to placard and vacate the structure or dwelling unit, if
compliance with the provisions of the notice of condemnation is not
secured. Any person affected by any such notice may request and shall
be granted a hearing on the matter before the Board of Appeals.
B. Placarding. The Building Inspector or the assistant building inspectors
shall post in a conspicuous place on the affected dwelling unit or
structure a placard bearing the words "THIS BUILDING IS UNSAFE
AND ITS OCCUPANCY AND USE HAS BEEN PROHIBITED."
C. Vacating. Any dwelling unit or structure which has been condemned
shall be vacated within a reasonable time as required by the Building
Inspector and shall not be used for human habitation again until written
approval is secured from the Building Inspector. The owner or operator
of such unit or structure shall make such unit or structure safe and
secure in whatever manner the Building Inspector shall deem
necessary. Any vacant building, open at doors and windows, if
unguarded, shall be deemed dangerous to human life and a nuisance.
D. Order to disconnect utilities. Whenever any dwelling unit or structure
has been placarded and vacated, the Department shall order services
and utilities to be turned off or disconnected and all utility meters to be
removed.
E. Order to make repairs or demolish. Whenever the Building Inspector
designates a building unfit for human habitation, unsafe to the
community in its vacant state and determines that the cost necessary to
correct the violation is not reasonably related to the value of the
building, the Building Inspector shall order the demolition of the
structure. A copy of such notice shall be served on the owner and copies
§ 245-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-91
1:265
§ 245-92. Emergency repair program.
shall be sent to other agencies, including the Police and Fire
Departments. The owner may demolish such structure, convert the
structure into another use, rehabilitate the structure or correct the
violation regardless of cost, provided that the requirements of this Part
3 and of the Building Code in effect at the time of attempted compliance
are satisfied.
F. Department to make repairs or demolish. Whenever a notice or order to
remove a violation, secure, vacate or demolish a building has not been
complied with, and when such failure to comply is deemed by the
Building Inspector to constitute a danger to the tenants and the
community, the Building Inspector may proceed to have the building
demolished, repaired, rehabilitated, converted, altered, secured,
vacated or take such action as is necessary to abate the nuisance.
Abatement authorized by the provision shall not commence until at
least 10 days after service of such notice. Such procedures and
recovery of expenses shall be served as provided in § 245-92,
Emergency repair program, and work shall be completed within the
time specified by the Building Inspector.
A. Power to act in emergencies. Whenever the Building Inspector finds
that a violation of this Part 3 exists which, in his opinion, requires
immediate action to abate a direct hazard or immediate danger to the
health, safety or welfare of the occupants of a building or of the public,
the Building Inspector may, without prior notice or hearing, issue an
order citing the violation and directing that such action be taken as is
necessary to remove or abate the hazard or danger. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this Part 3, such an order shall be effective
immediately upon service and shall be complied with immediately or as
otherwise provided. [Amended 3-23-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
B. Emergencies include, but are not limited to:
(1) Failure to supply utilities, such as heat, water, light and gas;
(2) Inability to drain the waste system;
(3) Large amounts of falling plaster condition;
(4) Extreme overgrowth of noxious weeds;
(5) Infestation of rats and other disease-bearing rodents and insects;
(6) Stormwater flooding or similar conditions which endanger the
operability of the affected premises; or
(7) Any condition listed in § 245-90, Dangerous structures.
C. Abatement of hazards in emergencies. Whenever any violation of this
Part 3 which requires immediate action has not been corrected by such
person in the time specified by the order issued, the Building Inspector
§ 245-91 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-92
1:266
§ 245-93. Structures imposing serious and immediate risks.
Certain structures impose a serious and immediate risk to public health,
safety and welfare. Such structures are of such age and condition or have
such a history of violations of minimum housing standards that they may
contain harmful or potentially harmful conditions which threaten the health,
safety and welfare of the occupants or the public. It is therefore in the
public interest to authorize the use of special code enforcement remedies in
these cases.
§ 245-94. Code enforcement remedies.
may take such direct action as is necessary to abate the hazard or
danger, including but not limited to the repair of the condition, the
provision of services, the provision of materials necessary to abate the
condition or the demolition of the property.
D. Recovery of expenses. The expenses incurred by the Department in
abating hazardous or dangerous conditions, as provided above, shall be
paid to the Department by such person. The Building Inspector shall file
among his records an affidavit stating, with fairness and accuracy, the
items of expense and the date of execution of actions authorized under
this Part 3. Upon failure of said person to pay the cost of such repairs or
improvements or demolition, the Building Inspector may institute a suit
in the name of the municipality to recover such expenses against any
persons liable for such expenses or may cause such expenses to be
charged and assessed against the property as a lien when the owner is
the willful violator. If such expenses are not paid within 10 days after
demand, the amount thereof shall be added to and become part of the
taxes next to be assessed and levied upon said premises and shall be
collected and enforced in the same manner as taxes.
A. In such cases as described in § 245-93 above, the following remedial
measures may be authorized: The Department is authorized to require
information regarding, but not limited to, tenant turnover, vacancies,
maintenance costs and mortgage indebtedness, status of tax
indebtedness and any other information required by the authorities to
assist in the early identification of problem conditions and buildings.
B. In addition, the Department may require that a building registration
permit be obtained as a condition to the continued occupancy of a
multiple dwelling. Such permit shall be subject to revocation or
modification. The Department may charge a fee for the registration of a
multiple dwelling and the issuance of a building registration permit.
The fee must bear a reasonable relationship to the cost to the
Department of administering these requirements.
C. Certificates of occupancy for individual units. Upon termination of the
occupancy of a dwelling unit in such a district, an inspection shall be
made to determine whether the unit contains violations of this Part 3
which are, or are likely to become, dangerous to health, life or safety. If
§ 245-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-94
1:267
such conditions exist, the owner shall be prohibited from renting such
unit until he obtains a certificate from the Department which certifies
that the violating conditions have been removed and that the unit
no longer contains conditions that are dangerous or likely to become
dangerous to life, health or safety. To enforce this requirement, an
owner must notify the Department whenever a unit is vacated.
D. Evictions of occupants for violations of this Part 3.
(1) Owners are prohibited from evicting occupants when such
evictions are substantially motivated by an owner's desire to
retaliate against an occupant's good-faith complaint to the
Department regarding violations of this Part 3. [Amended
3-23-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
(2) Whenever an owner wishes to evict a tenant, for whatever reason,
the owner shall first obtain a certificate of eviction from the
Department. The certificate may be requested by the owner, in
writing, by telephone or in person, directly from the Building
Inspector, who shall keep a separate record of all such requests. If
a certificate is not issued or denied within two full working days
following the day of the request, the owner may proceed with his
eviction proceeding, unless his action or failure to cooperate has
delayed action regarding the certificate.
(3) Upon receiving a request for a certificate of eviction, the Building
Inspector shall immediately cause an inspection of the subject
premises. If the inspection reveals serious violations of this Part 3
which have not been caused or substantially contributed to by the
occupant, the certificate shall be denied. If the inspection reveals
that serious violations of this Part 3 exist which have been caused
or substantially contributed to by the tenant, the inspection report
shall be filed by the Department in court as part of the record in the
owner's proceeding to evict the tenant. The court shall make a final
decision. Occupants who believe that evictions, rent increases or
reduction in service are substantially motivated by an owner's
desire to retaliate against their good-faith report of violations of
this Part 3 to the Department shall be afforded a hearing on the
matter before the Building Inspector or the Board of Appeals at
their option.
E. Deposits by owners for emergency repairs.
(1) Whenever the Department is required to perform the emergency
measures pursuant to § 245-92 of this Part 3, it may pay for those
measures through an Emergency Repair Fund. Owners of multiple
dwellings within such districts shall be required to deposit $500
per dwelling unit with an interest-bearing escrow account
maintained by the Department in such an Emergency Repair Fund
for the purpose of making emergency repairs. The deposit shall be
required upon the owner's filing of his first registration statement.
§ 245-94 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-94
1:268
Upon the transfer of ownership of the subject premises, the deposit
shall be transferred by the Department to the new owner's account
upon the filing of a registration statement by that owner. Interest
accrued on the deposited funds shall accumulate in the account
and be available for the purpose of this subsection. [Amended
3-23-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
(2) The owner of the premises in regard to which such measures were
taken shall be required to reimburse the account for the cost of the
measures, including interest lost from the date of withdrawal. A
per-diem fine may be levied against owners who fail to reimburse
the account or who fail to post a bond guaranteeing
reimbursement.
F. Rent escrow accounts. Whenever an owner of a multiple dwelling
repeatedly fails to comply with orders to correct violations of this Part 3
regarding building conditions which are likely to become dangerous to
the life, health or safety of the occupant or the public, the Department
may authorize the occupants to deposit their rent in a separate escrow
account administered by the Department. Withdrawals from the
account shall be made by the Department to cover the costs of abating
the conditions. All remaining rents shall be returned promptly to the
owner.
G. Occupant nuisance. Part of the responsibility for the care and upkeep of
a dwelling unit shall rest with the occupant. Occupants shall be liable if
serious violations are caused by their own willful act or negligence,
such as improper refuse disposal, improper and destructive acts,
physical destruction or inadequately maintained living space. The
Department shall act to discourage or penalize occupants who cause or
substantially contribute to violations of this Part 3. A system of orders,
hearings and citations shall be developed with sanctions that include
orders to abate fines and violation reports which can be filed in court in
support of an owner's petition to evict the occupant. Before using these
sanctions, the Department shall make a good-faith attempt to provide
or obtain supportive services and counseling for the occupants that are
designed to prevent the occupants from causing or contributing to
violations of this Part 3.
§ 245-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-94
1:269

ARTICLE XIV
Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants
§ 245-95. Compliance; extent of liability.
Owners shall be responsible for compliance with all provisions of this Part 3,
but the occupant shall also be liable if a violation is caused by the occupant's
willful act or negligence or that of any family member or guest.
§ 245-96. Effect of contracts.
Notwithstanding any contract provision to the contrary regarding
compliance with the provisions of this Part 3, no person shall be relieved of
any direct responsibility under this Part 3.
§ 245-97. Cleanliness.
No person shall occupy or let to another any dwelling or dwelling unit
unless it and the surrounding premises are clean, fit for human occupancy
and comply with all sanitary requirements of this Part 3.
§ 245-98. Exterior premises.
Owners and occupants shall maintain the outdoor premises and the
exteriors of residential and accessory structures thereon, such that the
appearance of the premises and structures shall not blight adjoining
properties nor lead to the progressive deterioration of the neighborhood.
§ 245-99. Environment.
No owner or occupant shall create or cause to create conditions that result
in infestation, that contaminate the atmosphere or that may be otherwise
detrimental to public health and welfare.
§ 245-100. Structure.
Owners shall maintain in good condition and repair, or replace when
necessary, floors, walls, ceilings, windows, doors and all other structural
components of a structure used for human habitation or abate any
structural condition that might be detrimental to the health, safety and wellbeing
of the occupants or that might damage the structure itself.
§ 245-101. Facilities and equipment.
Owners shall supply and maintain at all times, in operable and sanitary
condition and free from defects and hazards, all services, equipment,
facilities and utilities and shall furnish adequate heat and hot water as
required under the provisions of this Part 3.
§ 245-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-102
1:271
§ 245-102. Firesafety to be provided and maintained.
Owners shall provide and maintain firesafety facilities and equipment in
compliance with the requirements of this Part 3, the Fire Prevention Code
and any other applicable codes and shall properly maintain such facilities
and equipment and the residential structure and its premises to prevent fire
hazards.
§ 245-103. Janitor.
Every dwelling of 16 or more dwelling units in which the owner or operator
does not reside shall have a janitor available 24 hours a day whenever the
Department determines that a janitor is necessary to ensure maintenance
of the premises in compliance with this Part 3.
§ 245-104. Maintenance.
Every occupant shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that part or
those parts of the residential structure, dwelling unit and related premises
thereof that he occupied, or was shared by said occupant.
§ 245-105. Garbage.
Every occupant shall properly store and dispose of, in a tightly covered
container, all garbage, rubbish and all organic waste that might cause
infestation.
§ 245-106. Fixtures and equipment.
Occupants shall not damage or impair the operation or functioning of the
building's facilities, equipment and utilities. In addition, the equipment
and fixtures furnished by the occupant shall be properly installed and
maintained in good working condition.
§ 245-107. Occupancy limitations.
Occupants shall be responsible for limiting occupancy of that part of the
premises that they occupy or control to the maximum permitted by this Part
3.
§ 245-108. Nuisances.
Occupants shall control domestic animals and pets in an appropriate
manner, control the level of noise so as not to unduly disturb other
occupants of the residential structure or the community at large and control
conditions from which excessive offensive odors may emanate and be
discharged into the atmosphere of any public or shared area.
§ 245-102 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-109
1:272
§ 245-109. Compliance with firesafety regulations.
Occupants shall comply with firesafety regulations, shall not obstruct a
safe, continuous means of egress and shall store flammable matter only as
permitted by the Fire Department.
§ 245-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-109
1:273

ARTICLE XV
Minimum Standards for Outdoor Premises
§ 245-110. Hazards.
Outdoor premises, including vacant lots, shall be free from conditions that
might create a health, accident or fire hazard or which are unsightly and
might tend to blight the neighborhood.
§ 245-111. Paved areas.
§ 245-112. Landscaping.
Lawns, hedges and bushes shall be kept from becoming overgrown and
unsightly where exposed to public view and where neglect constitutes a
blighting factor, depreciating adjoining property. Ground cover shall be
properly established to prevent undue soil erosion.
§ 245-113. Noxious and offensive weeds.
§ 245-114. Recreation areas and facilities.
A. Such areas shall be reasonably free from holes and excavations, sharp
protrusions and other objects or conditions that are a potential cause of
personal injury.
B. Open wells, cesspools and cisterns shall be securely closed.
C. Trees and limbs of trees that constitute a hazard shall be removed.
A. All paved areas, such as but not limited to walkways, alleyways, steps,
parking areas, driveways, courts and yards, that contain holes or
tripping hazards shall be filled, repaired or replaced as the need
indicates.
B. Such areas on outdoor premises of multiple dwellings shall be
maintained and properly lighted at night to afford safe and convenient
passage; such lighting shall be of an approved type as to location and
safety of installation.
A. Outdoor premises, vacant lots and the abutting sidewalks shall be free
from species of weeds or plant growth that are noxious or offensive.
B. Ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak and poison sumac shall be eliminated
on outdoor premises whenever the Building Inspector determines such
growths to be probably or actually dangerous to public health by reason
of location, quantity or spread.
C. Accumulations of weeds or other growths that are potential sites for
rodent harborage, unsightly or potentially dangerous or unhealthy for
whatever reason shall be eliminated.
§ 245-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-114
1:275
§ 245-115. Garbage, rubbish and litter.24
§ 245-116. Junk; attractive nuisances.
§ 245-117. Insects, vermin and rodents.
A. Outdoor recreational facilities, such as benches, swings and similar
equipment, shall be maintained in a structurally safe condition or shall
be removed from the premises.
B. Playground areas shall be maintained so as to be free of all hazards for
children.
A. Outdoor premises shall be kept free from any accumulation of organic
or inorganic material that might become a health, accident or fire
hazard or any material, including litter, which may be unsightly.
B. An adequate number of durable, nonporous containers which are
watertight, structurally strong, easily filled, emptied and cleaned, and
equipped with tight-fitting lids shall be provided for temporary storage
of garbage and rubbish.
C. Whenever it may be deemed necessary by the Building Inspector,
platforms constructed of an impervious material shall be used for the
storage of receptacles so as to eliminate the creation of a health
nuisance.
D. A water faucet shall be close to said containers, to be used for cleansing
each container at the storage site; or another means for such cleansing
may be provided upon approval of the Building Inspector.
E. All bulk storage containers shall have self-closing lids.
A. Junk, including but not limited to discarded furniture, appliances and
equipment, shall be disposed of in accordance with the regulations of
Sleepy Hollow.
B. Any attractive nuisance that may prove detrimental to children,
whether in the building, on the premises or upon a vacant lot, shall be
eliminated; such nuisances include, but are not limited to, abandoned
refrigerators, motor vehicles and wells.
A. Outdoor premises shall be kept free from sources of insect, vermin and
rodent harborage. Where such sources exist, they shall be eliminated.
B. Materials, such as boxes, newspapers, lumber, scrap metal and other
such materials, that are stored outside the structure shall be neatly
stacked and elevated so that there will be an opening of at least 18
inches between the material and the ground level, to prevent the
24.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 347, Solid Waste.
§ 245-114 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-117
1:276
§ 245-118. Sewage.25
§ 245-119. Stormwater.26
§ 245-120. Accessory structures and appurtenances.
creation of a rat harborage area. Stacking or piling of such materials
against the building shall be prohibited.
C. Garbage and rubbish containers shall be insect-, vermin- and
rodentproof.
D. Vacant lots shall be kept free of rubbish, brush or any other conditions
that may serve as places of rat harborage.
A. Sewage must be discharged into a public sewer system, except as
provided in § 245-152B of this Part 3.
B. Discharge of inadequately treated sewage shall not be permitted upon
the surface of the ground or into natural or artificial surface
drainageways.
A. Stormwater shall be properly drained to prevent recurrent or excessive
ponding or the entrance of stormwater into the basement, cellar or
ground level of the structure.
B. The ground surrounding the structure shall, where practical, be graded
away from the building and foundation.
C. Conductors or drain pipes, where utilized, shall function properly.
Stormwater sewers, dry wells or other satisfactory drainage systems
shall be used where necessary.
D. No stormwater shall be discharged onto public sidewalks.
A. Accessory structures and appurtenances, such as but not limited to
swimming pools, water tanks, dividing or retaining walls, storage
sheds, garden ornaments and monuments, located on outdoor premises
shall be kept in good repair, free from health, accident and fire hazards
and from insect, vermin and rodent harborage.
B. Such structures and appurtenances shall be kept structurally sound
and in good repair or removed from the premises.
C. Effective insect-, vermin- and rodentproofing or extermination must be
done where necessary.
25.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 330, Sewers.
26.Editor's Note: See also § 245-157, Stormwater; and Ch. 358, Stormwater Management and
Erosion and Sediment Control.
§ 245-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-120
1:277
§ 245-121. Noxious fumes.
§ 245-122. Animals and pets.27
D. The exteriors of such structures and appurtenances shall be made
weather-resistant through the use of decay-resistant materials or
through the use of paint or other preservatives.
E. The water supply used for the filling or cleaning of swimming pools
shall be clean. The water supply shall be protected against potential
pollution from all sources, including cross-connection and backflow.
Drains shall be provided so that the pool can be safely and adequately
drained. Drains shall be provided in floors surrounding the swimming
pool and arranged so that water from such areas will drain without
entering the pool. Filtering, sterilizing and auxiliary equipment, where
required, shall be adequate to maintain the sanitary quality of water
during each period the pool is in use. Equipment containing gases or
disinfectants capable of giving off irritating, toxic or flammable fumes
shall be located in ventilated rooms. The installation shall be arranged
and maintained to prevent dirt, sand or other foreign matter from
entering the bathing area.
F. Water supply tanks shall be installed and maintained so as to be
watertight, verminproof, rodentproof, resistant to corrosion and
capable of withstanding the working pressures under normal operation.
Supports for tanks shall be of noncombustible construction. Tanks and
their supports shall not be used to support equipment or structures
other than for tank use, except where specially designed for such other
use. Means for emptying water supply tanks shall be provided and
maintained in proper working condition. Potable water supply tanks for
domestic supply and standpipe or automatic sprinkler systems shall be
installed and maintained to furnish water in sufficient quantity and
pressure for such systems.
G. Privies shall not be constructed or continued in operation without the
written consent of the Building Inspector.
H. Outdoor antennas shall be firmly secured and maintained so as not to
appear unsightly.
A. No person shall cause, or allow to be caused by others, any noxious
fumes that are a health nuisance.
B. Exhaust openings for clothes dryers, heating units, cooling units,
kitchen exhausts and other appurtenances that can create a nuisance
shall be so located that the exhaust air discharging into the atmosphere
will not create a nuisance.
27.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 123, Animals.
§ 245-120 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-122
1:278
§ 245-123. Open fires.
Open fires shall not be permitted, unless authorized and approved pursuant
to Sleepy Hollow law and in conformity with New York State air pollution
control regulations.
§ 245-124. Signs.28
All signs permitted by reason of other regulations or as a lawful
nonconforming use shall be maintained in good repair, and printed matter,
pictures or illustrations contained thereon shall be completely maintained
and, when no longer in use, completely removed.
§ 245-125. Motor vehicles.
Not more than one currently unregistered and/or uninspected motor vehicle
shall be parked on any property in a residential district, and at no time shall
said vehicle be in any state of major disassembly or disrepair, nor shall it be
in the process of being stripped or dismantled. At no time shall any vehicle
of any type undergo major overhaul, including body work, in a residential
district.
A. Domestic animals and pets shall not be kept on any outdoor or interior
premises in such a manner as to create insanitary conditions or
constitute a nuisance.
B. Insanitary conditions, inappropriate types of domestic animals or pets
and excessive numbers of the same constitute conditions that may be
considered a nuisance under this section.
C. Domestic animals and pets shall be maintained in accordance with
applicable regulations of the Village.
28.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 338, Signs.
§ 245-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-125
1:279

ARTICLE XVI
Minimum Standards for Exterior of Structures
§ 245-126. Exterior maintenance.
§ 245-127. Foundations, walls and roofs.
§ 245-128. Stairways, porches and railings.
A. The exterior of a residential building shall be maintained structurally
sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the health and safety of
the occupants and so as to protect the occupants from adverse
environmental conditions.
B. The exterior of a residential building shall be maintained so as to retain
a neat appearance. Painting, protective coatings and other finishes on
exterior surfaces shall conform to acceptable standards. Siding
material shall be kept in good repair.
C. The exterior of a residential building shall be maintained so as to
prevent the decay of environmental quality and prevent the spread of
blight.
A. All foundation walls, exterior walls and roofs shall be maintained in
good repair and be structurally sound.
B. Foundation walls shall be free from damage or defects, such as open
cracks and breaks, and shall be capable of bearing imposed loads.
C. Exterior walls shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or
timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or dampness to
the interior portions of the walls or to the interior spaces of the
building.
D. Roofs shall be structurally sound, tight and shall have no defects that
might admit rain or melted snow. Roof drainage shall be adequate to
prevent rain, water or melted snow from causing dampness in the walls
or interior portions of the building.
A. Stairways, porches and balconies, handrails, railings and parapet walls
shall be kept in good repair and structurally sound, free of holes and
cracks and capable of bearing normally imposed loads.
B. Stairways and landings shall be arranged, proportioned and maintained
so as to provide safe ascent and descent.
C. Handrails shall be provided on at least one side of stairways that are
more than three risers high.
D. Balustraded railings, at least 33 inches above nosings and 36 inches
above landings, shall be provided on open portions of stairways and
landings.
§ 245-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-128
1:281
§ 245-129. Protection from adverse environmental conditions.
Every residential building shall be protected from adverse environmental
conditions as follows:
§ 245-130. Insects, vermin and rodents.
E. Handrails and railings shall be firmly fastened.
F. Properly balustraded railings or parapet walls shall be provided at open
sides of porches, balconies, accessible roofs and motor vehicle parking
decks and ramps, where there is clear danger of accident or personal
injury.
G. Railings and parapet walls shall be at least three feet six inches high.
Fixed openings in the same shall not exceed six inches in one
dimension.
A. Watertight and weatherproof. Exterior walls, roofs and all openings
around doors, windows, skylights, hatchways, chimneys and all other
parts of the structure shall be maintained so as to keep water from
entering the structure and to prevent undue heat loss. Damaged
materials shall be repaired or replaced.
B. Dry rot and rust-resistance. All parts of the structure that show
evidence of dry rot or other deterioration shall be replaced and
refinished.
C. All exterior wood surfaces that are not of a species inherently resistant
to decay shall be treated periodically with a protective coating or other
preservative to prevent structural decay.
D. Metal surfaces that show evidence of excessive rusting shall be
refinished, replaced if necessary or removed.
A. The exterior of every residential building shall be so equipped and
maintained as to be free of insects, vermin and rodents.
B. From May 1 to October 1, every window or other device with openings
to the outdoors, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall be
effectively protected against the entrance of insects by equipping the
same with approved screening.
C. The owner of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for providing and
hanging all screens in said dwelling unit, whenever such are required
under the provisions of this Part 3 or regulations adopted pursuant to
the same, except where there is a written agreement between owner
and occupant.
D. However, such screening shall not be required in rooms deemed by the
Building Inspector to be located high enough in the building as to be
free from insects and in rooms located in areas of Sleepy Hollow that
§ 245-128 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-130
1:282
§ 245-131. Windows, screens, doors and hatchways.
§ 245-132. Overhanging objects; ice and snow.
are deemed by the Building Inspector to have so few insects as to
render screens unnecessary.
E. Where a vermin or rodent problem exists, every openable window,
exterior door and any other opening that is two feet or less above
ground level or can be reached by vermin or rodents by crawling or
climbing pipes, wires, cornices, stairs, roofs, trees or vines or by
burrowing shall be screened or protected with acceptable wire mesh or
other approved materials. Defects, cracks and holes shall be tightly
sealed to prevent the entrance of said pests.
F. Skirting, lattice or other non-ratproofed enclosure creating a possible
rodent harborage under a porch or any portions of a building shall be
ratproofed at all locations where a rat could find, burrow or gnaw an
access opening.
A. Every window and exterior door shall fit reasonably well in its frame.
Weather stripping shall be used. They shall be kept in sound condition
and in good repair.
B. Every window, exterior door and frame shall be so constructed and
maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall as to exclude wind and
rain from entering the building. They shall be kept in sound condition
and good repair.
C. Every required window sash shall be fully supplied with approved
glazing materials that are without cracks or holes.
D. Every window, other than a fixed one, shall be capable of being easily
opened and shall be held in position by window hardware. Meeting rails
shall meet.
E. Window locks shall be provided for every window and shall function
properly.
F. Every sash shall be so set that it slides without undue effort in its frame,
yet not so loose as to rattle or jam or admit the elements.
G. Every exterior door, door hinge, door latch and all other hardware shall
be maintained in good and operable condition.
H. Every basement or cellar hatchway shall be so constructed and
maintained as to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface
drainage water into the structure.
I. Every basement or cellar window that is openable shall be supplied
with rodentproof shields or storm windows or other material affording
protection against the entrance of rodents.
§ 245-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-132
1:283
§ 245-133. Lighting.
Exterior artificial lighting shall be provided at night at or near front
entrances of multiple dwellings. Such illumination shall provide a minimum
of 1/2 footcandle of light.
§ 245-134. Lead-based paint.
A. Every residential building and every accessory structure on its
premises shall be free of loose or unsecured overhanging objects and
materials. Such objects or materials shall be removed.
B. Dangerous accumulations of ice and snow shall be removed.
A. Lead-based paint with a lead content of more than 0.5% shall not be
applied to any interior or exterior surface of a residential structure,
dwelling unit or accessory structure on the premises.
B. Existing paint conditions conducive to lead poisoning shall be
eliminated in accordance with procedures contained in Article 13, Title
X, of the New York State Public Health Law.
§ 245-132 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-134
1:284
ARTICLE XVII
Minimum Standards for Interior of Structures
§ 245-135. Interior maintenance.
The interior of a residential building and its equipment shall be so
maintained as to be sound, safe, clean, sanitary and functioning.
§ 245-136. Structural components and members.
The supporting structural members of every residential building shall be
maintained structurally sound, showing no evidence of deterioration that
would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads.
§ 245-137. Floors, walls and ceilings.
§ 245-138. Stairs and railings.
§ 245-139. Chimneys, flues and vents.
A. Floors, walls and ceilings of every residential building shall be
maintained structurally sound, showing no evidence of deterioration
that would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads, and
they shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
B. Walls and ceilings shall be considered to be structurally sound and in
good repair when clean, free from cracks, loose plaster and similar
conditions.
A. Interior stairs of every residential building shall be structurally sound
and free from defects. They shall be securely fastened to supportive
structural members and be capable of supporting normally imposed
loads.
B. Properly balustraded railings capable of bearing normally imposed
loads shall be placed on the open portions of stairways that are more
than three risers high and on balconies, landings and stairwells.
C. Treads or risers that evidence excessive wear or are broken, warped or
loose shall be repaired or replaced.
A. Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto and all other flues
and vents in every residential building shall be structurally sound, free
from defects and perform the functions for which designed and used.
B. Chimneys, flues, vents and other draft-producing equipment shall
provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of the connected
equipment.
C. Chimneys; flue linings, where required, flues, gas vents, and their
supports shall be structurally safe, durable, smoketight and capable of
withstanding the action of flue gases.
§ 245-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-140
1:285
§ 245-140. Public space height requirements.
Public spaces in residential buildings shall have a minimum height of seven
feet six inches, measured from floor to finished ceiling, free of any overhead
obstructions below that height.
§ 245-141. Light and ventilation in public areas.
§ 245-142. Rubbish and garbage.
§ 245-143. Insects, vermin and rodents.
A. Public spaces in residential buildings shall be provided with artificial
light.
B. In multiple dwellings, stairways and passageways shall be provided at
all times with a minimum of two footcandles of light or more as deemed
necessary by the Building Inspector so as to afford safe passage.
C. Every laundry, furnace room and all similar nonhabitable work space
shall have either adequate natural or artificial lighting available at all
times.
D. In two-family houses, an on/off switch shall be conveniently located at
both ends of a shared stairway and passageway, to be used when
necessary. Footcandle requirements shall comply with Subsection B
above.
E. Public spaces shall be provided with either natural ventilation
conforming to the requirements for habitable space or with approved
mechanical ventilation.
A. The interior of every residential building shall be maintained free from
rubbish and garbage that might become a health, accident or fire
hazard.
B. Durable, nonporous containers with tight-fitting lids shall be provided
for temporary storage of rubbish, garbage and other refuse.
C. Inflammable materials shall be stored safely or removed from the
premises.
A. The interior of every residential building shall be free from insect,
vermin and rodent infestation. Where infestation, harborage or
breeding areas of said pests exists, such areas, harborage or infestation
shall be eliminated.
B. If a residential building, accessory structure or the adjoining outdoor
premises are found by the Building Inspector to be infested with such
pests, a notice shall be served upon such owner to correct such
infestation. The owner, being so notified, shall take immediate and
necessary measures to remedy the condition.
§ 245-140 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-143
1:286
C. Removal, damaging or destroying of ratproofing measures is
prohibited. No person shall remove, damage or destroy any part of any
building, structure or other appurtenance of improved real estate
premises which is intended to protect such premises against ingress of
rodents, nor in any way create a condition by which ingress for rodents
is made possible. This subsection shall not apply where the interference
with such ratproofing is made necessary in connection with lawful
construction. Ratproofing so affected or destroyed shall be promptly
restored.
D. In every residential building in which there is evidence of mouse
infestation in any part thereof, the owner or occupant shall immediately
trap, exterminate or employ other appropriate measures necessary to
free the building of such infestation.
E. The owner shall be responsible for extermination of insects, vermin and
rodents whenever such infestation occurs in one dwelling unit of a twofamily
house or of a multiple dwelling if such infestation is caused by
failure of the owner or operator to maintain such building in a
rodentproof and reasonably insect- and verminproof condition, or in
two or more dwelling units of a two-family house or of a multiple
dwelling, or in the public or shared areas of such dwellings.
F. The occupant shall be responsible for the extermination of insects,
vermin or rodents whenever such infestation occurs in a one-family
house that she/he occupies or in a dwelling unit of a two-family house or
of a multiple dwelling that she/he occupies, if such dwelling unit is the
only one infested and if such infestation is due to conditions created by
said occupant.
G. No person shall use in any residential building or accessory structure a
fumigant or a liquid, solid or powdered insecticide or rodenticide for
the destruction or control of insects, vermin, rodents or other pests in
such a manner as to cause a nuisance or endanger the health or safety
of the occupant, nor shall anyone engage in the business of fumigation
or extermination in Sleepy Hollow without a license issued by the New
York State Department of Health.
H. Notification of fumigation is required. No person shall fumigate in any
residential building without first giving 24 hours' notice of such
fumigation to the Department, the Fire Department and the Police
Department. Notification shall include the location of the building or
enclosed space to be fumigated, as well as its character and use, the
type of fumigant, the date and time when such fumigation will be
performed and the approximate time of completion.
I. Premises must be vacant prior to and during fumigation. No residential
building or enclosed space shall be occupied by persons during the
period of fumigation, and all necessary precautions and examinations
shall be taken previous to such fumigation to assure that no person
remains therein and also that all necessary precautions have been
§ 245-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-143
1:287
§ 245-144. Noxious fumes.
§ 245-145. Asbestos.
No person shall engage in or allow surface coating by the spraying of
asbestos or asbestos-containing materials.
§ 245-146. Cellars and basements.
§ 245-147. Security.
The owner of a multiple dwelling shall provide for the security of the
occupants at all times by:
taken to safeguard the lives and health of all persons occupying
buildings adjoining that in which the fumigation is to be performed.
J. No person shall use any rodenticide or insecticide which is poisonous to
human life without having first given 24 hours' notice to the
Department of such use.
K. Notification of construction or demolition is required. No person,
concern, company, corporation, etc., shall engage in the construction or
demolition of any residential building within Sleepy Hollow without first
prebaiting for rodent control at least two weeks before starting actual
work and so notifying the Department in writing.
A. No person shall cause, or allow to be caused by persons under his
control, any noxious fumes.
B. Exhaust openings for clothes dryers, heating units, cooking units,
kitchen exhausts and other appurtenances that can create a nuisance
shall be so located that the exhaust air discharging into the atmosphere
will not create a nuisance.
A. Cellars, basements and crawl spaces in every residential building shall
be reasonably free from dampness, to prevent conditions conducive to
decay or deterioration of the structure.
B. Cross ventilation shall be provided in every basement, cellar and crawl
space, consisting of at least one window, opening or vent located near
each corner of the structure. The aggregate ventilation area shall be
not less than one square foot for every 100 linear feet of wall space or
1% of the total area of the enclosed space, whichever is greater.
A. Maintaining proper lighting of all public and shared areas.
B. Providing all doors leading from the building exterior to the interior
with locks; where entry vestibules exist, the locks shall be placed on the
door or doors leading from the vestibule to the hall.
C. Providing all doors leading from the building exterior to the interior
with automatic door closers adequate to the task.
§ 245-143 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-147
1:288
§ 245-148. Water fountains.
Water fountains in public areas of a residential building shall be maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition so as to prevent a health hazard.
§ 245-149. Miscellaneous areas and spaces.
D. Ensuring that all locks, closers or other door hardware is operable at all
times.
E. Ensuring that all windows have operable locks.
F. Providing peepholes in entrance doors to dwelling units.
G. Prohibiting loitering in all public or shared areas.
H. Providing and maintaining locked, tamperproof mailboxes.
I. Supplying, upon letting, keys that are necessary to the occupant, such
as for the entrance door to the dwelling unit, the mailbox, the main
entrance door of the building and the entrance door to public or shared
areas to which the occupant is permitted access and which are kept
locked, such as laundry rooms and storage areas.
A. Laundry room floors in residential buildings shall be maintained in a
watertight condition.
B. Storage areas, for the use of occupants of a multiple dwelling, shall be
maintained neat and orderly and shall be kept locked at all times to
prevent theft or damage to the articles stored therein.
C. Lavatories and water closets for the use of employees or available to the
public shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, well
lighted and ventilated. An adequate supply of clean toilet paper and
single-service towels shall be provided at all times. The floors of such
facilities shall be impervious to water and properly drained. No
drinking cup, towel, hairbrush or comb shall be provided for common
use therein or in a rest or locker room adjacent thereto.
§ 245-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-149
1:289

ARTICLE XVIII
Basic Facilities, Equipment and Systems
§ 245-150. Installation, maintenance and repairs.
§ 245-151. Plumbing.29
A. Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, air-conditioning,
refrigerating, cooking and fire protection equipment, elevators,
dumbwaiters, escalators and other mechanical additions, installations
or systems for use in residential buildings shall be constructed,
installed, located, connected and maintained and repaired when
necessary so that such equipment and systems will operate
satisfactorily and not be a danger to safety, health and welfare.
B. Installation, maintenance and repairs shall be performed in accordance
with the relevant codes and/or regulations of Sleepy Hollow.
C. All installations, maintenance and repairs made by owners, operators or
occupants, and required by this Part 3, shall be done in a workmanlike
manner. Materials used for repairs shall be similar to and blend in with
surrounding structures so that the repair is not obvious to sight or
touch.
D. All facilities shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition so as
not to breed insects, vermin or rodents or produce noxious or offensive
gases or odors.
E. Moving parts of equipment that may be potentially hazardous shall be
guarded to protect against accidental contact.
F. Equipment and systems subject to damage from freezing shall be
adequately protected against freezing.
G. Equipment or systems that create excessive or undue noise or
otherwise become a nuisance shall be adequately baffled or otherwise
soundproofed.
H. No person shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility required
to be supplied by the provisions of this Part 3 to be removed from or
shut off from or discontinued for any dwelling unit, except for necessary
repairs, alterations, emergencies or if the building is vacated.
A. Water lines, plumbing fixtures and drains shall be kept free from
obstructions, leaks and defects.
B. Stacks, waste and sewer lines and connecting sewer lines shall be so
installed as not to be a source of structural deterioration or a health
hazard.
29.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 304, Plumbers.
§ 245-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-152
1:291
§ 245-152. Sewerage systems.30
§ 245-153. Potable water.31
§ 245-154. Electrical service and equipment.
A. All plumbing fixtures installed within residential buildings shall be
connected to sewer lines that discharge into a public sanitary sewerage
system.
B. Substances that will clog the pipes, produce explosive mixtures, destroy
the pipes or their joints or interfere unduly with the sewage disposal
process shall not be discharged into the building drainage system
unless it is provided with approved devices suitable for intercepting
such substances.
C. Each fixture directly connected to the sewage drainage system shall be
equipped with a water seal trap.
D. Adequate cleanouts shall be provided and maintained so that the pipes
may be readily cleaned.
E. The drainage system and its attendant vent piping shall be maintained
so as to provide adequate circulation of air in all pipes, in order that
siphonage, aspiration or pressure will not cause a loss of trap seal
under ordinary conditions of use.
F. Each vent terminal to the outer air shall be installed and maintained so
as to minimize the possibilities of clogging, frost closure, the return of
foul air to the building or the creation of a nuisance to adjacent
premises.
G. Drains provided for fixtures, devices, appliances or apparatus
containing food, water, sterile goods or similar materials shall be
equipped with air breaks which are adequate to prevent contamination
of such contents from any backup of sewage through the direct or
indirect drainage piping.
A. Every residential building and every dwelling unit shall be supplied, at
all times, with potable water from a public source. There shall be
sufficient volume and pressure at all hot- and cold-water outlets; they
shall function without undue noise.
B. Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained so that water
used for cooling or heating shall not be reintroduced into the domestic
water supply system nor be distributed through such equipment to
plumbing fixtures.
30.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 330, Sewers.
31.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 411, Water.
§ 245-152 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-154
1:292
§ 245-155. Heating systems.
A. Every residential building, dwelling unit and rooming unit shall be
provided with electrical service, properly connected to an adequate
source of electric power, meeting the standards of the National
Electrical Code as approved by the New York State Board of Fire
Underwriters.
B. Electrical wiring and equipment shall be installed and maintained so as
not to be a potential source of ignition of combustible materials or a
potential source of electrical hazard.
C. Electrical wiring and equipment shall be firmly secured to the surface
on which it is mounted.
D. Electrical wiring and equipment in damp or wet locations or exposed to
explosive or flammable gases or to excessive temperatures shall be of a
type approved for the purpose and location.
E. Electrical wiring and equipment shall be protected against excessive
current by properly rated over-current devices.
F. Electrical service equipment and over-current protection devices shall
be installed in readily accessible locations, and access to such locations
shall be kept unobstructed.
G. Electrical wiring and equipment shall be grounded or otherwise
protected by insulation, isolation or guarding so as to minimize the
danger of high voltages from lightning or other causes.
H. Electrical equipment that in ordinary operation produces arcs or sparks
shall be enclosed, unless separated and isolated from all combustible
materials.
I. Flexible cord shall not be run through holes in walls, ceilings or floors
or through doorways, windows or similar openings or be attached to
building surfaces or be concealed behind building walls or above
ceilings or under floors or floor coverings.
J. Defective wiring and equipment shall be repaired or replaced.
A. The owner of every residential building that is intended for occupancy
shall provide to such building, and keep in good repair, approved, safe
central heating facilities capable of maintaining a minimum inside
temperature of 65° F., or such other minimum inside temperature as
might be mandated or recommended by the Westchester County
Department of Health in an emergency crisis, whenever the
temperature outside of the building or part thereof shall fall below
55° F. Said temperature shall be provided in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms, shower rooms, water-closet compartments and kitchens.
Such temperature requirements shall be measured 36 inches from the
floor at approximately the center of the room.
§ 245-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-155
1:293
§ 245-156. Hot water supply.
§ 245-157. Stormwater.32
B. Heating equipment shall be installed in a manner that will avoid the
dangerous concentration of fumes and gases.
C. Every heating, cooking and water-heating device burning solid fuels
shall be rigidly connected to a chimney or flue; any such equipment
burning liquid or gaseous fuels shall be rigidly connected to a supply
line and, where required, to a chimney, flue or vent.
D. Fuel tanks for such equipment shall be permanently installed and
refilled only from outside the building.
E. Supply lines shall be installed in an approved manner.
F. Where necessary, exposed heating risers, heating ducts and hot-water
lines shall be covered with an insulating material or guard.
G. Every heating, cooking and water-heating device located in a
residential building shall be maintained and operated so as to be free
from fire, health and accident hazards.
H. All fuel-burning equipment, components and accessories shall be free
from leaks and obstructions and shall function properly.
I. Heating equipment shall not be forced to operate beyond the safe
capacity for which it was designed.
J. Portable space heaters burning liquid or gaseous fuels and heating,
cooking and water-heating equipment with integral fuel tanks are
prohibited.
A. Every residential building shall have an adequate supply of hot water
properly connected to plumbing fixtures requiring hot water.
B. Water-heating equipment shall be installed in accordance with the
applicable regulations of Sleepy Hollow. Such equipment shall be
capable of delivering water at a constant minimum temperature of
120° F. at a pressure adequate to enable it to function satisfactorily at
all times, at each hot water outlet. The system shall be capable of
delivering an adequate supply of hot water to each dwelling unit, onefamily
house and rooming house.
C. Hot water supply systems shall be provided with safety devices
arranged to relieve hazardous pressures and excessive temperatures.
A. Stormwater shall be properly drained to prevent recurring ponding or
the entrance of water into any basement or cellar.
32.Editor's Note: See also § 245-119; and Ch. 358, Stormwater Management and Erosion and
Sediment Control.
§ 245-155 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-157
1:294
§ 245-158. Fuel oil and gasoline.
§ 245-159. Incinerators.
§ 245-160. Fuel gas.
B. Conductors or drain pipes, where used, shall function properly; they
shall be discharged in such a manner that water will not flow onto
sidewalks or into sewers intended for sewage only or onto the property
of others.
C. Stormwater sewers, approved combined storm and sanitary sewers, dry
wells or other satisfactory drainage systems shall be used where
necessary.
A. All fuels stored on the premises of a residential building for the
operation of heat-producing equipment shall be stored in a safe manner,
in accordance with generally accepted practice and in a manner that
will minimize the danger of fire.
B. No fuel oil, gasoline or other highly flammable fuel shall be stored
within a residential building, except in a manner approved by the Fire
Safety Code of Sleepy Hollow.
C. Fuel oil shall be received, stored and conveyed by means of fixed
liquidtight equipment.
D. Storage tanks shall be installed and maintained so as not to be a hazard
to the premises serviced or the surrounding property. They shall be
provided with means for venting.
A. Incinerators are prohibited unless approved and registered with the
Fire Department. Incinerators shall not emit contaminants into the
atmosphere in violation of air pollution control regulations pursuant to
New York State law or to any other governmental authority having
jurisdiction.
B. Incinerators shall be of adequate capacity for the intended use.
C. Connections to incinerators shall provide free passage of garbage and
refuse without clogging.
D. Service openings shall be readily accessible to the building occupants.
E. Durable signs, with plainly legible letters, shall be conspicuously posted
at service openings, stating: "Throwing lighted matches, cigars or
cigarettes, carpet sweepings, naphthalene, camphor balls or flakes,
floor scrapings, oil-soaked rags, paint cans, aerosol containers or any
other flammable or highly combustible or explosive substance into
incinerator chutes is unlawful and subjects the offender to a penalty."
A. Fuel-gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained so as to
remain gastight, safe and operative under conditions of use.
§ 245-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-160
1:295
§ 245-161. Elevators.
B. Fuel-gas piping systems shall provide a supply of gas sufficient to meet
the maximum expected demand of the installed gas-burning appliances
connected thereto.
C. Gas piping systems shall have at least one accessible means for
shutting off all gas supply; such means shall be maintained in good
operating condition.
D. Gas services, gas meters and gas pressure regulators shall be located
so that they are protected from damage.
E. Gas refrigerators and ranges shall be installed with clearance for
ventilation; they shall be maintained in good operating condition.
F. Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed
through piping equipment and systems in residential buildings.
G. Liquefied petroleum gas containers shall be designed, stored and
located so as not to be a hazard to the premises served, or to the
surrounding property.
H. Fuel gas systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve
excessive pressure and shall be so arranged that the discharge
terminates in a safe location.
I. Fuel-gas systems shall have at least one accessible means of shutting
off the gas. Such means shall be located outside the building and shall
be maintained in good operating condition.
A. Elevators installed in residential buildings, for travel between floors,
shall be operable in good working order at all times. The elevator floor
shall align with building floor at any stop.
B. Defective equipment shall be repaired immediately. Elevators required
for vertical travel by human occupants above the third floor of any
structure shall be repaired as rapidly as possible.
C. Elevators shall provide a minimum of two footcandles of light at all
times.
D. All such elevators shall be inspected and maintained in accordance with
the American National Standards Safety Code for Elevators.
§ 245-160 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-161
1:296
ARTICLE XIX
Air Conditioning; Ventilation
§ 245-162. Multiple dwellings.
A. Refrigerants.
(1) Refrigerants that are highly flammable shall not be used in multiple
dwellings.
(2) Direct systems using refrigerants that are flammable or toxic shall
not be used for air-conditioning purposes.
B. Ventilating systems.
(1) Ventilating systems shall be installed and maintained so that the
rapid spread of heat, flame or smoke through the system will be
prevented and so that, under conditions of use, the temperature of
any combustible material adjacent thereto or in contact therewith
will not exceed a safe temperature.
(2) Stairways, passageways, exits, shafts, hoistways or attics shall not
be used as plenum chambers.
(3) Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately fire
stopped.
(4) Ducts and other air-handling equipment shall be of noncombustible
material.
(5) Filters shall be installed and maintained so as not to constitute a
fire or smoke hazard.
(6) Ducts passing through or located within combustible construction
shall be separated from such construction by a clearance of at least
1/2 inch or by a noncombustible insulating material or shall be
quality controlled.
(7) Air required for ventilation shall be taken from the exterior or shall
be quality controlled.
(8) Exhaust air from a dwelling unit or a space whose contents may
emit odors, fumes or vapors shall not be circulated to other
occupied spaces within the building.
C. Air intake and exhaust openings.
(1) Air intake and exhaust openings shall be installed, located and
maintained so as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance and so as to
prevent the possibility of fire, smoke, fumes or foreign matter being
drawn into the system.
§ 245-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-162
1:297
§ 245-163. One- and two-family dwellings.
(2) Ventilating systems shall be provided with adequate openings for
incoming and outgoing air to obtain the required circulation. Intake
openings shall provide air from an uncontaminated source.
(3) Where openings for mechanical exhaust are located in spaces that
also contain fuel-burning equipment, there shall be provided fixed
intake openings from the exterior to supply sufficient air so that the
fuel-burning equipment is not adversely affected.
(4) Exhaust openings shall be located so that the exhaust air will not
create a nuisance.
D. Ventilation requirements.
(1) Enclosures or spaces where heat, gases, vapors or odors may
accumulate and become a potential source of hazard or nuisance
shall be provided with adequate means of ventilation to remove
such excess.
(2) Public spaces shall be provided with means for obtaining air supply
for the maximum number of persons for which such spaces are
designed.
E. Safety controls.
(1) Every system using recirculated air and serving an assembly space
for more than one fire area or more than one story of a building
shall be provided with controls arranged so that, under an
abnormal rise in temperature of the air in the system, the fans
causing normal circulation shall stop and require manual restart.
(2) Every system for ventilating an assembly space shall be provided
with an emergency switch conveniently located and with a durable
sign giving instructions for shutting down the system in case of fire.
A. Exhaust air from a dwelling unit shall not be circulated to another
dwelling unit.
B. Ducts shall be securely fastened in place and appropriately firestopped.
§ 245-162 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-163
1:298
ARTICLE XX
Firesafety
§ 245-164. Prevention of fire hazards.
Every residential building shall be constructed and maintained to prevent
fire hazards, and in a manner conducive to firesafety.
§ 245-165. Egress.
§ 245-166. Fire-resistance ratings.
Floors, walls, ceilings and other elements and components of every
residential building that require fire-resistance ratings shall be maintained
so that said ratings are preserved.
§ 245-167. Fire protection systems.
A. A safe, continuous and unobstructed means of egress shall be provided
from the interior of a residential building to the exterior at a street or to
a yard, court or passageway leading to a public open area at grade
level.
B. All doors in the required means of egress shall be readily opened from
the inside without the use of keys.
C. Every dwelling unit and rooming unit shall have safe and unobstructed
means of egress from the building. Such means of egress shall not lead
through other dwelling units or rooming units or through bathrooms or
water-closet rooms.
D. Every dwelling unit and rooming unit located in a multiple dwelling or a
rooming house shall have at least two means of egress; such means of
egress shall be remote from each other. This shall apply to a dwelling
unit in a two-family house which is located entirely above the second
floor.
E. Exits that cannot be cut off in case of fire shall be regarded as a
minimum essential. These exits shall be such that, where necessary,
they can safely be used by children, the infirm, aged and physically
handicapped.
F. Multiple dwellings and buildings in which rooms are let to three or
more persons shall, in addition, have exits that comply with the
requirements of the Multiple Residence Law.
G. All required fire escapes shall be maintained in good working condition
and shall be structurally sound.
H. All exit signs shall be maintained illuminated and visible at all times.
I. The owner or his agent shall notify the occupant of the passageway to
all required exits.
§ 245-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-167
1:299
§ 245-168. Accumulation and storage of materials.
§ 245-169. Prevention of fire spread.
A. All firesafety systems and equipment shall be maintained in proper
operating condition at all times.
B. Every multiple dwelling built before September 1, 1976, shall be
equipped with smoke detectors approved by the Fire Department of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow.
C. Every multiple dwelling built after September 1, 1976, shall be
equipped with heat and smoke detectors approved by the Fire
Department of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
D. Every one- and two-family house built after September 1, 1976, shall be
equipped with smoke detectors approved by the Fire Department of
Sleepy Hollow.
E. In multiple dwellings, smoke detectors shall be placed one in each
dwelling unit, one in the boiler room, one in each mechanical
equipment room and one at the top of each shaftway.
F. Fire alarm and detecting systems shall be maintained and be suitable
for their respective purposes.
G. Fire suppression systems shall be maintained in good condition, free
from mechanical injury. Sprinkler heads shall be maintained clean, free
of corrosion and paint and not bent or damaged.
H. In standpipe systems, hose stations shall be identified and accessible.
The hose shall be in proper position, ready for operation, dry and free of
deterioration.
I. All portable fire extinguishers shall be visible and accessible and
maintained in an efficient and safe operating condition.
A. Waste, refuse, household goods, articles of furniture, personal
possessions, construction materials or any other materials shall not be
allowed to accumulate in stairways, passageways, doors, windows, fire
escapes or other means of egress or in any locations that might
interfere with fire-fighting operations.
B. Highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints, volatile oils and
cleaning fluids, or combustible refuse, such as wastepaper, boxes and
rags, shall not be accumulated or stored on the premises, except in
reasonable quantities which are consistent with normal usage.
C. All fuels stored on the premises for the operation of heat-producing
equipment shall be stored in accordance with generally accepted
practice and in a manner that will minimize the danger of fire. Fuel oil,
gasoline and other highly flammable fuel shall be stored in a manner
approved by the Fire Department of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 245-167 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-169
1:300
§ 245-170. Interior finishes, trim and decoration materials.
Interior finish materials for acoustical correction, surface insulation and
decorative treatment on the surfaces of walls and ceilings and interior trim
shall be of materials that will not, in burning, give off excessive amounts of
smoke or objectionable gases.
§ 245-171. Fireplaces.
§ 245-172. Prohibiting location for dwelling or rooming unit.
A dwelling unit or rooming unit shall not be located within a structure
containing an establishment handling, dispensing or storing flammable
liquids with a flash point of 110° F. or lower, except as provided for in the
Building Code.
A. Walls and ceilings shall be maintained free from cracks and openings
that would permit flame or excessive heat to enter the concealed space.
B. In buildings of mixed occupancy, nonresidential space shall be
separated from residential space by approved fire separations that will
retard the spread of fire.
C. Garages in or attached to a residential building shall be separated from
other spaces in the building by approved fire separations that will
retard the spread of fire and prevent flammable or toxic vapors
originating within the garage from being transmitted to other parts of
the building.
A. Fireplaces and similar construction used or intended to be used for
burning fuel in open fires shall be connected to approved chimneys and
shall be installed so that nearby or adjacent combustible materials and
structural members shall not be heated to unsafe temperatures.
B. Hearths and linings or other parts of fireplaces exposed directly to
flame shall be of materials that will not melt, disintegrate, spill or
shatter at high temperatures.
C. Wood mantels and trim on fireplaces shall be placed and attached so
that they cannot be heated to unsafe temperatures or ignited by sparks
or embers from the fire.
§ 245-169 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-172
1:301

ARTICLE XXI
Dwelling Units
§ 245-173. Maintenance.
§ 245-174. Maximum occupancy; minimum space.33
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit
that does not comply with the following requirements:
§ 245-175. Bedrooms.
§ 245-176. Alcoves.
A. Every dwelling unit shall be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary
condition.
B. Every dwelling unit in a multiple residence, which is not covered by
rent control or by separate agreement providing for painting, shall be
painted at least once every three years.
A. A dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling shall not be occupied by more
than one family, plus two occupants unrelated to the family, except for
guests or domestic employees.
B. The owner, or his agent, shall advise the occupants, in writing, of the
maximum number of occupants permitted in the dwelling unit.
C. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet for the first
occupant, at least 100 square feet for the second occupant and at least
75 square feet for each occupant thereafter. The floor space shall be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
D. At least one room shall have a minimum width of 10 feet.
E. Every habitable room shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet
over at least 50% of the floor area therein. The area where the ceiling is
less than five feet shall not be considered in computing minimum
required floor area.
A. In every dwelling unit of two or more habitable rooms, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes shall have at least 70 square feet of
floor area for one occupant; 50 square feet of floor area per person for
two or more occupants; for children under six years old, the
requirement shall be 35 square feet per child for two or more children.
B. Every sleeping room shall be at least seven feet wide.
C. Every sleeping room shall have a door to ensure privacy.
D. A kitchen shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
33.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 319, Residential Occupancy Restrictions.
§ 245-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-176
1:303
§ 245-177. Efficiency apartments.
Every dwelling unit, occupied by two or more persons, that contains a room
not intended primarily for either cooking or sleeping and which is properly
designed and equipped or especially furnished with a kitchenette and bed
furniture properly designed for daytime storage or other daytime use, to be
used as a combination of regular living and efficiency sleeping, may contain
50 square feet less gross floor area than required in § 245-174 of this Part
3.
§ 245-178. Access.
§ 245-179. Closets.
Every dwelling unit shall have at least four square feet of floor-to-ceilingheight
closet space for the personal effects of each permissible occupant. If
it is lacking, in whole or in part, an amount of space equal in square footage
to the deficiency shall be subtracted from the area of habitable room space
used in determining permissible occupancy.
§ 245-180. Habitable space below grade.
A. An alcove with an area of less than 60 square feet shall be deemed part
of the habitable room it abuts, provided that:
(1) The dividing partition between the alcove and the room has an
opening of at least 80% of the wall area of the partition, measured
on the alcove side.
(2) Such wall area is at least 40 square feet.
(3) The depth of such alcove is not more than half its width.
B. The floor area of the alcove shall be added to the floor area of the
habitable room for the purpose of complying with the light and
ventilation requirements under §§ 245-182 through 245-185 of this Part
3.
C. An alcove with an area of 60 square feet or more, but less than 80
square feet, shall be deemed part of the habitable room that it abuts,
provided that it meets the requirements of Subsection A above and is
separately lighted and ventilated as required for habitable space under
this Part 3.
A. No dwelling unit shall have such room arrangement that the only access
to a water closet or bathroom, to any habitable space, to any hall or
exterior shall be through a water closet or bathroom or through the
sleeping room or dwelling unit of another occupant.
B. No habitable room and no water closet or bathroom contained in a
dwelling unit shall open directly into or be used in conjunction with any
space used for public purposes.
§ 245-176 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-180
1:304
§ 245-181. Nonhabitable space.
No cellar shall be used as a habitable area.
§ 245-182. Light.
§ 245-183. Natural light.
§ 245-184. Artificial light.
A. Every dwelling unit and rooming unit located in a basement shall meet
all the requirements of this Part 3.
B. Floors and outside walls of such dwelling units and rooming units shall
be water- and dampproofed.
C. All pipes, ducts and other obstructions that interfere with the normal
use of the room shall be at least 6 1/2 feet above the floor level.
D. The sills of all required windows shall be located no more than three
feet above the floor level.
E. The exterior grade abutting any wall shall be at least six inches below
any window for a distance of at least five feet from such wall.
A. Every habitable room shall have adequate sources of natural or
artificial light.
B. Every nonhabitable room shall have an adequate source of natural or
artificial light available at all times.
A. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight or
transparent or translucent panels or any combination thereof facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum aggregate area available for
unobstructed light shall be at least 10% of the floor area of such rooms.
B. Whenever an obstruction is higher than the top of the window and less
than five feet from it, such window shall not be deemed to face directly
to the outdoors or be included as contributing to the total window area.
A. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with at least one fifteen-amp
circuit; such circuit shall not be shared with another dwelling unit.
B. Every habitable room and kitchen shall contain at least two separate
wall duplex electric convenience outlets, remote from each other, and
one supplied wall or ceiling electric light fixture. However, in lieu of a
wall or ceiling fixture, an additional wall duplex electric convenience
outlet is acceptable.
C. The artificial lighting equipment shall provide a minimum of one watt
per square foot of floor area.
§ 245-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-184
1:305
§ 245-185. Ventilation.
Every habitable room and every kitchen, bathroom, shower room, watercloset
room or compartment shall have at least one window or skylight that
can be easily opened or a mechanical device that will adequately ventilate
such room.
§ 245-186. Kitchens.
Every dwelling unit shall have a room or a portion of a room in which
food may be prepared and cooked. Such room or area shall be provided
with installed safe and adequate food preparation and cooking facilities or
with utility connections for such facilities. Where cooking facilities are not
supplied, adequate space and utility connections shall be provided where
D. Every nonhabitable room, including bathrooms, shower rooms, watercloset
rooms and compartments, shall be supplied with at least one
permanently installed ceiling or wall electric light fixture and one wall
electric convenience outlet.
E. Temporary wiring or extension cords shall not be used as permanent
wiring.
F. Convenient switches for turning on one light in each room or
passageway shall be located so as to permit the area ahead to be
lighted. Such switches shall be of such design as to avoid danger of
electrical hazard.
G. There shall be a switch or other means for controlling a light in each
dwelling unit near the point of entrance to such unit.
A. Natural ventilation.
(1) Openable areas for natural ventilation shall include windows,
skylights, louvers, monitors and similar openings.
(2) The total openable area for natural ventilation in habitable rooms
shall be equal to 45% of the minimum requirement for windows and
skylights, as specified in § 245-183 of this Part 3.
(3) The total openable area for natural ventilation in bathrooms,
shower rooms, water-closet rooms or compartments shall be at
least 1 1/2 square feet facing open space.
B. Mechanical ventilation.
(1) Required ventilation may be supplied by a mechanical device of a
type approved by the Building Inspector.
(2) The system shall be provided with proper openings for incoming
and outgoing air to obtain the required circulation of air and shall
be so constructed, arranged and maintained as to continuously
provide adequate ventilation.
§ 245-184 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-186
1:306
such connections are necessary. Such area shall be equipped with the
following:
§ 245-187. Bathrooms.
A. A kitchen sink of approved material, in good working condition,
properly connected to a water supply system approved by the Building
Inspector, which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated
and unheated running water under pressure and which is connected to
any approved sewer system.
B. A stove or similar device for cooking food, which is properly installed
with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation.
C. A refrigerator for the safe storage of food at temperatures less than
45° F. but more than 32° F. under maximum summer conditions, which
is properly installed with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary
and efficient operation.
D. Exception: The devices required by Subsections B and C of this section
need not be installed when a dwelling unit is not occupied and when the
prospective occupant is expected to provide the same on occupancy.
E. Adequate cabinets and/or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking,
cooking equipment and utensils and of food that does not, under
ordinary maximum summer conditions, require refrigeration for
safekeeping. Said equipment shall be of sound construction, with
surfaces that are easily cleaned and that will not impart any toxic or
deleterious effect to food. All doors and drawers must operate easily,
close fully, and all hardware must be operable.
A. Every dwelling unit shall have a room that affords privacy, equipped
with a flush water closet, with easily cleanable surfaces, properly
connected to a water system that at all times provides an adequate
amount of running water under pressure to cause it to operate properly
and that shall be properly connected to a sewer system approved by the
Building Inspector.
B. Every dwelling unit shall have a lavatory which may be located in the
same room as the flush water closet or, if in another room, shall be close
to the door leading directly into the room in which said water closet is
located. The lavatory shall be in good working condition and properly
connected to a water supply system approved by the Building Inspector,
which provides, at all times, an adequate amount of heated and
unheated running water under pressure and which is properly
connected to a sewer system approved by the Building Inspector. Water
inlets for the lavatory shall be located above the overflow run of these
facilities.
C. Every dwelling unit shall have a room that affords privacy and is
equipped with a bathtub or shower in good working condition. Such
bathtub or shower may be in the same room as the water closet or in
§ 245-186 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-187
1:307
§ 245-188. Heat.
§ 245-189. Doors.
another room, it shall be properly connected to a water supply system
approved by the Building Inspector and shall provide an adequate
amount of heated and unheated water under pressure, and it shall
be properly connected to a sewer system approved by the Building
Inspector.
D. In multiple dwellings, floors of bathrooms, shower rooms and watercloset
rooms and compartments shall be waterproof. Such
waterproofing shall extend at least four inches above floors, except
doors, so that floors can be flushed or washed without leaking.
E. In one- and two-family houses, the floor surface of every bathroom,
shower room and water closet or compartment shall be constructed or
covered with a moisture-resistant finish or material. Such floors shall be
kept clean and sanitary.
F. Every bathroom shall be equipped with a medicine cabinet or other
approved means of storage.
A. Every owner or operator of a building, who permits to be occupied any
dwelling unit or rooming unit therein under an agreement, expressed or
implied, to supply or furnish heat to the occupants thereof, shall supply
heat adequate to maintain no less than a minimum inside temperature
of 65° F. between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and not less
than 60° F. between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Whenever
the ambient temperature outside of the building or part thereof shall
fall below 55° F., said temperature shall be provided in all habitable
rooms, shower rooms, bathrooms, water-closet compartments and
kitchens.
B. Temperature requirements shall be measured 36 inches from the floor
at approximately the center of the room.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply where the failure to
maintain minimum requirements is caused by a general shortage of
fuel, negligent or malicious acts of the occupant, necessary repairs or
alterations or any cause beyond the control of the owner or occupant
such as might be mandated or recommended by the Westchester
County Department of Health in an emergency crisis.
D. Heating facilities, if such are under the occupant's control, shall be
operated in order to maintain above-freezing temperatures at all times
in all parts of the residential building, dwelling unit or rooming unit that
is occupied, so as to prevent injury or damage to water pipes and
plumbing.
A. The entrance door to a dwelling unit shall be equipped with safe,
functioning locks.
§ 245-187 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-189
1:308
§ 245-190. Garbage and rubbish.34
§ 245-191. Storage of drugs and poisons.
Every dwelling unit shall have facilities for the storage of drugs and
household poisons.
B. Every door, when closed, shall fit reasonably well within its frame.
C. Every door, door hinge and door latch shall be maintained in good
condition.
D. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a functioning mechanical or
electrical doorbell or clapper.
A. Every dwelling unit shall be free from accumulations of garbage and
rubbish that might become a health, accident or fire hazard.
B. Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of regularly by the occupant in
the appropriate manner.
C. Disposal of garbage by garbage disposal units shall be in accordance
with all applicable regulations of Sleepy Hollow.
D. Inflammable materials shall be stored safely or removed from the
premises.
34.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 347, Solid Waste.
§ 245-189 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-191
1:309

ARTICLE XXII
Window Guards
[Added 12-21-1993 by L.L. No. 17-1993]
§ 245-192. Installation and maintenance.
A. Within 60 days after the effective date of this article, every person who
owns, manages or controls a dwelling containing four or more rental
units shall provide, install and maintain a window guard of a type
acceptable to the Building Department of the Village of Sleepy Hollow
("Building Department") on all windows in each apartment not on a
ground floor where a child or children 10 years of age or under reside
and on all windows in the common public halls.
(1) It shall be the duty of each person required to provide, install and
maintain a window guard to ascertain whether such children reside
therein.
(2) Installation shall be made in accordance with specifications
provided by the Building Department.
(3) This section shall not apply to windows giving access to fire
escapes or to first-floor windows or windows that are a required
means of emergency egress from the dwelling.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor next above it. If there is no floor
above it, then it shall be the space between the floor and ceiling next
above it. A cellar shall not be counted as a story in determining building
height.
C. No one shall obstruct or interfere with the installation of the window
guards required by Subsection A, nor shall any person remove such
window guards without written permission from the Building
Department.
D. Every person who owns, manages or controls a building with rental
units is required to provide, install and maintain window guards when
so requested by any resident, even when a child in the protected
category does not reside in the subject apartment, within 30 days of a
written request to do so.
E. Whenever a violation is found to exist, the Building Department may
order any person required to provide, install and maintain window
guards to do so. In the event that such order is not complied with within
five days after service thereof, the Building Department may issue
appearance tickets to enforce compliance with this article. No
certificate of occupancy or letter of legal nonconformity shall be issued
§ 245-192 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-192
1:311
§ 245-193. Notification to tenants.
§ 245-194. Penalties for offenses.
by the Building Department unless the building in question is in
compliance with this section.
A. All leases offered to tenants of a dwelling must contain a notice,
conspicuously set forth therein, which advises them of their rights to
have window guards installed in their apartments and that a copy of
this article is contained in the office of the Sleepy Hollow Village Clerk.
If the lease arrangements are oral, a written notice to the effect of the
above and a copy of this article shall be nevertheless provided to each
tenant holding under such an oral lease.
B. Every person required to provide, install and maintain window guards
must cause to be delivered to each apartment within the dwelling a
notice advising the occupants of their rights to have window guards
installed in their apartments and that a copy of this article is contained
in the office of the Village Clerk. Such notices must be provided
annually in a form and manner approved by the Building Department to
any units that do not have window guard installations.
C. The Building Department may promulgate such procedures as it deems
necessary for there to be compliance with the provisions of this section.
A. Any person who neglects, refuses or fails to comply with any order or
notice issued hereunder shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a
fine not to exceed $250 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional offense or violation.
B. Nothing in this article shall be construed as depriving the Village of
Sleepy Hollow of any other remedy available to it in cases where there
is a violation of this article.
§ 245-192 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 245-194
1:312
Chapter 251
INDUSTRIAL FACILITIES
§ 251-1. Short title and purposes.
§ 251-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW BOARD — The Environmental Review Board of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow established pursuant to this chapter.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Crude oil and its fractions, including
petroleum and all liquid or semisolid petroleum derivatives, asbestos, any
substance defined as a hazardous substance under the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. § 9601
et seq., any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste under
the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901
et seq., and polychlorinated biphenyls, pesticides subject to the Federal
Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act, any substances designated as
toxic pollutants by Congress or the United States Environmental Protection
Agency pursuant to Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act and any substance designated a "hazardous substance," "extremely
A. This chapter shall be called the "Environmental Protection and
Abandoned Industrial Property Reclamation Law."
B. The purposes of this chapter are to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, to prevent the
creation of nuisance conditions, hazards to public safety and abandoned
industrial neighborhood blight, to assure that large industrial
properties are evaluated for environmental degradation and that
environmental contamination is remediated prior to a significant
change in use of an industrial facility and to prevent erosion of the tax
base of the Village through the creation of large parcels of abandoned,
environmentally contaminated industrial property.
C. The Village Board of the Village of Sleepy Hollow specifically finds that
termination and uncontrolled transfer of industrial properties in other
Westchester County communities, including but not limited to Yonkers,
Hastings-on-Hudson, New Rochelle, Irvington-on-Hudson, Ardsley and
Port Chester, have created conditions conducive to the development of
community blight and environmental degradation and further
specifically finds that without an adequate local law to control the
means by which large industrial operations in the Village are
transferred to nonindustrial owners or are terminated, the Village of
Sleepy Hollow will experience similar difficulties and impacts, which
will be magnified because of the unique publicly visual nature of a
significant portion of the industrial base of the Village.
§ 245-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-2
1:313
hazardous substance" or "toxic substance" under regulations issued
pursuant to Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act
of 1986.
INDUSTRIAL FACILITY — A facility engaged in operations which involve or
during its operational life ever involved the generation, use, manufacture,
refining, transportation, treatment, storage, handling or disposal of
hazardous substances or wastes which occupies more than 25,000 square
feet of interior structural space in one or more structures devoted to
manufacturing and ancillary activities located on a single parcel or
contiguous parcels of land and which has a Standard Industrial
Classification (SIC) major group number within 22 to 39, inclusive, 46 to 49,
inclusive, 51 or 76, as designated in and determined in accordance with the
procedures in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual prepared by
the Department of Commerce and/or the Office of Management and Budget
of the United States.
OPERATOR — A person or organized business enterprise exercising
financial and management control over the operations of an industrial
facility.[Amended 3-29-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
OWNER — A person or entity holding fee title to an industrial facility
or possessing a leasehold interest in an industrial facility pursuant to a
lease having a term of more than 25 years. The term shall not include a
governmental entity holding title or indicia of title solely incident to an
industrial revenue bond financing arrangement or a payment in lieu of taxes
arrangement, nor shall it include an entity holding indicia of ownership
solely to protect a security interest or a person holding indicia of title
as owner-trustee or owner-participant under a finance lease.[Amended
3-29-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
TERMINATION OF OPERATIONS — Cessation of active manufacturing at
the industrial facility, including reduction of the annual production output
for a period of one year to less than 10% of the average yearly production
output for the 10 years prior to such reduction.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR OPERATION — The transfer of either title
to or the owner's leasehold interest in an industrial facility by sale, lease,
assignment, gift or other means or a controlling interest in a corporation,
partnership, joint venture or other entity, the principal asset of which
is an industrial facility, whether such transfer takes the form of a stock
sale, gift, assignment, corporate reorganization, merger, consolidation or a
combination or series of the foregoing.[Amended 3-29-1994 by L.L. No.
5-1994]
§ 251-3. Responsibilities upon transfer or termination of
operations. [Amended 3-29-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
A. The obligations imposed by this section shall be joint and several upon
the owner and operator of an industrial facility.
B. Unless exempt under § 251-5 hereof, prior to the earlier occurring of
transfer of ownership or operation of an industrial facility or prior to
§ 251-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 251-3
1:314
termination of operation of an industrial facility, the owner and operator
shall, not later than 90 days prior to such event, provide notice of such
proposed transfer or termination and shall undertake the following
activities:
(1) Remove all hazardous substances stored in or on the facility or
disposed of in or on the facility and dispose of such substances at a
location other than the facility in accordance with applicable law.
(2) Utilizing the services of competent professional consultants and
contractors, perform a thorough and complete investigation,
satisfactory to the Environmental Review Board, of the physical
structures and soil and groundwater of and beneath all real
property which was at any time utilized in connection with
operations of the industrial facility or is contiguous or adjacent to
the industrial facility and under ownership or control of the facility,
on or beneath any public or private highway or railroad right-ofway
not under the ownership or control of the owner or operator of
the industrial facility and lying on or adjacent to the industrial
facility, provided that permission for such activity is obtained from
the owner or lessee thereof, and on or beneath the bed of any body
of water contiguous to the industrial facility, provided that any
necessary approval for such activity is acquired, for the presence of
hazardous substances above the normally occurring background
concentrations of such substances in undeveloped property within
the municipality.
(3) In the event that any hazardous substances are detected in the soil
or groundwater of or beneath the facility at concentrations greater
than background, or in the physical structures at any
concentration, undertake further sampling and analysis,
satisfactory to the Environmental Review Board, to determine the
extent of contamination by such substances beyond the boundaries
of such facility, provided that permission to enter and take samples
is obtained from the owner or lessee occupant of any such property
not owned or controlled by the owner and operator.
(4) Following completion of its obligations under Subsection B(2) and
B(3) of this section, the owner and operator (or transferee) shall
submit the site assessment conducted thereunder to the
Environmental Review Board. If the site assessment (or, in the
event that the owner, operator or transferee fails to conduct such
assessment in a manner reasonably satisfactory to the
Environmental Review Board, such additional information as the
Environmental Review Board shall have available to it) indicates
that the condition of the structure or structures included in the
facility or the presence of sufficient quantities or concentrations of
hazardous substances in the soil or groundwater of the facility (or
any adjacent or other properties contaminated by such substances
as a result of operations or activities at the facility) or beneath or
incorporated into any structure or structures at the facility is such
§ 251-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-3
1:315
as to render the soil, groundwater or such structure or structures,
in whole or in part, dangerous, unsafe or a significant threat to
health or the environment, the Environmental Review Board may,
after affording the owner and operator (or transferee) a reasonable
opportunity to be heard and to present objections, direct the owner
and operator (or transferee) of such industrial facility to take all
remedial actions necessary to remove such hazardous substances
from affected portions of the facility or the premises so
contaminated so that the levels of such substances remaining in
the environment after remedial activity is complete do not exceed
background levels. Such directive may also include the demolition,
removal and proper disposal of any dangerous, unsafe or
environmentally threatening structure (or part thereof) where, in
the judgment of the Environmental Review Board, such action
is necessary to adequately protect public health, safety and the
environment.
(5) If the owner or operator (or transferee) shall object to any directive
issued by the Environmental Review Board pursuant to Subsection
B(4) of this section, the objecting party may, by notice given within
15 days from the date of such directive, appeal such determination
of the Environmental Review Board to the Village Trustees, which
shall, after affording such party a further opportunity to be heard
and to present objections to such directive, either affirm, modify or
rescind such directive.
(6) In the event that the owner or operator (or transferee) shall fail to
take such actions as may be directed by the Environmental Review
Board pursuant to Subsection B(4) of this section or, in the event of
an appeal to the Village Trustees pursuant to Subsection B(5) of
this section, by the Trustees, the Village may commence
proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel the
performance of the remediation, demolition, removal and disposal
specified by the Environmental Review Board or the Trustees, as
the case may be, or to collect the costs of such remediation,
demolition, removal and disposal from the owner and operator (or,
at the option of the Village, such transferee).
(7) The Village has determined that, in the event of termination of
operations, the continuing presence of unused and abandoned
structures, even if not sufficiently contaminated or in such
condition as to require their immediate demolition and removal
pursuant to Subsection B(4), nevertheless poses a significant longterm
threat to public health, safety and the environment.
Accordingly, if five years after the date of termination of operations
such structures remain on the facility, the owner (or transferee)
shall, not later than 12 months thereafter, demolish all such
structures on the facility site and remove all personal property and
debris from the site, including all foundations, tanks and
§ 251-3 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 251-3
1:316
§ 251-4. Review fee and bond.
subsurface structures, regrade the site and eliminate all man-made
hazards and structures.
C. Following completion of each of the applicable requirements set forth in
Subsection B hereof, the owner or operator (or transferee) shall certify
to the Environmental Review Board that such requirement has been
satisfied and provide a detailed written report to the Environmental
Review Board setting forth in detail what was done in compliance with
each subsection thereof. Each report required hereby shall be prepared
by a competent, qualified consulting firm. The Environmental Review
Board shall, following review of the submission and supporting
material, either certify in writing that the owner or operator has
satisfied the obligations of this chapter or inform the submitter, in
writing, that the obligations of this chapter have not been satisfied,
setting forth the deficiencies upon which the conclusion is based. A final
certification or a final determination of noncompliance shall be
considered final action for the purpose of judicial review. Certification
by the Environmental Review Board shall not constitute an independent
conclusion or warranty by the Village of Sleepy Hollow regarding the
safety or environmental condition of the property subject to the
certification, and each certification made by the Environmental Review
Board shall include a disclaimer that the action was based upon
information provided by the applicant.
D. The duties imposed upon the owner or operator (or transferee) under
this section shall be continuing until such time as the owner or operator
has been notified, in writing, by the Environmental Review Board,
following its review of the report received with respect to such
obligation pursuant to Subsection C hereof and following such further
inquiry or inspection made by the Environmental Review Board, at its
sole discretion, that the obligations hereof have been carried out in
accordance with the terms of Subsection B of this section.
A. A fee in the amount set forth in Chapter 200, Fees, shall be paid to the
Village of Sleepy Hollow by the owner or operator at the time the notice
required in § 251-3 hereof is filed with the Environmental Review
Board. Said sums shall be utilized by the Environmental Review Board
solely for the purpose of retaining qualified technical and legal
consultants to review materials submitted pursuant to § 251-3, to
undertake independent evaluation of the conditions of the property and
to provide advice to the Environmental Review Board with respect to
the industrial facility and for other purposes related to the general
administration of this chapter. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
B. The owner and operator (or transferee) shall at the same time also
provide to the Village of Sleepy Hollow a performance bond in an
amount sufficient, in the judgment of the Environmental Review Board,
to cover the estimated costs of site characterization and hazardous
§ 251-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-4
1:317
§ 251-5. Exemptions. [Amended 3-29-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
substance removal and disposal. [Amended 3-29-1994 by L.L. No.
5-1994]
A. The obligations of §§ 251-3 and 251-4 hereof applicable to transfer of
ownership or operations shall not apply to the transfer of an industrial
facility by its owner or operator, prior to termination of operations, to
another adequately capitalized manufacturing owner or operator,
provided that the Environmental Review Board determines, upon
certification by the chief executive officer of the transferor, assented to
by the chief executive officer of the transferee, that:
(1) The transferee intends to produce goods of the same general type
as those produced by the transferor, at a production output level,
following a reasonable retooling and start-up period, of at least
25% of the average annual output of the transferor during the 10
years prior to the date of the proposed transfer.
(2) The transferee has sufficient capitalization, assets and relevant
manufacturing experience to successfully operate the enterprise in
such manner and at such level of output.
B. The following transactions, operations or facilities are not subject to
this chapter:
(1) Any business entity engaged primarily in the production of
agricultural commodities.
(2) A cessation of operations for less than two years where within three
months of the initial cessation of operations the owner or operator
certifies, under oath, to the Environmental Review Board that the
cessation of operations is intended to be temporary, setting forth
the reasons therefor, and commits to satisfy the obligations
imposed by this chapter in the event that operations do not
terminate within 24 months of the date of first cessation.
(3) Transfers made solely to confirm or correct any deficiencies in
recorded title.
(4) Transfers made solely to release a contingent or reversionary
interest.
(5) Facilities engaged in the retail sale of goods with a SIC major group
number of 52 to 59.
(6) Transfer of an individual establishment by devise or interstate
succession.
(7) Transfer of an industrial establishment where the transferor and
the transferee are members of the same family. As used in this
subsection, "family" means a person's siblings, spouse, children,
grandchildren, parents and grandparents.
§ 251-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 251-5
1:318
§ 251-6. Enforcement. [Amended 3-29-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
§ 251-7. Variances.
(8) Transfer of a beneficiary interest pursuant to the terms of a trust.
(9) Operations engaged in the wholesale distribution of durable goods
with a SIC major group number of 50.
(10) Granting or terminating an easement on or a license to any portion
of an industrial facility.
(11) Construction loans obtained by the owner or operator of an
industrial facility.
(12) Termination of a lease of an industrial establishment where the
lease is renewed by the same tenant without disruption in
operations.
(13) Repurchase of fee title by a lessee from the holder of title acquired
from the lessee in a lease finance or sale-leaseback transaction
where there is no disruption in operations.
(14) The following subgroups or classes of operations within those
subgroups in the SIC major group numbers 22 to 39, inclusive, 46
to 49, inclusive, 51 or 76 (listed by SIC industry number): 4724,
4725, 4729, 4785, 4812, 4813, 4822, 4833, 4841, 4941, 4952,
4953, 4971, 5111, 5112, 5113, 5131, 5136, 5137, 5139, 5141,
5142, 5143, 5144, 5145, 5146, 5147, 5148, 5149, 5153, 5154,
5159, 5181, 5182, 5192, 5193, 5199, 7622 and 7631.
A. The Village may seek civil injunctive relief in the Supreme Court to
compel the performance of any duty imposed hereunder.
B. Any party who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall
be liable for a penalty of not more than $5,000 for each offense. If the
violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which the violation
continues shall constitute an additional and separate offense. The
Village shall collect penalties in a special proceeding in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
A. In the event that the owner and operator are unable to secure
permission to enter and conduct sampling or remedial work on property
owned by a third party after having exerted their best efforts to obtain
such entry, including offering to pay reasonable consideration to the
third-party landowner, the Environmental Review Board may, upon
application for relief submitted by the owner and operator, waive the
obligation imposed by Subsection B(2), (3) and (4) of § 251-3 with
respect to such property.
B. The Environmental Review Board may, upon a showing made by the
owner and operator (or transferee) that the obligations of Subsection
§ 251-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-7
1:319
§ 251-8. Environmental Review Board. [Amended 3-29-1994 by L.L.
No. 5-1994]
The Environmental Review Board shall be composed of five residents of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow, one of whom shall be a member of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow Conservation Advisory Committee and one of whom shall be
a member of the Village of Sleepy Hollow Planning Board. The members of
the Environmental Review Board shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Trustees for terms of five years, except that two of the initial
members of such Board shall serve for terms of three years each, and the
remaining three initial members shall serve for terms of five years each. The
Environmental Review Board is authorized to adopt rules and procedures
necessary for its proceedings under this chapter.
§ 251-9. Other laws.
In the event that any provision of this chapter conflicts with any provision of
any federal law or State of New York law which is preemptive of local law,
the conflicting provision of this chapter shall not be effective with respect
to any activity that is subject to and being addressed under the federal or
State of New York law.
§ 251-10. Special condition exemption. [Added 8-20-1996 by L.L.
No. 5-1996]
B(4) and (7) of § 251-3 are not economically feasible or are not
technically feasible, within the time constraints set forth herein, grant
an extension of time for compliance with such obligations, said
extension not to exceed a reasonable period of amortization and in all
events not longer than 10 years, upon such terms and conditions as
are necessary in the interest of the Village and the public. [Amended
3-29-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
C. Upon a showing made by the owner and operator, or by the owner or
operator in conjunction with a prospective purchaser of the facility who
does not qualify for an exemption under § 251-5 hereof, that some or all
of the premises may be adapted for other uses that are consistent with
Village of Sleepy Hollow land use and waterfront revitalization
ordinances and land use plans, the Environmental Review Board may,
upon written findings, waive the obligations of Subsection B(4) of
§ 251-3 hereof and may modify the obligations of Subsection B(1)
through (4) thereof to the extent necessary to allow such adaptive
reuse, upon such terms and conditions, which may include a bond or
other evidence of financial responsibility, as are reasonable and
necessary to assure that the purposes of this chapter are met.
[Amended 3-29-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
A. Any person otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter on
account of the permanent closure of an industrial facility scheduled to
occur during the calendar year 1996, and who, prior to September 1,
§ 251-7 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 251-10
1:320
Chapter 259
LAUNDRIES AND CAR WASHES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
1996, has entered into a binding written agreement with the Village of
Sleepy Hollow which the Mayor and Trustees of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow determine is substantively equivalent to the requirements and
commitments mandated under this chapter, shall be conditionally
exempt from the procedural and substantive requirements hereof.
B. For the purposes of Subsection A hereof, an agreement shall be
considered to be substantially equivalent to the requirements and
commitments mandated under this chapter if it:
(1) Requires the owner, lessee or operator of the industrial facility to
perform a complete environmental site assessment of the industrial
facility in accordance with generally established standards and
practices followed by competent environmental site assessment
professionals;
(2) Requires the owner, lessee or operator to remediate (clean up) any
environmental contamination discovered at, under or emanating
from the industrial facility within a reasonable period of time and to
a level of cleanup that is consistent with applicable or relevant and
appropriate federal or state cleanup standards or remediation
trigger levels for specific compounds and applicable soil or
groundwater quality criteria; and
(3) Requires the owner, lessee or operator to demolish the industrial
structures, fixtures and appurtenances on the site within a period
of time that is equal to or less than the longest time period within
which such activity would be required under the provisions of this
chapter.
C. Nothing contained in this section or any agreement entered into
pursuant to this section shall constitute a waiver of or otherwise limit
the powers of the Village of Sleepy Hollow to take such other
reasonable actions as it shall believe necessary or appropriate to
protect the public health and welfare against any unremediated or
continuing contamination of an industrial facility subject to such an
agreement, any failure to demolish such an industrial facility within the
time provided in such agreement or any other condition resulting from
the failure of an owner, lessee or operator to comply with its obligations
under such agreement.
D. This section shall take effect immediately.
§ 251-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-10
1:321
§ 259-1. Purpose.
As a legislative determination, it is deemed necessary to the safety, health
and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Village of Sleepy Hollow that
certain coin-operated laundry and car washing establishments within said
Village be regulated and to eliminate conditions dangerous to the Village.
§ 259-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, when used in this chapter, the following
words and phrases shall have the meaning herein respectively ascribed to
them:
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow or his duly authorized representative.[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
PERSON — Includes one or more persons, firms, partnerships or
corporations and the employees, agents or officers thereof.
PREMISES — Any place, whether self-service or otherwise, maintained for
use of and by the general public for the purpose of washing and drying of
clothing, apparel or other fabrics or household articles and automobiles, by
or in automatic or coin-operated machines, except, however, such places
in private homes and apartment houses used solely by residents thereof.
Premises for car washing purposes shall be deemed to include an off-street
area for car drying purposes.
§ 259-3. Permit required. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate a
coin-operated laundry or car washing establishment in any premises in the
Village of Sleepy Hollow without a permit therefor.
§ 259-4. Application for and issuance of permit. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. The application for a permit or for any renewal thereof to conduct a
coin-operated laundry or car washing establishment shall be in writing
upon a form to be furnished by the Building Inspector and shall state
the specific location of such establishment and the number and type of
all machines to be maintained therein. Before issuing any such permit,
the Building Inspector shall cause all necessary investigations to be
made of the premises described in such application for the purpose of
determining whether the provisions of all applicable state, county,
health and local laws and regulations are fully complied with.
B. If the Building Inspector shall be satisfied that such premises conform
to the provisions of this chapter and other laws relating thereto, he
shall issue or cause to be issued a permit authorizing such applicant to
§ 251-10 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 259-4
1:322
§ 259-5. Fee. [Amended 8-16-1994 by L.L. No. 11-1994; 1-22-2013
by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 259-6. Permit term; transferability. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
Each such permit shall expire on the 31st day of May following the date of
its issuance unless sooner suspended or revoked by the Building Inspector.
Such permit shall not be transferable from person to person or from the
location for which it is originally issued.
§ 259-7. Revocation of permit. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
The Building Inspector may, at any time, for violation of this chapter or
of any applicable law or regulation, or such other cause as the Building
Inspector upon investigation and after a hearing deems sufficient, suspend
or revoke any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter. Notice in
writing of the proposed suspension or revocation and the reason or reasons
therefor and of the time and place of a hearing to be held thereon by the
Building Inspector shall be served upon the permittee either personally
or by certified or registered mail to the business address given in the
application at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Whenever any permit shall
be so revoked, no refund of any unearned portion of the permit fee shall
be made. No permit shall be granted to any person whose permit has been
revoked within a period of two years from the date of such revocation,
except in the discretion of the Building Inspector.
§ 259-8. Departmental approvals. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
All coin-operated washing and drying machines and car washes and
locations must be approved by the department having jurisdiction, prior to
the installation of machinery. A floor plan showing the business premises
and the location, type and manner of installation of all equipment shall be
submitted with each permit application.
establish, maintain, conduct or operate a coin-operated laundry or car
washing establishment at the place, and with the number of machines,
as specified and designated in such application, for and during the
period of such permit.
A. Prior to the issuance of a coin-operated laundry or car-washing
establishment permit, each applicant therefor shall pay an annual
permit fee as established and determined by the Board of Trustees from
time to time and set forth in the fee schedule included at the end of
Chapter 200, Fees.
B. For permits issued between the 30th day of November and the 31st day
of May, inclusive, only 1/2 of the annual permit fee shall be payable.
§ 259-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-9
1:323
§ 259-9. Hours of operation.
No coin-operated laundry or car-washing establishment shall be open for
business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 259-10. Operating restrictions.
§ 259-11. Instructions to public; display of information. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 259-12. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Any person maintaining or conducting or carrying on or operating a coinoperated
laundry or car washing establishment, who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense and subject to a fine
of not more than $250 for each violation, or to imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or to both such fine and imprisonment. Each day or fraction
of a day on which each such violation shall continue shall be construed as a
separate and distinct offense.
A. Filter residue shall be disposed of so as not to create a health hazard or
nuisance.
B. All equipment exhausts or vents for drying machines shall be provided
with mesh lint arrestors which shall be kept clean. Lint traps shall be
provided on all drying units.
C. Each self-service or coin-operated laundry establishment shall be
provided with a portable fire extinguisher of the carbon dioxide or dry
chemical type.
D. All machines shall be checked daily and kept in good repair.
E. Drying machines shall be serviced each day, including but not limited to
cleaning the lint bag, trap or screen.
F. The operator of a coin-operated car washing establishment must
provide off-street space for the drying of cars.
A. A step-by-step instruction list must be posted in a conspicuous location
near each washing and drying machine and each washing machine for
customer use.
B. There shall be posted and conspicuously displayed and maintained, at
all times, on the premises a legible sign on a form to be provided by the
Building Inspector stating the name, address and telephone number of
the owner or managing agent, which telephone number shall be listed
at Police Headquarters for emergency assistance. There shall be posted
and conspicuously displayed and maintained, at all times, on the
premises the permit issued by the Building Inspector.
§ 259-9 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 259-12
1:324
Chapter 263
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 280.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Solid waste — See Ch. 347.
§ 263-1. Prohibited conduct.
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall deposit or place or allow
to be deposited or placed upon any of the streets, highways, public places,
alleys, sidewalks, parks or lanes, sewers or drains in the Village of Sleepy
Hollow, New York, and no person or persons, firm or corporation shall
allow to accumulate upon any sidewalks, streets or thoroughfares abutting
on their premises or adjoining their premises any filth, rubbish, papers,
wrappers and boxes of any nature or description whatsoever or in any way
litter the streets or sidewalks or thoroughfares of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow, New York, except that garbage or refuse may be placed in proper
receptacles on the sidewalks of said Village for the purpose of being
collected by the duly appointed garbage collector.
§ 263-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons violating this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not to exceed $250 for each offense.
Chapter 268
PUBLIC GATHERINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 200.
Handbills and posters — See Ch. 240.
Littering — See Ch. 263.
Nuisances — See Ch. 280.
§ 259-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 263-2
1:325

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 268-1. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BAZAAR — A sale of goods to raise money for a particular project or
organization.
BLOCK PARTY — A party that takes place outside on a public street or
highway for all the people who live on the same block or street.
BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
CARNIVAL — An outdoor amusement show with rides and places where
patrons can buy food and try to win prizes by playing games.
FESTIVAL — A series of related events or performances conducted on
Village property, sidewalks, streets and other public rights-of-way, including
but not limited to festive activities, cultural events, exhibitions,
competitions, collections of shows, live entertainment and other amusement
enterprises and/or the dispensation of food, which is open to the public at
large.
PARADE — A public celebration in which a large group of people move
through an area, often with decorated vehicles and bands playing music.
PERMIT — The permission in writing of the Village Administrator of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow, issued in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law, to carry on a festival.
PERSON — Every natural person, copartnership, association or
corporation, whether for-profit or nonprofit.
SPONSOR — The person or entity who or which executes the application for
a permit to conduct a festival.
VENDOR — A person who operates, during the life of the permit, a booth or
stand, or otherwise occupies space in which he conducts games of skill or
chance or dispenses food and beverages, merchandise or the like.
VILLAGE — The Village of Sleepy Hollow.
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR — The Village official or employee designated
to be responsible for receiving applications and issuing permits.
§ 268-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-1
1:327

ARTICLE II
Bazaars, Carnivals, Parades and Festivals
§ 268-2. Prohibited conduct.
Outdoor bazaars, carnivals, parades and festivals within the corporate
limits of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, New York, are hereby prohibited,
unless written permission for the same is granted by the Board of Trustees.
No person or persons shall parade or go about or remain in or upon any of
the streets of this Village, or on any place beating any drum or tambourine,
or make noise with any instrument whatsoever, for any purpose whatever,
without permission from the Board of Trustees. This section is intended to
include the loud playing of automobile radios or unnecessary sounding of
automobile horns.
§ 268-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate, through the permit and inspection
process, bazaars, carnivals, parades and festivals and affairs of like nature
to be conducted in the Village of Sleepy Hollow on public streets, sidewalks,
rights-of-way and/or other Village property, for the protection of the health,
welfare and safety of the public in general.
§ 268-4. Permit required.
A. No permit for a festival or other activity of a similar nature shall be
considered or issued unless and until the sponsor desiring to conduct
the affair shall have made and signed a written application to the
Village Administrator for an operator's permit, in the form provided by
the Village, and paid the proper fee therefor when required, not less
than two weeks prior to the first day of operation of the proposed
festival.
B. The issuance of the festival operator's permit shall be further
conditioned upon the following:
(1) The sponsor's requesting and obtaining from the Mayor of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow permission to close the street or streets
necessary to conduct the festival.
(2) The sponsor's requesting and obtaining from the Board of Trustees
of Sleepy Hollow permission to use property owned by the Village
as well as sidewalks and other rights-of-way.
(3) The sponsor's and/or vendor's executing an indemnification
agreement on behalf of the Village, substantially as follows:
§ 268-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-4
1:329
§ 268-5. Fees.
§ 268-6. Health and sanitary requirements.
"The sponsor and/or vendor hereby represent, stipulate, contract
and agree that they do jointly and severally indemnify and hold
harmless the Village of Sleepy Hollow against liability for any and
all claims for damages to property or injury to or death of persons
arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or
conduct of the public at and during the life of the festival."
(4) Approval by the Fire Department, upon a satisfactory examination
of the premises, with respect to compliance with regulations as
hereinafter set forth in the fire prevention section of this article.
(5) The sponsor's depositing with the Village Administrator at the time
of the filing of the application, in cash or by certified check made
payable to the Village of Sleepy Hollow, a deposit in an amount as
set forth in the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200,
Fees, to guarantee that upon the termination of the festival the
general area where the affair has been conducted will be left in
good condition, cleaned up and cleared of all paper, waste material
and debris within two days from the termination of the festival. If
the sponsor fails to meet this requirement, the Village, in its
discretion, shall clean and restore the area to its prefestival
condition, deducting the moneys spent thereon from the deposit
aforementioned. No deposit will be required for nonprofit entities
sponsoring a festival.
A. If the sponsor is determined to be a wholly nonprofit entity, a minimum
licensing fee to be established and determined by the Board of Trustees
and set forth in the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200,
Fees, shall be charged. A fee to be established and determined by the
Board of Trustees and set forth in the fee schedule shall be charged in
all other instances for a festival operator's permit.
B. Except in those instances where the sponsor is a wholly nonprofit entity,
the fee for a vendor's permit shall be established and determined by the
Board of Trustees from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule
included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
C. The preceding fees shall be payable in advance to the Village
Administrator.
D. In addition thereto, vendors intending to operate food and beverage
stands shall be required to obtain a permit, if required, from the County
Health Department, County of Westchester, and pay any fee required by
the health and sanitary laws of the State of New York and the County of
Westchester.
§ 268-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 268-6
1:330
§ 268-7. Fire prevention.
A. All health and sanitary requirements, regulations and licensing shall be
adhered to by the sponsors and/or vendors of the festival, as provided
for in the sanitary codes of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, the County of
Westchester and the State of New York, which are incorporated by
reference herein as if fully set forth.
B. In addition thereto, the operator of a festival shall provide a sufficient
number of temporary or permanent toilet facilities for the use of
vendors and the use of the public, such number to be determined in the
discretion of the Village Administrator.
A. The sponsor and/or vendors shall, with the consent of the Fire
Department, be authorized to install, hook and connect to fire hydrants
specially marked by the Fire Department a master hose or watercarrying
device to supply water to booths and stands operating at the
festival, subject to the following provisions:
(1) The Fire Department, in its sole discretion, shall determine which
fire hydrants will be used as hereinabove stated.
(2) The sponsor and/or vendors shall maintain all fire hydrants within
the perimeter of the festival free and clear of any obstruction, with
the closest object located next to a fire hydrant at no less than two
feet in any direction from its geometrical center.
(3) The sponsor and/or vendors shall meet and observe at all times the
requirements of the Water Department of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow.
B. The sponsor and/or vendors, while operating a booth or stand in which
there is heating or cooking apparatus for the preparation of food, shall
keep at all times, in a visible, easily accessible location within the booth
or stand, a fully charged fire extinguisher of the kind classified as ABC.
C. All doors or gates on entrances to and exits from the premises where
the festival shall be conducted shall be kept open and unobstructed
during the hours of operation of the festival in order to facilitate the
rapid ingress or egress of all persons attending in case of emergency.
D. It shall be the duty of the sponsor, before the permit shall be issued, to
provide the Village Administrator and the Fire Department with a
sketch depicting the following:
(1) Location of all fire hydrants within the perimeter of the festival.
(2) The physical layout of booths, stands, amusement rides and the
lanes of traffic that shall hereinafter be set forth, showing the
dimensions of said booths and stands and the location and size of
the area which the amusement rides will occupy.
§ 268-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-7
1:331
§ 268-8. Electrical requirements.
All electrical requirements, regulations and licensing shall be adhered to
by the sponsors and/or vendors of the festival, as provided for in the
Electrical and Building Codes of the Village of Sleepy Hollow which are
hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth.
§ 268-9. Alcoholic beverages; games of chance or skill.
§ 268-10. Duration of permit.
The duration of a permit for a festival shall be for not more than five
consecutive days, after which period it shall lapse.
§ 268-11. Hours of operation.
The hours in which it shall be lawful to operate or permit the operation of
a festival in the Village shall be between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:00
p.m., Monday to Friday; 11:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on Saturdays; and
1:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. on Sundays.
§ 268-12. Financial statement.
E. After the sponsor has assigned the individual booths and stands to the
vendors and the areas used for amusement rides to the operators, it
shall be the duty of said sponsor, by the end of the first day of the
festival, to provide the Village Administrator with the list in which the
names, addresses and locations of the vendors and operators of
amusement rides shall be set forth.
F. It shall be the obligation and duty of the sponsor to maintain, during the
duration of the festival, an unimpeded and unobstructed lane for
emergency traffic, at least 10 feet in width, for the rapid ingress and
egress of vehicles required for emergencies or other governmental
purposes.
A. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or consumed and no games
of skill or chance shall be conducted during the operation of the festival
unless and before the sponsor or the vendors obtain a proper and legal
permit to dispense alcoholic beverages and/or conduct games of skill or
chance from the State of New York, the County of Westchester, the
Village or any other regulatory agency.
B. The sponsor and vendors receiving such licenses to dispense alcoholic
beverages and/or conduct games of skill or chance shall be conclusively
presumed to be cognizant of the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Law of New York, of state rules and regulations in regard
thereto and all applicable federal, state and municipal laws, rules and
regulations regarding the operation of games of skill and chance, all of
which are incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth.
§ 268-7 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 268-12
1:332
§ 268-13. Permit revocation.
§ 268-14. Insurance.
A. If requested by the Village Administrator, it shall be the duty of the
sponsor to furnish the Village, not later than 90 days from the last day
of the operation of the festival, with a detailed financial statement
submitted by the chief financial officer of the sponsor, certified as to its
accuracy by a licensed accountant, in a form and manner satisfactory to
the Village Attorney. This financial record, with a profit and loss
statement in the form of an affidavit attached, shall include but not be
limited to fees and sources thereof, rental derived, donations received
by the sponsor and other pertinent data.
B. Failure to provide this data upon request, to wit, the financial statement
in the manner set forth, shall preclude the sponsor from applying for
and receiving a festival permit for future operations until such
requirement has been met and be subject to such other penalty or fines
as set forth herein.
A. The operator's permit or any vendor's permit may be revoked by the
Village Administrator at any time during the life of such permit for any
violation by the operator or an individual vendor of any provision of this
article or any violation of the Code of the Village or any other applicable
state or federal law, in addition to the penalties set forth in the general
penalties section of this chapter.
B. Anything to the contrary in this section notwithstanding, in the cases of
revocation of food and beverage vendors' permits, such revocation shall
be at the discretion of the appropriate health or regulatory authority.
A. Before any permit shall be granted, the sponsor shall provide and
deposit with the Village Administrator a public liability insurance policy
in an amount to be determined by the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow, but in no event to exceed the amount of $1,000,000,
single limit, naming the sponsor and the Village of Sleepy Hollow as
coinsured.
B. In addition thereto, the sponsor shall hold the Village harmless from
any and all claims or judgments recovered against him or the Village in
any court of competent jurisdiction in excess of the amount of insurance
required by the Village, or if the maximum is required, for all claims in
excess of said one-million-dollar single-limit liability insurance policy.
§ 268-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-14
1:333

ARTICLE III
Outdoor Gatherings
§ 268-15. Meetings or gatherings without permission prohibited.
No outdoor or other public meeting or gathering shall be permitted on any
of the highways, avenues, roadways, sidewalks or other public property of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow without written permission from the Board of
Trustees of said Village after proper application made therefor.
§ 268-16. Application for permission.
Any person or persons seeking permission to hold such outdoor or public
meeting or gathering shall make written application to the Board of
Trustees, setting forth the name and address of the applicant; the purpose
of such meeting or gathering; the time when and the place where such
meeting is to be held; and the approximate length of time such meeting will
last.
§ 268-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-16
1:335

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 268-17. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, in
addition to the forfeiture of the permit, shall be punished by a fine not
to exceed $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both, per
violation, such fine and imprisonment to be in the discretion of the court.
§ 268-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-17
1:337
Chapter 272
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 110.
Animals — See Ch. 123.
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 148.
Explosives and blasting — See Ch. 193.
Public gatherings — See Ch. 268.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 299.
§ 272-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DECIBEL (dB) — A unit level used in acoustics to express the ratio of two
sound pressures. The number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two
sound pressures is 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of this ratio.
FREQUENCY BAND — The range of frequencies between two specified
frequencies.
NIGHTTIME — The hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., prevailing
time.
NOISE OF IMPULSIVE CHARACTER — A noise such as that from a hammer
blow, punch press, gunshot, etc.
NOISE OF PERIODIC CHARACTER — A noise such as that from a power
planer or power saw, a transformer hum, etc.
OCTAVE BAND — A frequency band one octave wide.
OCTAVE BAND ANALYZER — An instrument for measuring the sound
pressure level in each of the octave bands which comprise the spectrum
of the sound. The octave band analyzer shall conform to United States of
America Standard USASI Z24.10 1953 or the latest revision thereof.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL (SPL) — In decibels of a sound, is 20 times the
logarithm to the base 10 of the measured sound pressure to a reference
pressure of 0.0002 microbar [SPL = 20 log10 (sound pressure/reference
pressure)].
UNREASONABLE NOISE — Any excessive or unusually loud sound or any
sound which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities
or which causes injury to animal life or damage to property or business.
Standards to be considered in determining whether unreasonable noise
exists in a given situation include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. The volume of the noise.
B. The intensity of the noise.
§ 268-17 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 272-1
1:338
VILLAGE — The Village of Sleepy Hollow in the County of Westchester and
State of New York.
§ 272-2. Policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village to prevent any
unnecessary loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise. Noise of such
character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health
of any individual or contrary to the public welfare, as herein set forth, is
prohibited.
§ 272-3. Prohibited noise levels.
C. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.
D. Whether the origin of the noise is usual or unusual.
E. The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any.
F. The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.
The nature and the zoning district of the areas within which the noise
emanates.
G.
H. The time of the day or night the noise occurs.
I. The time duration of the noise.
J. Whether the sound source is temporary.
K. Whether the noise is continuous or impulsive.
A. Determination of noise levels.
(1) No person shall operate or cause to be operated any mechanism or
device which shall create a noise within the Village exceeding the
limiting noise levels set forth in the following table:
Octave Band Center
Frequency in Hertz (CPS)
Sound Pressure
Level in Decibels
Above 0.0002 Microbar
63 70
125 63
250 56
500 49
1,000 45
2,000 40
4,000 38
8,000 35
§ 272-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-3
1:339
§ 272-4. Disturbing and unreasonable noises.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing,
unnecessary and unreasonable noises in violation of this chapter, but any
enumeration herein shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(2) The above values refer to smooth and continuous noise; however, in
the event that the noise is not smooth and continuous and is not
radiated at nighttime, one or more of the following corrections
shall be added to or subtracted from each of the decibel levels
given above:
Type of Operation or Character of
Noise
Correction
(dBs)
Daytime operation only +5
Noise source operates less than 20% of
any 1 hour
+5*
Noise source operates less than 5% of
any 1 hour
+10*
Noise source operates less than 1% of
any 1 hour
+15*
Noise of impulsive character -5
Noise of periodic character -5
NOTE:
* Apply one of these corrections only.
B. Noise measurements required under the terms of this chapter shall be
made by the use of an octave band analyzer as defined herein.
C. Noise measurements and limits shall conform to the following
practices:
(1) Noise shall be measured at least four feet above ground level but
not more than at an altitude exceeding 40 feet above ground level.
(2) Facility noise originating on residential property shall be measured
at the property on which the noise source is located.
(3) Facility noise originating on business or commercial property shall
be measured at the property line of the nearest residential
property.
A. Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle (other than an
emergency vehicle) on any street or public place, except as a danger or
burglary warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of
any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such
device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of
§ 272-3 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 272-4
1:340
any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use
of any horn, whistle or of any such signaling device when traffic is for
any reason held up.
B. Radios, televisions, electronic sound reproduction devices, etc. The
using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any
radio, musical instrument or instruments, phonograph or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, in such a
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring
inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for
convenient hearing of the person or persons who are voluntary listeners
thereto. "Neighboring inhabitants" shall also be interpreted to mean
those persons in close proximity to the operator of an above-listed
device. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph,
machine, or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. in
such a manner as to be plainly audible on adjacent properties shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. The playing of
such devices is strictly prohibited at all times in all municipal parks or
playgrounds unless specifically permitted on such terms as may be
determined by the Village Board of Trustees or its designee. [Amended
7-18-1989 by L.L. No. 13-1989; 12-9-2008 by L.L. No. 3-2008]
C. Loudspeakers and amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is
cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising
or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure.
D. Yelling, shouting, etc.
(1) Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets
or any public place, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the
quiet, comfort or repose of persons in the vicinity. [Amended
7-18-1989 by L.L. No. 13-1989]
(2) The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors.
E. Animals. The keeping or harboring of any animal which by causing
frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of
any persons in the vicinity. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
F. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal-combustion engine, air compressor or motor vehicle
engine except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
G. Deliveries and pickups. The making of deliveries of supplies or
merchandise or collection of garbage or refuse of any store or other
place of business between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except
in cases of emergencies. [Amended 7-18-1989 by L.L. No. 13-1989]
§ 272-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-4
1:341
§ 272-5. Permitted noises. [Amended 7-18-1989 by L.L. No.
13-1989; 6-6-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995; 11-14-2000 by L.L. No.
4-2000]
The following shall be permitted noises:
H. Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or
any internal-combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise
due to the detonation of operating gases or fluids or the expulsion of air
unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is
equipped with a muffler, baffling device or effective noise-absorbent
material sufficient to deaden such noise.
I. Loudspeakers and amplifiers in all Village parks at any time. [Added
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. Sound created by persons engaged in construction work between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. weekdays, and on Saturdays and
holidays, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Sounds created
by persons engaged in construction work between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. weekdays and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m. on Saturdays and holidays may be permitted by the
Department of Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings and
Building Compliance in the case of work to repair, maintain, demolish,
or replace property owned or to be owned by the Village or another
public corporation. Sounds created by persons engaged in construction
work on Sundays may be permitted by the Police Department and
Department of Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings and
Building Compliance if the work is of an emergency nature. In the case
of any permission given by the Police Department or the Department of
Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings and Building
Compliance, a permitting department may impose such conditions
regarding noise, lighting, traffic control, hours of work, staging, and
any other aspect of the work as may be reasonable and appropriate to
mitigate any annoyance, disturbance, injury, or danger to the comfort,
repose, health, peace, or safety of a reasonable person of normal
sensibilities that may be threatened or caused by the work. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013; 5-23-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
B. Sound created by any government agency by the use of public warning
devices.
C. Sound created by lawn mowers, rakers, or leaf vacuums in use between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. prevailing time and 9:00 p.m. weekdays, 9:00
a.m. prevailing time and 8:00 p.m. on Saturdays and holidays, and
12:00 noon prevailing time and 6:00 p.m. on Sundays. [Amended
7-27-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
D. Sound created by public utilities in carrying out the operations of their
franchise.
§ 272-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 272-5
1:342
§ 272-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-18-1989 by L.L. No.
13-1989; 11-15-1994 by L.L. No. 16-1994; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $250, 15 days' imprisonment,
or both. Each day that a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.35
Chapter 276
NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 362.
§ 276-1. Notification required.
No civil action shall be maintained against the Village of Sleepy Hollow
(hereinafter referred to as the "Village") for damages or injuries to person
or property, including those arising from the operation of bicycles and
snowmobiles, sustained by reason of any highway, street, crosswalk, bridge,
culvert, street marking, sign or device or any other property owned,
operated or maintained by the Village being defective, out of repair, unsafe,
dangerous or obstructed, unless written notice of such defective, unsafe,
dangerous or obstructed condition of such street, bridge, culvert, highway
marking, sign or device or any other property owned, operated or
maintained by the Village was actually given to the Village Clerk of the
Village and there was a failure or neglect within a reasonable time after the
giving of such notice to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction
complained of; and no such action shall be maintained for damages or
injuries to persons or property sustained solely in consequence of the
existence of snow or ice upon any highway, street, bridge, culvert or any
other property owned by the Village, unless written notice thereof,
E. Sounds connected with sporting events of any public or private school.
F. Sound created by gas-powered leaf blowers, from October 1 of each
year through the Friday commencing Memorial Day weekend of the
following year between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday; 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Saturdays and holidays; and
12:00 noon and 2:00 p.m., Sundays, prevailing time, effective October
1, 2010. [Added 7-27-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010; 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
35.Editor's Note: Original § 36-7.1, Impoundment of device, of the 1965 Code, added
11-15-1994 by L.L. No. 14-1994, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013.
§ 272-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-1
1:343
specifying the particular place, was actually given to the Village Clerk of
the Village and there was a failure or neglect to cause such snow or ice
to be removed or to make the place otherwise reasonably safe within a
reasonable time after the receipt of such notice.
§ 276-2. Record of notices to be maintained. [Amended 1-22-2013
by L.L. No. 1-2013]
The Village Clerk of the Village shall keep an index record, in a separate
book, of all written notices which the Village Clerk shall receive of the
existence of a defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition in or
upon, or of any accumulation of ice and snow upon, any Village street,
highway, bridge, culvert or sidewalk or any other property owned by the
Village, which record shall state the date of the receipt of the notice, the
nature and location of the condition stated to exist and the name and
address of the person from whom the notice is received. The record of
such notice shall be preserved for a period of five years from the date it
is received. The Village Clerk shall, at the Board meeting next following
receipt of such written notice, or within 10 days, whichever is sooner, cause
said written notice to be brought to the attention of the Board of Trustees.
§ 276-3. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be held to repeal or modify or waive
any existing requirement or statute of limitations which is applicable to
these causes of action but, on the contrary, this chapter shall be held to
be additional requirements to the right to maintain such action; nor shall
anything herein contained be held to modify any existing rule of law relative
to the question of contributory negligence nor to impose upon the Village,
its officers and employees any greater duty or obligations than that it shall
keep its streets, sidewalks and public places in a reasonably safe condition
for public use and travel.
Chapter 280
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boardinghouses — See Ch. 139.
Housing standards — See Ch. 245.
Noise — See Ch. 272.
§ 280-1. Findings and intent.
A. The Village Board of Trustees hereby finds that buildings and places
being employed for the illegal sale of controlled substances and for the
promotion of prostitution and other public nuisances exist within the
Village of Sleepy Hollow; and that real estate used for improper
§ 276-1 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 280-1
1:344
§ 280-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NOTICE —
purposes can have a devastating effect on the surrounding community;
that these public nuisances exist in occupied and vacant buildings and
on occupied and vacant developed and undeveloped real estate; that
these public nuisances exist as a result of the operation of certain
businesses, establishments and use of property in flagrant violation
of pertinent provisions of penal laws, health laws, licensing laws,
environmental laws and laws relating to the sale and consumption of
alcoholic beverages; and that all of these public nuisances interfere
with the interest of the public in the quality of life and total community
environment, the tone of commerce in the Village, property values and
the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of this Village.
B. The Board further finds and determines that the existence of real estate
with public nuisances that is sold in the Village, together with other
public nuisances, is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Village.
C. Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is to create one standardized
procedure for securing legal and equitable remedies, without prejudice,
to the use of procedures available under existing and subsequently
enacted laws; to strengthen existing laws so as to assist the
Westchester County District Attorney, Westchester County Attorney's
office, Westchester County Executive, Westchester County and the
Village of Sleepy Hollow as well as all local police departments in
preventing buildings, residences, premises and real estate within the
Village of Sleepy Hollow from being used in such a way as to constitute
a public nuisance.
First notice that prohibited conduct has occurred shall be given to an
owner of the affected real estate by means of certified or registered
mail, return receipt requested. Where there are multiple owners, said
notice shall be sent to at least one of the owner's addresses as recorded
with the Westchester County Clerk. If for any reason the return receipt
is not received by the Village of Sleepy Hollow, then the notice
requirement shall be fulfilled by affixing the notice to the door of at
least one of the owner's of the premises addresses as recorded with the
Westchester County Clerk. The notice must contain a statement of the
date or dates upon which prohibited conduct took place on the property,
the nature of the prohibited conduct and a listing of all conduct or
occurrences that are considered prohibited conduct under this chapter.
It must inform the owner of his or her obligation to cause the prohibited
conduct to cease and advise the owner that upon the further occurrence
of any prohibited conduct, action pursuant to this Nuisance Abatement
Law will be commenced by the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
A.
§ 280-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-2
1:345
OWNER — Any person, individual, association, entity or corporation in
whose name the affected real estate is recorded with the Westchester
County Clerk, Division of Land Records.
PROHIBITED CONDUCT —
Final notice shall be sent to an owner when there is a further
occurrence of prohibited conduct within one year of the first notice
being given to an owner. The final notice must be sent by the authorized
methods for a first notice and must contain the same information as
contained in the first notice. It must further inform an owner of the
further occurrence of prohibited conduct and inform an owner that he
or she is required within five days to cause the prohibited conduct to
cease and, if necessary, to make an application to a court of appropriate
jurisdiction to accomplish the abatement of the prohibited conduct by
any and all nonowner occupants. The notice must further state that
if an owner does not take such action within five days of notice, the
Village of Sleepy Hollow, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, will
bring necessary procedures for any remedies set forth in this chapter
as though the Village were the owner of the premises.
B.
Any conduct or occurrence that is in violation of the following articles
or sections of the New York State Penal Law:
(1) Article 220 (controlled substances).
(2) Article 230 (prostitution).
(3) Article 225 (gambling).
Sections 221.40, 221.45, 221.50 and 221.55 (criminal sale of
marijuana in the fourth degree through first degree).
(4)
Sections 165.45, 165.50, 165.52 and 165.54 (criminal possession of
stolen property in the fourth degree through first degree).
(5)
Sections 165.10 and 165.11 (auto stripping in the second and first
degrees).
(6)
(7) Section 170.65 (forgery of a vehicle identification number).
Section 170.70 (illegal possession of a vehicle identification
number or plate).
(8)
A.
Any conduct either unlawful in itself or unreasonable under all the
circumstances that creates or results in the maintaining of a condition
which endangers the safety or health of a considerable number of
persons or creates or results in the maintenance of any premises or
place where persons gather for the purpose of engaging in unlawful
conduct.
B.
Any building, structure or place, used for the purposes of business
activity or enterprise, which is not licensed as required by law.
C.
§ 280-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 280-2
1:346
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any building, structure or place where an owner
thereof has been given first notice that prohibited conduct has occurred
therein or thereon and within a period of one year after said first notice
has been given there is an additional occurrence of any prohibited conduct
therein or thereon.
§ 280-3. Service of notice; civil action.
§ 280-4. Remedies and enforcement.
The Building Department is authorized to bring and maintain a civil action
or special proceeding in the name of the Village in a court of competent
jurisdiction for necessary relief, including, but not limited to, temporary,
preliminary and/or permanent equitable remedies, which may include
orders to make improvements and/or alterations to a premises; eviction
of tenants, ejection of occupants and imposition of civil penalties; and
the recovery of the costs of the action, including, but not limited to,
investigation costs, litigation expenses and reasonable attorneys fees, or
for such other remedies as may be necessary to prevent or enjoin any
public nuisance from existing at any building, residence, premises or place
within the Village of Sleepy Hollow. These remedies may be sought singly
or in combination with each other in a court of competent jurisdiction. The
owner, lessor and lessee of a building, residence, premises or place where
a public nuisance is being conducted, maintained or permitted shall be
named as defendants or respondents in the action special proceeding. The
existence of an adequate remedy at law shall not prevent the granting of
temporary or permanent relief pursuant to this chapter. The enforcement of
all remedies obtained pursuant to this chapter shall be carried out by the
Mayor, the Board of Trustees, the Building Inspector or the Chief of Police.
§ 280-5. Procedures; penalties for offenses.
A. Upon the request of the Mayor, the Board of Trustees or Chief of Police,
the Building Department is authorized to send notice that the
prohibited conduct has occurred.
B. After first notice has been sent, the Mayor or Chief of Police shall
inform the Building Department of the recurrence of prohibited conduct
at the affected property. Thereafter, the Building Department shall send
final notice to an owner of the affected premises. If no corrective
measures are diligently pursued by the owner(s) within the five-day
time period provided therein, the Building Department is authorized to
bring and maintain a civil action or proceeding in the name of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow in any court of appropriate jurisdiction to seek
remedies as hereinafter provided.
A. The summons or notice. The Building Department shall name as
defendants or respondents the building, residence, premises or place
wherein a public nuisance exists because prohibited conduct is being
conducted, maintained or permitted by describing it by block, lot
§ 280-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-5
1:347
number, street address and at least one of the owners of some part of
or interest in the property.
B. In rem jurisdiction. In rem jurisdiction shall be complete over the
building, residence, premises or place wherein a public nuisance exists
because prohibited conduct is being conducted, maintained or
permitted by affixing the summons or notice to the door of the building,
residence, premises or place and by mailing the summons or notice by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to one of the
owners of some part of or interest in that property. Proof of service shall
be filed within two days thereafter with the Clerk of the Court
designated in the summons or notice. Service shall be complete upon
such filing.
C. Service of summons or notice on other defendants or respondents.
Defendants or respondents other than the building, residence, premises
or place wherein a public nuisance exists because prohibited conduct is
being conducted, maintained or permitted shall be served with the
summons or notice as provided in the New York Civil Practice Law and
Rules (hereinafter referred to as "CPLR").
D. Notice of pendency. With respect to any action or proceeding
commenced or to be commenced pursuant to this section, the Building
Department may file a notice of pendency pursuant to the provisions of
Article 65 of the CPLR.
E. Presumption of ownership. The person or entity(ies) in whose name the
real estate affected by the action or special proceeding is recorded in
the office of the County Clerk shall be presumed to be the owner
thereof.
F. Presumption of employment or agency. Whenever there is evidence that
a person was the manager, operator, supervisor or, in any other way, in
charge of the premises at the time a public nuisance exists because
prohibited conduct is being conducted, maintained or permitted, such
evidence shall be presumptive that he or she was an agent or employee
of the owner or lessee of the building, residence, premises or place.
G. Penalty. If upon order or judgment in an action or special proceeding
under this chapter a finding is made that the defendant(s) has
intentionally conducted, maintained or permitted a public nuisance
defined in this chapter, a civil penalty, to be included in the judgment,
may be awarded in an amount not to exceed $350 for each day it is
found that the defendant or respondent intentionally conducted,
maintained or permitted prohibited conduct to exist at the building,
residence, premises or place. Upon recovery, such penalty shall be paid
into the general fund of the Village of Sleepy Hollow. Defendants or
respondents are jointly and severally liable for such penalty.
§ 280-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 280-6
1:348
§ 280-6. Preliminary injunction.
Pending request for any remedy as provided for under this chapter, the
Building Department may apply for and the court may grant a preliminary
injunction enjoining a public nuisance within the scope of this chapter
and the person or persons engaging in or permitting prohibited conduct.
A temporary closing order and/or a temporary restraining order may be
granted pending a hearing for a preliminary injunction where it appears
by clear and convincing evidence that a public nuisance within the scope
of this chapter exists because prohibited conduct is being engaged in or
conducted, maintained or permitted.
§ 280-7. Temporary closing order.
§ 280-8. Temporary restraining order.
A. If, on a motion for a preliminary injunction pursuant to § 280-6 of this
chapter, the Building Department shall show by clear and convincing
evidence that a public nuisance within the scope of this chapter exists
because prohibited conduct is being conducted, maintained or
permitted, and that the public health, safety or welfare immediately
requires a temporary closing order, a temporary order closing such part
of the building, residence, premises or place wherein the public
nuisance exists because prohibited conduct is being conducted,
maintained or permitted may be granted without notice, pending an
order of the court granting or refusing the preliminary injunction and
until further order of the court. Upon granting a temporary closing
order, the court shall direct the holding of a hearing for the preliminary
injunction at the earliest possible time, but in no event later than three
business days from the granting of such order. A decision on the motion
for a preliminary injunction shall be rendered by the court within three
business days after the conclusion of the hearing.
B. Service of temporary closing order. Unless the court orders otherwise,
a temporary closing order, together with the papers upon which it was
based, and a notice of hearing for the preliminary injunction shall be
personally served in the same manner as a summons as provided in the
CPLR.
A. Generally. If, on a motion for preliminary injunction pursuant to § 280-6
of this chapter, the Building Department shall show by clear and
convincing evidence that a public nuisance within the scope of this
chapter exists because prohibited conduct is being conducted,
maintained or permitted and that the public health, safety or welfare
immediately requires a temporary restraining order, such temporary
restraining order may be granted without notice restraining the
defendants and all persons from removing or in any manner interfering
with the furniture, fixtures and movable property used in conducting,
maintaining or permitting the public nuisance and from further
conducting, maintaining or permitting the public nuisance, pending
§ 280-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-8
1:349
§ 280-9. Temporary closing order together with temporary
restraining order.
order of the court granting or refusing the preliminary injunction and
until further order of the court. Upon granting a temporary restraining
order, the court shall direct the holding of a hearing for the preliminary
injunction at the earliest possible time but in no event later than three
business days from the granting of such order. A decision on the motion
for a preliminary injunction shall be rendered by the court within three
business days after the conclusion of the hearing.
B. Service of temporary restraining order. Unless the court orders
otherwise, a temporary restraining order and the papers upon which it
was based and a notice of hearing for the preliminary injunction shall
be personally served in the same manner as a summons as provided in
the CPLR.
A. Generally. If on a motion for a preliminary injunction the Building
Department submits evidence warranting both a temporary closing
order and a temporary restraining order, the court shall grant both
orders.
B. Inventory upon service of temporary closing order and temporary
restraining order. The officers serving a temporary closing order or
temporary restraining order shall forthwith make and return to the
court an inventory of personal property situated in and used in
conducting, maintaining or permitting a public nuisance within the
scope of this chapter and shall enter upon the building, residence,
premises or place for such purpose. Such inventory shall be taken in
any manner which is deemed likely to evidence a true and accurate
representation of the personal property subject to such inventory,
including, but not limited to, photographing such personal property.
C. Closing of premises pursuant to temporary closing order. The officers
serving a temporary closing order shall, upon service of the order,
command all persons present in the building, residence, premises or
place to vacate forthwith. Upon the building, residence, premises or
place being vacated, it shall be securely locked and all keys delivered to
the fee owner, lessor or lessee of the building, residence, premises or
place involved. If the fee owner, lessor or lessee is not at the building,
residence, premises or place when the order is being executed, the
officers shall securely padlock the premises and retain the keys until
the fee owner, lessor or lessee of the building is ascertained, in which
event the officers shall deliver the keys to such owner, lessor or lessee.
D. Posting of temporary closing order and temporary restraining order.
Upon service of a temporary closing order or a temporary restraining
order, the officer shall post a copy thereof in a conspicuous place or
upon one or more of the principal doors at entrances of such premises
where a public nuisance exists because prohibited conduct is being
conducted, maintained or permitted. In addition, where a temporary
§ 280-8 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 280-9
1:350
§ 280-10. Vacating temporary closing order or temporary
restraining order.
closing order has been granted, the officers shall affix in a conspicuous
place or upon one or more of the principal floors at entrances of
such premises printed notice that the premises have been closed by
court order, which notice shall contain the legend "CLOSED BY COURT
ORDER" in block lettering of sufficient size to be observed by anyone
intending or likely to enter the premises, the date of the order, the
court from which issued and the name of the office or agency posting
the notice. Furthermore, where a temporary restraining order has been
granted, the officers shall affix, in the same manner, a notice similar to
the notice provided for in relation to a temporary closing order except
that the notice shall state that certain described activity is prohibited
by court order and that removal of property is prohibited by court
order. Mutilation or removal of such a posted order or such a posted
notice while it remains in force, in addition to any other punishment
prescribed by law, shall be punishable, on conviction, by a fine of not
more than $350 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by
both, provided that such order or notice contains therein a notice of
such penalty.
E. Intentional disobedience of or resistance to a temporary closing order
or temporary restraining order, in addition to any other punishment
prescribed by law, shall be punishable, on conviction, as a violation with
a fine of not more than $350 or imprisonment not exceeding six months,
or by both.
A. A temporary closing order or temporary restraining order shall be
vacated, upon notice to the Building Department, if the defendant or
respondent shows by affidavit or such other proofs as may be submitted
that the public nuisance within the scope of this chapter which existed
because prohibited conduct was being conducted, maintained or
permitted has been abated. An order vacating a temporary closing
order shall include a provision authorizing agencies of the Village to
inspect the building, residence, premises or place which is the subject
of an action pursuant to this chapter periodically without notice during
the pendency of the action for the purpose of ascertaining whether or
not the public nuisance has been resumed. It shall be the obligation of
the defendant or respondent applying to the court for an order vacating
a temporary closing order or temporary restraining order to prove by
affidavit or such other proof deemed appropriate by the court that the
intended occupants of the building have been advised of and consent to
a provision authorizing an agency of the Village to inspect without
notice as provided herein. Intentional disobedience of or resistance to
an inspection provision of an order vacating a temporary closing order
or a temporary restraining order, in addition to any other punishment
prescribed by law, shall be punishable, on conviction, as a violation with
a fine of not more than $350 or imprisonment not exceeding six months,
or by both.
§ 280-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-10
1:351
§ 280-11. Temporary receiver.
B. A temporary closing order or a temporary restraining order may be
vacated by the court, upon notice to the Building Department, when the
defendant or respondent gives an undertaking and the court is satisfied
that the public health, safety or general welfare will be protected
adequately during the pendency of the action. The undertaking shall be
in an amount equal to the assessed valuation of the building, residence,
premises or place where the public nuisance is being conducted,
maintained or permitted or in such other amount as may be fixed by the
court.
A. Generally. In any action or special proceeding under this chapter, the
court may, upon motion on notice by the plaintiff or petitioner, appoint a
temporary receiver to manage and operate the property during the
pendency of the action or proceeding. A temporary receivership shall
not continue after final judgment unless otherwise directed by the
court. Upon the motion of any party, including the temporary receiver,
or on its own initiative, the appointing court may remove a temporary
receiver at any time. Any fees due and owing the receiver for services
rendered shall be chargeable to the defendant or respondent.
B. Powers and duties. The temporary receiver shall have such powers and
duties as the court shall direct, including, but not limited to, collecting
and holding all rents due from tenants, leasing or renting portions of
the building or structure, making or authorizing other persons to make
necessary repairs or to maintain the property, hiring security or other
personnel necessary to maintain the premises safely, prosecuting or
defending suits flowing from his or her management of the property
and retaining counsel therefor, and expending funds from the collected
rents in furtherance of the foregoing powers.
C. Oath. A temporary receiver, before entering upon his or her duties,
shall be sworn or shall affirm faithfully and fairly to discharge the trust
committed to such receiver. The oath or affirmation may be
administered by any person authorized to take acknowledgments of
deeds by the Real Property Law. The oath or affirmation may be waived
upon consent of all parties.
D. Undertaking. A temporary receiver shall give an undertaking, in an
amount to be fixed by the court making the appointment, that such
receiver will faithfully discharge his or her duties.
E. Accounts. A temporary receiver shall keep written accounts itemizing
receipts and expenditures and describing the property and naming the
depository of receivership funds, which shall be open to inspection by
any person having an apparent interest in the property. Upon motion of
the temporary receiver or of any person having an apparent interest in
the property, the court may require the keeping of particular records or
direct or limit inspection or require presentation of a temporary
receiver's accounts. Notice of motion for the presentation of a
§ 280-10 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 280-11
1:352
§ 280-12. Vacating preliminary injunction.
When the defendant or respondent gives an undertaking in an amount fixed
by the court, together with costs, disbursements and the projected actual
costs of the prosecution of the action to be determined by the court, upon a
motion on notice to the Building Department, a preliminary injunction may
be vacated by the court. The provisions of the CPLR governing undertakings
shall be applicable to this chapter.
§ 280-13. Permanent injunction.
temporary receiver's accounts shall be served upon the sureties on the
temporary receiver's undertaking as well as upon each party.
A. A judgment awarding a permanent injunction pursuant to this chapter
may direct the County Sheriff to seize and remove from the building,
residence, premises or place all material, equipment and
instrumentalities used in the creation and maintenance of the public
nuisance and shall direct the sale by the County Sheriff of such property
in the manner provided for the sale of personal property under
execution pursuant to the provisions of the CPLR. The net proceeds of
any such sale, after deduction of the lawful expenses involved, shall be
paid into the general fund of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
B. A judgment awarding a permanent injunction pursuant to this chapter
may direct the closing of the building, residence, premises or place by
the County Sheriff to the extent necessary to abate the nuisance and
shall direct the County Sheriff to post a copy of the judgment and a
printed notice of such closing conforming to the requirements of
§ 280-9D of this chapter. Mutilation or removal of such a posted
judgment or notice while it remains in force, in addition to any other
punishment prescribed by law, shall be punishable, on conviction, by a
fine of not more than $350 or by imprisonment not exceeding six
months, or by both, provided that such judgment contains therein a
notice of such penalty. The closing directed by the judgment shall be for
such period as the court may direct, but in no event shall the closing be
for a period of more than one year from the posting of the judgment
provided for in this subsection. If the owner shall file a bond in the value
of the property ordered to be closed and submits proof to the court that
the nuisance has been abated and will not be created, maintained, or
permitted for such period of time as the building, residence, premises
or place has been directed to be closed in the judgment, the court may
vacate the provisions of the judgment that direct the closing of the
building, residence, premises or place. Any closing by the Sheriff
pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not constitute an act of
possession, ownership or control by the Sheriff of the closed premises.
C. Intentional disobedience or resistance to any provision of a judgment
awarding a permanent injunction pursuant to this chapter, in addition
to any other punishment prescribed by law, shall be punishable as a
§ 280-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-13
1:353
§ 280-14. Action or proceeding for ejectment or eviction.
violation with a fine of not more than $350 or by imprisonment not
exceeding six months, or both.
D. A judgment rendered awarding a permanent injunction pursuant to this
chapter shall constitute a lien upon the building, residence, premises or
place named in the complaint in such action, such lien to date from the
time of filing a notice of its pendency in the office of the Clerk of the
County wherein the building, residence, premises or place is located.
Every such lien shall have priority before any mortgage or other lien
that exists prior to such filing except tax and assessment liens.
E. A judgment awarding a permanent injunction pursuant to this chapter
shall provide for the costs and disbursements allowed by the CPLR and,
in addition, the Village of Sleepy Hollow shall be entitled, upon
satisfactory proof by affidavit or such other evidence as may be
submitted, to its actual costs, expenses and disbursements in
investigating, bringing and maintaining the action. The defendants and/
or respondents are jointly and severally liable for any such costs,
expenses and disbursements.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the Building Department is
authorized to send notice and, if necessary, to commence and maintain
an action or proceeding for the ejectment or eviction of the occupant(s)
or tenant(s) at any building, residence, premises or place where a
public nuisance exists.
B. In any action or proceeding for ejectment or eviction, brought by the
Building Department pursuant to this section, at least one of the
owners, and any person(s) in possession, shall be named and served as
defendant or respondent.
C. Before the Building Department may commence an action or
proceeding pursuant to this section, the Building Department shall
complete all notice requirements provided for in the definition of
"notice" in § 280-2. Upon the failure of the owner or landlord to act
pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice, the Building
Department is authorized to commence an action or proceeding in
accordance with this chapter and as set forth in the notice. Such action
or proceeding shall have precedence over any similar proceeding
thereafter brought by such owner or landlord or to one theretofore
brought by him and not prosecuted diligently and in good faith.
D. A court granting an eviction or ejectment pursuant to this section may,
in addition to any other order provided by law, make an order imposing
and requiring the payment by the defendant or respondent of a civil
penalty not exceeding $350 for each day (after first notice has been
given) that the public nuisance was allowed to continue and may also
order the payment of the costs to the Village of Sleepy Hollow in
investigating, bringing and maintaining the action and the recovery of
§ 280-13 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 280-14
1:354
§ 280-15. Other remedies not excluded.
This chapter shall not be construed to exclude any other remedy provided
by law for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the people of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
Chapter 295
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Advisory Committee — See Ch. 83. Public gatherings — See Ch. 268.
reasonable attorneys' fees by the Village of Sleepy Hollow. In any such
case, multiple defendants or respondents shall be jointly and severally
liable for any payment so ordered, and the amounts of such payments
shall constitute a lien upon the subject building, residence, premises or
place. Any penalties or fees shall be payable to the Village of Sleepy
Hollow and shall become a part of the general fund of the Village.
E. The commencement of a proceeding under this section shall not be
construed to exclude any other remedy provided by law for the
protection of the health, safety and welfare of the people of the Village
of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 280-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 280-15
1:355

ARTICLE I
Closing Times
[Adopted 4-21-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992 (Ch. 39, Art. I, of the 1965
Code); amended in its entirety 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 295-1. Hours of operation.
Every park in the Village shall be closed to the public a half hour after
sunset and a half hour before sunrise, and all members of the public shall
leave the park during the times in which the park is closed, subject to the
exceptions set forth in § 295-2.
§ 295-2. Exceptions.
The provisions of § 295-1 closing parks after sunset and before sunrise and
requiring the public to leave the parks at such times are subject to the
following exceptions:
§ 295-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity violating any provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $250, 15
days' imprisonment, or both, for each offense.
A. A person or persons may remain in the park after the time it would be
closed under § 295-1 where an official sign posted at the entrance of the
park provides for different park closing times, in which case members
of the public shall leave the park at the posted closing time.
B. A person or persons may remain in the park after the time it is closed if
such person or persons are in the park under a permit to do so issued by
the Department of Parks and Recreation, provided that such person or
persons shall leave the park at the time specified in the permit.
C. A person or person may remain in the park during the time it is closed
where such person or persons are participating in an official program
operated by the Department of Parks and Recreation.
§ 295-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-3
1:357

ARTICLE II
Prohibited Activities.
[Adopted 12-12-2017 by L.L. No. 11-2017]
§ 295-4. No smoking.
No person shall smoke any cigarette, cigar, or pipe of any nature or content
in any park or recreation area in the Village.
§ 295-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine not to exceed $250, 15 days' imprisonment, or both, for
each offense.
§ 295-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 295-5
1:359
Chapter 299
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handbills and posters — See Ch. 240.
Littering — See Ch. 263.
Noise — See Ch. 272.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 362.
§ 299-1. Legislative intent.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of regulating the distribution of
certain materials, peddling, soliciting and related activities within the
Village of Sleepy Hollow. The registration of persons engaged in the abovementioned
activities is required so that the identity of persons going door
to door or distributing materials within the Village may be established,
the rights of legitimate businesses may be protected, general regulations
may be more effectively enforced, the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Village may be protected and maintained and dishonest
business practices and dishonest solicitation of funds in the Village may be
prevented.
§ 299-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, as used herein, shall
be considered to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS — A building or store in which a
person transacts business and deals in the goods, wares and merchandise
he hawks, peddles or solicits.
HAWKER and PEDDLER — Except as hereinafter expressly provided, any
person, either principal or agent, who, in any public street or public place,
or in an open area on private property adjacent to a public way, or by going
from house to house or place of business on foot or on or from any animal
or vehicle standing in a street, sells or barters, offers for sale or barters
or carries or exposes for sale or barter any goods, wares or merchandise,
except as hereinafter exempted.
PERSON — One or more persons of either sex, natural persons,
corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock companies, societies
and all other entities of any kind.
SOLICITING — Includes any one or more of the following activities:
Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs or services of any kind, character or
description whatsoever for any kind of consideration whatsoever.
A.
Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of
insurance of any type, kind or character.
B.
§ 295-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 299-2
1:360
§ 299-3. Exemptions. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply to any sales conducted
pursuant to statute or by order of any court; to any person selling personal
property at wholesale to dealers in such articles; to merchants having an
established place of business within the Village where there are employees
for soliciting orders from customers and delivering the same; to farmers
and persons who produce such commodities; to any honorably discharged
member of the United States Armed Forces who has procured a license
as provided by the General Business Law of the State of New York; or to
persons soliciting or collecting for any bona fide charitable organization
having a permanent office within a radius of 50 miles of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow; or to any religious, civic, or philanthropic organization which has
a tax exemption as a charitable institution, pursuant to Section 501, as
amended, of the Internal Revenue Code. All persons named above shall
be subject to restrictions hereinafter delineated in §§ 299-7, 299-8, 299-9,
299-10 and 299-16.
§ 299-4. Certificate of registration required.
Every person desiring to engage in soliciting, hawking and peddling, as
herein defined, from persons in residences within this municipality is
hereby required to make written application for a certificate of registration
as hereinafter provided. Such certificate shall be carried by the solicitor,
hawker or peddler.
§ 299-5. Application for certificate.
Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type of publication.
C.
Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other
valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit
association, organization or project.
D.
A. Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form
provided by the municipality. The applicant shall truthfully, under
penalty of perjury, state in full the information requested on the
application as follows:
(1) Name and address of present place of residence and length of
residence at such address; also the business address if other than
the present address.
(2) Address of place of residence during the past three years if other
than present address.
(3) Age of applicant.
(4) Physical description of applicant.
§ 299-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-5
1:361
§ 299-6. Revocation of certificate; expiration date.
(5) Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association
by whom or which the applicant is employed or represents and the
length of time of such employment or representation.
(6) Name and address of employer during the past three years if other
than the present employer.
(7) Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the
soliciting in which the applicant will engage.
(8) Period of time for which the certificate is applied.
(9) Date or approximate date of the latest previous application for a
certificate under this chapter, if any.
(10) Whether or not a certificate of registration issued to the applicant
under this chapter has ever been revoked.
(11) Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation
or a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal
law of the United States.
(12) Whether or not the applicant or representative has ever been
denied a peddling, hawking or soliciting certificate of registration
or has had a certificate revoked; if so, from where, when and why.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in
connection therewith shall be under oath.
C. The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting and photographing by the
Police Department of the municipality in connection with the
application for the certificate.
D. The Chief of Police shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate
record of every application received and acted upon, together with all
other information and data pertaining thereto, and all certificates of
registration issued under the provisions of this chapter and of the
denial of applications. Applications for certificates shall be numbered in
consecutive order as filed, and every certificate issued and any renewal
thereof shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application
upon which it was issued.
E. No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been
convicted of the commission of a crime under the laws of the state or
any other state or federal law of the United States; to any person who
has been denied other permits for good cause; to any person who has
been convicted of a violation of any provisions of this chapter; or to any
person whose certificate of registration issued hereunder has
previously been revoked as herein provided or who has a history of
complaints from this or other communities.
§ 299-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 299-6
1:362
§ 299-7. Notice restricting solicitations.
Every person desiring to secure the protection provided by the regulations
pertaining to soliciting, hawking and peddling contained in this chapter
shall comply with the following directions. Notice of the determination by
the occupants of giving invitation to solicitors, hawkers or peddlers or the
refusal of invitation to solicitors, hawkers or peddlers to any residence shall
be given in the following manner:
§ 299-8. Duties of solicitors, hawkers and peddlers.
A. Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the
Chief of Police if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter or has made a false material
statement in the application or otherwise becomes disqualified for the
issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms of this chapter.
Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given
by the Chief of Police to the holder of the certificate in person or by
certified United States mail addressed to his or her residence set forth
in the application. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. Immediately upon giving of such notice, the certificate of registration
shall become null and void.
C. The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date thereof.
A. A weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches in size,
shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence, indicating the determination by the occupant and containing
the applicable words as follows: "Only Solicitors Registered in Sleepy
Hollow Invited" or "No Solicitors Invited."
B. For the purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Village
Clerk to persons requesting same, at the cost thereof. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
C. Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor
of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the information
contained thereon.
A. It shall be the duty of every solicitor, hawker and peddler, upon going
onto any premises in the municipality upon which a residence is
located, first to examine the notice provided in this chapter, if any is
attached, and to be governed by the statement contained on any notice.
If the notice states "Only Solicitors Registered in Sleepy Hollow
Invited," then the solicitor, hawker or peddler not possessing a valid
certificate of registration, as herein provided, shall immediately and
peacefully depart from the premises, and if the notice states "No
Solicitors Invited," then the solicitor, hawker or peddler, whether
registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 299-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-8
1:363
§ 299-9. Uninvited soliciting, hawking and/or peddling.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door
or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention
of the occupant of such residence for the purpose of securing an audience
with the occupant thereof and engaging in soliciting, hawking or peddling,
as herein defined, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in
accordance with the provisions of § 299-8 of this chapter.
§ 299-10. Hours of operation. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for
any person, whether registered under this chapter or not, to go upon any
premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door or create any sound
in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of
such residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant
thereof and engaging in soliciting, hawking or peddling, as herein defined,
prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m., year round.
§ 299-11. Investigation of applicant; issuance of certificate.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited
or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
A. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of registration under this
chapter, the original shall be referred to the Chief of Police of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow, who shall cause such investigation of the
applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems
necessary for the protection of the public good. If, as a result of such
investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is
found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on such
application his disapproval and his reasons for the same and notify the
applicant that his application is disapproved and that no certificate
shall be issued. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and
business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the
Chief of Police shall endorse on the application his approval and return
such application to the Village Clerk who, upon receiving payment of
the prescribed fees, shall issue a certificate. Such certificate shall
contain the signature and seal of the issuing office and shall show the
name and address of said certificate holder, the kind of goods to be sold
thereunder, the amount of the fee paid, the date of issuance and the
length of time the same shall be operative.
B. A certificate shall not be assignable. Any holder of such certificate who
permits it to be used by any other person and any person who uses such
certificate granted to any other person shall be guilty of a violation of
§ 299-8 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 299-11
1:364
§ 299-12. Fees. [Amended 8-16-1994 by L.L. No. 11-1994]
The fee for an application for certification pursuant to this chapter shall
be established and determined by the Board of Trustees from time to time
and set forth in the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
This application fee shall be nonrefundable and shall not be credited to any
certificate fee. The fee for each certificate issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be established and determined by the Board of Trustees from time to
time and set forth in the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200,
Fees.
§ 299-13. Employees of certificate holder. [Amended 1-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
Any certificate holder using a motor vehicle may employ not more than two
persons to assist in selling and delivering the wares, but such person shall
so act only while accompanying a peddler, hawker or solicitor holding a
valid certificate of registration.
§ 299-14. Vehicles used in operations. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
Every vehicle used by a hawker, peddler or solicitor holding a valid
certificate of registration in or about his business shall have the name of the
certificate holder and his address plainly, distinctly and legibly painted in
letters and figures at least two inches in height in a conspicuous place on
the outside of each side of every such vehicle, and such name and address
shall be kept so painted plainly and distinctly at all times while such vehicle
is in use during the continuance of the certificate.
§ 299-15. Revocation of certificate. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
this chapter. Such certificate shall automatically expire on January 1
following the date of issuance thereof, but such certificate may provide
for an earlier expiration date. No applicant to whom a certificate has
been refused or who has had a certificate which has been revoked shall
make further application until a period of at least six months shall have
elapsed since the last previous rejection or revocation, unless he can
show that the reason for such rejection or revocation no longer exists.
Every certificate holder, while exercising his certificate, shall carry the
certificate with him and shall exhibit same upon demand to any police
officer or citizen.
C. No certificate shall be granted to a person under 18 years of age.
A. Causes. Certificates issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the Chief of Police of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, after
notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
§ 299-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-15
1:365
§ 299-16. Appeals from denial or revocation of certificate.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police in the denial or
revocation of a certificate shall have the right of appeal to the Board of
Trustees. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Board, within 10 days
after the notice of revocation or denial is mailed or served, whichever is
shorter, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for appeal. The
Board of Trustees shall set a time and place for a hearing of such appeal,
and notice of such hearing shall be forwarded to said person at his last
known residence, as indicated in his application, by mailing such notice by
first class mail at least five days prior to the hearing. The decision of the
Board shall be final and conclusive.
§ 299-17. Bond requirements. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Prior to the issuance of any certificate, the applicant shall file with the
Chief of Police a bond running to the Village in the amount of $2,000,
with good and sufficient surety, in such form as shall be approved by the
Village Attorney or his designated representative. Said bond shall remain in
force for the term of the certificate and shall be conditioned to indemnify
and pay the Village for any penalties or costs incurred in the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter and to indemnify and reimburse
any purchaser of personal property from the holder of the certificate in
a sum equal to at least the amount of any payments such purchaser may
have been induced to make through the misrepresentation as to the kind,
quality or value of the personal property, whether said misrepresentation
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the certificate.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as a peddler.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any local law
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
(5) Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
(6) A complaint received by the Village in violation of a "no soliciting"
sign on a private residence or business.
B. A notice of hearing for revocation of a certificate shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the
time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be personally served or
mailed by first class mail to the certificate holder at his last known
address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 299-15 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 299-17
1:366
was made by the certificate holder or said certificate holder's agents,
servants or employees either at the time of making the sale or through
any advertisement printed or circulated with reference to such personal
property or any parts thereof.
§ 299-18. Restrictions.
§ 299-19. Orders. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
All orders taken by solicitors holding a valid certificate of registration who
demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final
delivery shall be in writing, in duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the
A. A hawker, peddler or solicitor holding a valid certificate of registration
shall: [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(1) Not falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quantity or quality of
any article offered for sale or offer for sale any unwholesome,
tainted or diseased provisions or merchandise.
(2) Keep the vehicles and receptacles used by him in a clean and
sanitary condition and the foodstuffs and edibles offered for sale
well covered and protected from dirt, dust and insects.
(3) Not stand or permit the vehicle used by him to stand in one place in
any public place, street or on a private lot adjacent to a public
street for more than 10 minutes or in front of any premises for any
time if the owner or lessee of the premises objects.
(4) Not create or maintain any booth or stand or place any barrels,
boxes, crates or other obstructions upon any street or in an open lot
adjacent to a street or public way for the purpose of selling or
exposing for sale any goods, wares or merchandise.
B. No peddler shall: [Added 10-28-1985 by L.L. No. 5-1985]
(1) Sell from a location on private property without the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy from the Building Department of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow, and a site plan.
(2) Peddle within 200 feet of any church or place of worship or any
place occupied exclusively as a public or private school, nor shall
he or she permit his or her vehicle, if any, to stand on any public
highway within said distance of school or church property.
(3) Sell from any point within 500 feet of any established place of
business selling substantially similar merchandise.
(4) Sell within the Village recreation areas without the written
permission of the Village Board of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
(5) Operate between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 299-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-19
1:367
amount paid in advance, and one copy shall be given to the purchaser at the
time the deposit of money is paid to the solicitor.
§ 299-20. Records. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to keep a record of all applications
and of all certificates granted under the provisions of this chapter, giving
the number and date of each certificate, the name and residence of the
person holding the certificate, the amount of the fee paid, the term of the
certificate and also the date of revocation of all certificates revoked.
§ 299-21. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Each violation of this chapter or of any regulation, order or rule
promulgated hereunder shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 for
each offense, and each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 304
PLUMBERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Housing standards — See Ch. 245.
Sewers — See Ch. 330.
Water — See Ch. 411.
§ 299-19 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 299-21
1:368
ARTICLE I
Plumbers and Plumbing
§ 304-1. Certificate of competency required.
Any person desiring or intending to conduct the trade, business or calling
of a plumber or of plumbing in Sleepy Hollow, New York, as employing or
master plumber or any person desiring to do plumbing, shall be required
to submit to an examination before an Examining Board of Plumbers,
appointed according to law, as to his experience and qualifications for such
trade, business or calling, and it shall not be lawful in Sleepy Hollow, New
York, for a person to conduct such trade, business or calling unless he shall
have first obtained a certificate of competency from such board of Sleepy
Hollow, New York.
§ 304-2. Corporations may conduct business.
Any domestic corporation desiring or intending to conduct the trade,
business or calling of a plumber or of plumbing in Sleepy Hollow, New
York, as employing or master plumber, may do so, provided one or more
officers of such corporation separately or aggregately actually hold and own
at least 51% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of said corporation,
and provided that each of such officers holding such percentage of the
stock is the holder of a certificate of competency of the Examining Board
of Plumbers of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, New York, as provided in
§ 304-1 of this article. Each and every member of said corporation holding
a certificate of competency shall comply with all the rules and regulations
applicable to master or employing plumbers in Sleepy Hollow, New York.
Such corporation shall register at the office of the Board of Trustees as
provided in § 304-4 of this article.
§ 304-3. Penalties for offenses. [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law, any person violating
any of the provisions of this chapter or failing to comply therewith shall be
liable to a civil penalty of not less than $250 nor more than $1,500 for each
violation, together with the costs of prosecution, or to imprisonment not
exceeding six months, or both. For subsequent violations, the penalty shall
be increased to not less than $500 nor more than $2,500. Each and every
day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 304-4. Registration of master plumbers.
Every employing master plumber carrying on his trade, business or calling
in the Village of Sleepy Hollow, New York, shall register his name and
address at the office of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Sleepy Hollow,
New York, and thereupon he shall be entitled to receive a certificate of such
registration; provided, however, that such employing or master plumber
§ 304-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-4
1:369
shall pay all fees and pass the Village test of competency from an Examining
Board of Plumbers.
§ 304-5. Cancellation of master plumber registration; registration
required.
§ 304-6. Inspector of Plumbing. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
There shall be appointed, as provided by law, an Inspector or Inspectors of
Plumbing whose duties, in addition to those prescribed by law and those
which may be enjoined or required by the Board of Trustees, shall be to
inspect the construction and alteration of all plumbing work performed in
the Village of Sleepy Hollow, New York, and to report the results of such
inspection to the Building Inspector. He or they shall also report in like
manner any person engaged in or carrying on the business of employing
plumber without having the certificate herein provided.
§ 304-7. Expiration and renewal of certificates; insurance.
[Amended 7-18-1989 by L.L. No. 9-1989; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
A. Such registration may be canceled by the Board of Trustees for a
violation of the rules and regulations for the plumbing, drainage, water
and gas pipes of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, New York, duly adopted
and enforced therein, after a hearing had before such Board of Trustees
and upon a prior notice of not less than 10 days stating the grounds of
complaint and served on the person charged with the violation, but
such revocation shall not be operative unless concurred in by the local
Examining Board of Plumbers.
B. It shall not be lawful for any person to engage in or carry on the trade,
business or calling of any employing or master plumber in the Village of
Sleepy Hollow, New York, unless his name and address shall have been
registered in the Village of Sleepy Hollow, New York.
A. All certificates of registration issued under the provisions of the
preceding sections of this article and all permits authorizing
connections with street sewer or water mains shall expire on the 31st
day of December of the year in which they shall be issued, and may be
renewed within 30 days preceding such expiration. Such renewals shall
be for one year from the first day of January in each year. The bond must
be continuous. The bond must be filed with certificate renewal. The fee
for renewal of each certificate shall be as set forth in the fee schedule
included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
B. Any person, firm, corporation or institution must file with the Village
Clerk a certified copy of liability and workmen's compensation
insurance with minimum per-occurrence limits of $1,000,000. The
certificate for any person, firm, corporation or institution shall be
immediately revoked upon failure to maintain said insurance.
§ 304-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 304-8
1:370
§ 304-8. Notice of violation of rules.
Whenever any inspector or other person reports a violation of any rules and
regulations for plumbing, drainage, gas or water supply, or a deviation from
any officially approved plan or specifications for plumbing and drainage, gas
and water supply filed with any board or department, the inspector shall
first serve a notice of the violation thereof upon the master plumber doing
the work, if a registered plumber; then the Board of Trustees shall officially
notify said registered plumber.
§ 304-9. Service of notice of violation; proceeding when violations
not removed. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Such notice of violation may be served personally or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and, if by certified mail, it may be addressed
to such master plumber at the address registered by him with the Board
of Trustees, but the failure of a master plumber to register will relieve
the Board of Trustees from the requirement of giving notice of violation.
Unless the violation is removed within three days after the day of serving or
mailing such notice, exclusive of the date of serving or mailing, the Board
of Trustees may proceed according to law.
§ 304-10. Plumbing and drainage, gas and water supply to be
executed according to rules. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
The plumbing, drainage, gas and water supply of all buildings, both public
and private, in the Village of Sleepy Hollow, New York, shall be executed
in accordance with the requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code; and all repairs and alterations in the
plumbing, drainage, gas and water supply of all buildings heretofore
constructed shall also be executed in accordance with such Uniform Code.
This section shall not be construed to repeal any existing provision of law
requiring plans for the plumbing, drainage, gas and water supply of new
buildings to be filed with the Board of Trustees and be previously approved
in writing by such Board of Trustees and be executed in accordance
therewith, except that in case of any conflict with such plans, the Uniform
Code shall govern.
§ 304-11. Issuance of permits to connect with sewers and water
mains restricted.
The Clerk of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, New York, shall not issue a permit
to anyone to connect with the sewers or with the water mains of the Village
of Sleepy Hollow, New York, unless such person has obtained and shall
produce a certificate of competency from the Examining Board of Plumbers
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, New York.
§ 304-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-12
1:371
§ 304-12. Plans and specifications. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Plans and specifications of the work, together with application for a permit
signed by the owner or his agent, must be submitted for approval to the
Inspector of Plumbing, and a permit must be obtained before any part of
the building or work is commenced. There shall be a separate plan for
each building, public or private, accompanied by specifications describing
the drainage of said buildings on blanks prescribed and furnished for this
purpose, showing the size and kind of pipe, traps, closets, fixtures, etc., to
be used, the same to be examined and placed on file in the office of the
Department of Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings and Building
Compliance or Board of Trustees. Plans must be made by the architect or
engineer where one is employed.
§ 304-13. Change in plans.
Application for a change in plans or work in the building must be made in
writing by the plumber, duly signed by the owner or his agent, and a written
permit must be obtained from the Plumbing Inspector before any part of the
change is commenced.
§ 304-14. Registration and examination.
§ 304-15. Written notice to Inspector; inspections.
No person shall commence any plumbing work until he shall first have given
to the Plumbing Inspector written notice of the time when he intends to
commence the same. Such plumbers shall likewise, from time to time, notify
said Inspector when such work is ready for inspection, and no part of such
plumbing work shall be enclosed or covered until it has been tested and
approved by the Plumbing Inspector.36
A. Any person desiring or intending to conduct the trade, business or
calling of a plumber in the Village of Sleepy Hollow, New York, shall first
comply with all the provisions of law relating to the registration,
examination and licensing of plumbers, and shall pay all fees provided
by law.
B. The Plumbing Inspector shall prosecute all violations of law and of
these rules and shall promptly apply to the Village Board of Trustees for
the cancellation of the registration of all plumbers violating such rules
and regulations.
36.Editor's Note: Original Art. II, License and Application Therefor, of the 1965 Code, as
amended, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013.
§ 304-12 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 304-15
1:372
ARTICLE II
Plans, Permits and Inspections
§ 304-16. Plans, permits and inspections required. [Amended
3-25-1968; 10-28-1997; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Before commencing any new plumbing work or the repair of any old work,
the licensed plumber shall file with the Building Inspector three sets of
plans and specifications for such work, and at the same time written
application shall be made to this Board by a licensed plumber, on a form
prescribed by the Department of Architecture, Land Use Development,
Buildings and Building Compliance, for a permit to do said work; and no
plumbing work shall be done until such plans and specifications have been
approved and a permit issued to a licensed plumber for such plumbing.
Before making any sewer connection, the licensed plumber shall file with
the Highway General Foreman duplicate plans and specifications for such
work. No sewer connections shall be made until such plans and
specifications have been approved and a permit issued to a licensed
plumber for such sewer connection. Any violation of this section shall
subject the offender to a penalty not to exceed $250.
§ 304-17. Drawings.
The plans shall consist of such floor plans and sections as may be necessary
to show clearly all the work to be done, including all leaders, sewers, drains,
soil, waste and vent pipe lines, and the location of fixtures and their traps
and connections, etc., as may be required by the Board. All plans must be
drawn to a scale in ink, or may be prints of such scale drawings.
§ 304-18. Specifications.
The specifications shall be in the form prescribed by this Board and shall
contain the names of the owner, architect and plumber, the location of the
buildings and a clear and detailed description of all the work to be done,
including kind and size of sewer, drain, soil, waste, vent and supply lines
and trap, number and location of fixtures, etc., and shall be signed by the
owner or attorney in fact.
§ 304-19. Filing of permits and specifications.
Plans and specifications will be numbered in the order of their filing and
shall be so examined by the Plumbing Inspector, and if they are found by
him to be in accordance with the rules and regulations governing plumbers,
he shall attest his approval by endorsement on the copy of the plans and
specifications to be returned to the owner filing the same. The duplicate
copy shall be placed on file in the office of the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 304-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-20
1:373
§ 304-20. Approval of plans; bond required. [Amended 3-25-1968;
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
The Highway General Foreman shall certify to the approval of the plans
upon the application for a sewer connection filed by the plumber, and such
certificate shall be directed to the Mayor of the Village recommending that
permission be granted the applicant to make excavation for and connect
with the Village sewers. A cash bond to guarantee the repairs to road is
required.
§ 304-21. Amendments to plans.
No modification of the approved plans and specifications, or of the work
described therein, will be permitted, unless a proper application in writing
from the owner or architect, covering the proposed changes, has been
previously submitted to and approved by the Planning Inspector.
§ 304-22. Plans for old work. [Amended 3-25-1968]
In cases where the plumbing was completed before these rules and
regulations were in force, the application for plumbing work shall be
accompanied by full plans and specifications as required for new work; and
if the Plumbing Inspector shall find, upon examination of the plans and
of the buildings, that the work has been done in accordance with these
rules and regulations, permits will be granted as provided for new work. If,
however, the work is found not in accordance with the rules and regulations,
such alterations shall be made therein as this Board shall direct, to make
the plumbing safe to the persons occupying the building and so as to be
no source of injury or obstruction to the sewer. In all such cases, main soil
and waste pipes must extend above the roof, the drain have a trap, air inlet
and all traps be adequately protected from siphonage, be safe and clear and
all pipes shall have sufficient fall and fixtures shall be safe and clean and
provided with proper water supply for flushing, and the plumbing proved
tight, to the satisfaction of the Plumbing Inspector, under a smoke test.
§ 304-23. Inspections. [Amended 3-25-1968; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
As the rules require all work to be done in accordance with the approved
plans, due written notice must be given the Plumbing Inspector and/or
Highway General Foreman, by the licensed plumber, from time to time,
when any part of the work, including house sewer, drains, pipe lines,
connections, tests, etc., is ready for inspection, and no part of the work shall
be covered until it has been examined, tested and approved by the Plumbing
Inspector or the Highway General Foreman.
§ 304-24. Duties, powers and authority of Inspector and Highway
General Foreman. [Amended 3-25-1968; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
§ 304-20 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 304-24
1:374
A. It shall be the duty of the Plumbing Inspector, under the direction of the
Board of Trustees, to receive and pass upon all plans submitted to the
Board, to endorse applications for all plumbing permits, and to inspect
all buildings in the course of erection, alteration or repair, and see that
all plumbing, drainage, ventilation, and gas connections are done in
accordance with the provisions of these rules and regulations and kept
in order, in accordance with these rules and regulations, and for that
purpose he shall have power to inspect all plumbing, drainage and
ventilation whenever he deems it necessary.
B. The Highway General Foreman and other duly authorized employees of
the Village, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with
the provision of this chapter. The Highway General Foreman or his
representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes,
including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other
industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
C. While performing the necessary work on private properties, the
Highway General Foreman or duly authorized employees of the Village
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises and established
by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or
death to the Village employees and the Village shall indemnify the
company against loss or damage to its property by Village employees
and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the company and growing out of gauging and
sampling operations, except as such may be caused by negligence or
failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
Chapter 330, Sewers, § 330-47H.
D. The Highway General Foreman and other duly authorized employees of
the Village, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the Village
holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall
be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.
§ 304-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-24
1:375
Chapter 310
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Dumpsters — See Ch. 175.
Landscapers — See Ch. 225.
Housing standards — See Ch. 245.
Nuisances — See Ch. 280.
Solid waste — See Ch. 347.
Trees — See Ch. 385.
§ 304-24 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 304-24
1:376
ARTICLE I
Maintenance of Premises
[Adopted 12-3-1979 by L.L. No. 9-1979 (Ch. 41A of the 1965 Code)]
§ 310-1. Compliance required.
Multifamily premises, commercial premises and single-family residences
shall be maintained in conformity with the provisions of this article so as
to establish reasonable safeguards for the safety, health and welfare of the
occupants and users thereof and of the general public.
§ 310-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL PREMISES — A building, structure or land used for any
purpose other than for single-family or multifamily purposes, including
premises used for retail purposes, business purposes or industrial purposes.
MULTIFAMILY PREMISES — Any building which is used as a home or
residence, other than a single-family residence, together with any garage or
other accessory buildings and the lot upon which such building or buildings
are constructed.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE — A building which is occupied exclusively as
the home or residence of a single family, together with any garage or other
accessory building and the lot upon which such building or buildings are
constructed.
§ 310-3. Exterior maintenance.
A. Surface and subsurface water shall be drained to prevent damage to
buildings and structures and to prevent development of stagnant water.
Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers and
sanitary sewers or other satisfactory drainage systems shall be
provided and utilized. In no case shall the water from any rain leader be
allowed to flow over the sidewalk or adjoining property.
B. Fences and retaining walls shall be maintained in a safe condition.
C. In the case of multifamily premises and commercial premises, steps,
walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas shall be
maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and weather
conditions. Within 24 hours after the cessation of snowfall, snow shall
be plowed or shoveled from all steps, walks, driveways and parking
areas used or intended to be used by tenants, occupants, customers,
invitees or other members of the public.
D. No snow removed from driveways, walks or other areas shall be
deposited upon the public streets or highways so as to interfere with
§ 310-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-3
1:377
§ 310-4. Buildings and structures.
The owner shall keep all and every part of the building and accessory
structures in attractive condition and good repair, including but not limited
to the following:
the use of such streets or highways or with the use of any other
premises.
E. In the case of multifamily premises and commercial premises, all
driveways and parking spaces provided shall be covered with broken
stone, gravel, concrete or asphalt paving, which shall be kept in good
repair, and such driveways and parking spaces shall be regularly
cleaned to avoid accumulation of dirt, paper and other debris. On
commercial premises, all parking areas shall be paved with concrete or
asphalt, and all parking spaces shall be clearly marked with painted
white or yellow lines.
F. Heavy undergrowth and accumulation of plant growth which is
unsightly, noxious or detrimental to health shall be eliminated or
removed. Hedges and shrubs shall be kept pruned or trimmed. Grass
shall not be permitted to exceed six inches.
G. The owner shall keep all and every part of the premises which he owns
and the steps, walks, driveways and parking areas located in the front,
rear or side of said premises, from the building line to the nearest
public street line, in a clean, sanitary and safe condition and free from
litter, debris, paper, dirt, garbage and junk and, except for public
improvements, in good repair.
H. In the case of multifamily premises and commercial premises, all areas
within 20 feet of a public highway shall either be used as driveways and
parking areas, which areas shall be in compliance with Subsection E of
this section, or shall be planted with grass, shrubbery, flowers, trees or
other suitable plantings so that they will not be unsightly in
appearance.
I. Dead or incurably diseased trees shall be taken down and the diseased
portion thereof removed and destroyed. Trees shall be kept pruned, and
dead wood one inch in diameter shall be removed.
J. Notwithstanding anything contained in Subsection G of this section,
any property owner who shall fail to maintain the walkways, sidewalks,
driveways and parking areas located in the front, rear or side of such
premises, from the building line to the nearest public street line, in a
clean, sanitary and safe condition and free from litter, debris, paper,
dirt, garbage, junk and in good repair shall be liable to any party for
injuries sustained as a result thereof. [Added 1-9-2001 by L.L. No.
1-2001]
§ 310-3 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 310-4
1:378
§ 310-5. Control of infestation.
§ 310-6. Garbage and refuse.37
§ 310-7. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
A. Exterior wood surfaces of buildings and structures that are not
inherently resistant to deterioration shall be periodically treated with a
protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative.
B. In the case of multifamily premises and commercial premises, interior
floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures shall be maintained in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition.
A. In the case of multifamily premises and commercial premises, grounds,
buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insects, vermin and
rodents.
B. In the case of multifamily premises and commercial premises, where
the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows and other
openings in basements and cellars shall be screened with wire mesh or
other suitable materials.
C. From May 1 to October 1, entrances to multifamily premises shall be
provided with self-closing-type devices or screens. Windows and other
openings in such premises used for ventilation shall be screened.
A. Sanitary methods and facilities shall be used for the collection, storage
and handling and disposal of garbage, refuse and other debris.
B. Garbage, refuse and other debris shall not be permitted to accumulate
in public halls and stairways of multifamily and commercial premises.
A. Owners of premises and other persons, as defined in § 310-9B, shall be
responsible for compliance with this article.
B. In addition, tenants and occupants of multifamily and commercial
premises shall be responsible for compliance with respect to the
following:
(1) Maintaining all and every part of the commercial premises which
they rent, occupy or control and the steps, walks, driveways and
parking areas located in the front, rear or side of said premises,
from the building line to the nearest public street curbline, in a
clean, sanitary and safe condition and free from litter, debris,
paper, dirt, garbage and junk.
(2) Maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition all plumbing, cooking
and refrigeration fixtures and appliances as well as other building
37.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 347, Solid Waste.
§ 310-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-7
1:379
§ 310-8. Enforcement.
§ 310-9. Penalties for offenses.
§ 310-10. Notice of violation.
equipment and storage facilities in that part of the premises which
they occupy or control.
(3) Keeping exits from that portion of the premises which they occupy
clear and free from obstructions.
(4) Disposing in a clean and sanitary manner of all garbage, refuse and
debris in the provided facilities.
(5) Exterminating insects, rodents or other pests within that part of the
premises which they occupy.
A. The Building Inspector and other duly appointed law enforcement
officers of the Village of Sleepy Hollow shall be charged with the duty of
administering and enforcing this article.
B. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to issue a notice of
violation or to order in writing the correction of all conditions found to
exist in or on any premises which violate the provisions of this article.
C. The General Foreman and duly appointed law enforcement officers
shall have the power to issue an appearance ticket for violations of
§§ 310-3G, 310-6 and 310-7 of this article, with the penalties described
in § 310-9. [Added 8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 5-1991]
A. Any person, upon conviction of a violation of this article, shall be fined a
sum of money of not less than $250 nor more than $1,500 per day for
the first offense and not less than $500 nor more than $2,500 per day
for the second or any subsequent offense within a twelve-month period.
In addition, such person shall be subject to an injunction prohibiting
and otherwise preventing any further violations. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. The term "person" shall include the owner, tenant, occupant,
mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee, sublessee, agent or any other person, firm or
corporation directly or indirectly in control of any premises, building or
part thereof.
A. A notice of violation issued by the Building Inspector relative to a
premises shall be served either personally upon the person or by
posting the violation notice in a conspicuous place upon the premises
affected. If a notice of violation is served by posting it upon the
premises, a copy thereof shall be mailed to the person to whom it is
directed.
§ 310-7 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 310-10
1:380
§ 310-11. Emergencies.
Whenever the Building Inspector or enforcement official finds that an
emergency exists which requires immediate attention to protect the public
health or safety, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting
the existence of such emergency and requiring that such action be taken
as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this article, such order shall take effect immediately. Any
person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately,
but upon petition to the Building Inspector or the local justice court shall
be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, the Building
Inspector or court shall continue such order in effect or shall modify or
withdraw it.
B. A notice of violation shall state that unless, within five days from service
of notice, a written request is made for a hearing before the Building
Inspector, such notice shall, at the expiration of such five-day period, be
deemed an order to cease and desist from and to abate the described
violation. Such notice shall prescribe a reasonable time within which
such person shall be required to cease and desist from and abate such
violation. The notice may also contain an outline of remedial action
which, if taken, will effect compliance with this article. [Amended
5-16-1989 by L.L. No. 4-1989]
C. If a hearing is requested, it shall be commenced not later than 10 days
after the request is made, provided that for good cause the Building
Inspector may postpone such hearing for a reasonable time. If, after the
hearing, the enforcement officer finds that no violation exists, or that
such unusual, extraordinary or undue hardship shall occur as a result of
the physical dimension and proportion of the property, he shall
withdraw the notice. If he finds that a violation does exist, he shall
forthwith issue an order requiring the abatement of same within a
prescribed reasonable time. The proceedings at such hearing, which
shall be informal in all respects, shall be summarized in a report
reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office
of the Building Inspector.
D. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Building Inspector may,
within five days of the decision of the Building Inspector, appeal said
decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Sleepy Hollow
by filing the appropriate form.
E. The provisions of § 310-8B and Subsection A of this section
notwithstanding, it shall not be necessary for the Building Inspector to
issue a notice of violation or to order in writing the correction of a
condition in the instance of a second or any subsequent offense within a
twelve-month period, and in the case of a second or subsequent offense,
the person in violation may immediately be served with an appearance
ticket or summons.
§ 310-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-12
1:381
§ 310-12. Action upon noncompliance.
A. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner, person or agent so
notified to properly comply with this article within 20 days after the
service of notice as provided herein, the Building Inspector is hereby
authorized and empowered to pay for the correction of such violation,
subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow.
B. When the Village has effected the correction of the violation or has paid
for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus the accrued legal rate of
interest per annum from the date of the completion of the work, if not
paid by such owner prior thereto, shall be charged to such owner by the
Village, and such charge shall become due and payable by said owner
or person at the time of the payment of such bill.
C. Where the full amount due the Village is not paid by such owner within
20 days after the correction of such violation as provided in Subsections
A and B above, then, and in that case, the Building Inspector shall cause
to be filed in the office of the Village Clerk a sworn statement showing
the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was
completed and the location of the property by section, lot and block on
which said work was done and the name of the reputed owner thereof.
The filing of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege
on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount
due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection,
until final payment has been made. Said costs and expenses shall be
collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and,
further, shall be subject to a delinquent penalty at the legal rate of
interest in the event that the same is not paid in full on or before the
date the tax bill upon which such charge appears becomes delinquent.
Sworn statements filed in accordance with the provisions hereof shall
be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied
with and the work has been properly and successfully done and shall be
full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement,
plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated and
described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as
provided by law.
§ 310-12 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 310-12
1:382
ARTICLE II
Weeds and Grass
[Adopted 8-18-1937 (Ch. 60 of the 1965 Code)]
§ 310-13. Duties of lot owner or occupant.
Each owner or owners, occupant or occupants of any lot of ground or other
premises within the Village of Sleepy Hollow shall, at all times, keep the
same free from brush, rubbish, weeds, rag weeds, tall grass and other
materials.
§ 310-14. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-6-1981 by L.L. No.
3-1981; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Any person, upon conviction of a violation of this article, shall be fined a
sum of money of not less than $250 nor more than $1,500 per day for the
first offense and not less than $500 nor more than $2,500 per day for the
second or any subsequent offense within a twelve-month period. In addition,
such person shall be subject to an injunction prohibiting and otherwise
preventing any further violations.
§ 310-15. Failure to comply.
In addition to the penalty specified above, should any owner or occupant fail
or neglect to comply with the provisions of this article within 24 hours after
written notice to that effect by the Board of Trustees, the Village shall have
the right to remove the brush, rubbish, weeds, rag weeds, tall grass and/or
other materials and assess the cost thereof to the property so benefited.
§ 310-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-15
1:383
Chapter 319
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY RESTRICTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boardinghouses — See Ch. 139.
Housing standards — See Ch. 245.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 319-1. Prosecutions for illegal residential occupancies and
overcrowding in dwellings.
In all civil and criminal prosecutions brought for the enforcement of this
Code's provisions with respect to the illegal use of any building for
residential purposes or the illegal residential occupancy of any dwelling or
dwelling unit by more families than the number of families permitted for
such dwelling or dwelling unit under this Code, the following rebuttable
presumptions shall apply:
A. That any detached dwelling or dwelling unit which maintains more than
one mailbox or mail receptacle, more than one gas meter, more than
one electric meter, and/or more than one water meter is being used as
the residence of two or more families.
B. That any detached dwelling or dwelling unit which maintains more than
two mailboxes or mail receptacles, more than two gas meters, more
than two electric meters and/or more than two water meters is being
used as the residence of three or more families.
C. That any detached dwelling or dwelling unit which maintains any
entrance or entrances thereto, which entrance or entrances have not
been set forth on any plans approved by and on file with the
Department of Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings and
Building Compliance, is being used as the residence of two or more
families.
D. That any detached dwelling or dwelling unit which maintains any third
or additional entrances thereto, which entrance or entrances have not
been set forth on any plans approved by and on file with the
Department of Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings and
Building Compliance, is being used as the residence of three or more
families.
E. That any building which has been advertised in any newspapers,
magazines, or advertising publications as being available for sale or
rent for residential purposes, in whole or in part, which advertisement
expressly or implicitly provides that such building or the dwellings or
dwelling units therein contain rooms for rent, contain more than one
separate dwelling living unit, or may be occupied by more than one
§ 310-15 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 319-1
1:384
§ 319-2. Effect of rebuttal of presumptions.
The rebuttal of the aforesaid presumptions shall be an affirmative defense
by the defendant that, notwithstanding the existence of such conditions,
once such conditions have proven to the court, the subject building is not
being used as a dwelling or the subject dwelling is not being used for more
families than permitted under Chapter 450, Zoning, of the Code of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow.
separate family, is being used as a dwelling containing the number of
rooms for rent, dwelling units, or families stated or implied in such
advertisement.
F. That any dwelling or dwelling unit which maintains two or more
doorbells is being used as a dwelling for the same number of families as
there are doorbells.
G. That any single-family dwelling or dwelling unit at which there are the
following is being used for two or more families:
(1) Permanent partitions or internal doors which have not been set
forth on any plans approved by and on file with the Department of
Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings and Building
Compliance, which may serve to bar access between segregated
portions of the dwelling, including but not limited to bedrooms, or
the inability of any occupant or person in possession thereof to
have unimpeded and/or lawful access to all parts of the dwelling
unit; and/or
(2) Two or more kitchens which have not been set forth on any plans
approved by and on file with the Department of Architecture, Land
Use Development, Buildings and Building Compliance, each
containing one or more of the following: a range, oven, microwave,
or other similar device customarily used for cooking or preparation
of foods.
H. That any two-family dwelling units at which there are the following is
being used for three or more families:
(1) Permanent partitions or internal doors which have not been set
forth on any plans approved by and on file with the Department of
Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings and Building
Compliance, which may serve to bar access between three or more
segregated portions of the dwelling, including but not limited to
bedrooms; and/or
(2) Three or more kitchens which have not been set forth on any plans
approved by and on file with the Department of Architecture, Land
Use Development, Buildings and Building Compliance, each
containing one or more of the following: a range, oven, microwave,
or other similar device customarily used for cooking or preparation
of foods.
§ 319-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 319-3
1:385
§ 319-3. Demand for inspection of premises.
A person charged with a violation of this Code as described herein may
demand an inspection of the subject building or dwelling by the Department
of Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings and Building Compliance
to rebut such presumption. Such demand shall be in writing addressed
to the Department of Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings and
Building Compliance. The Department inspector shall prepare a report of
the findings of the inspection together with photographs, if appropriate.
§ 319-4. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 326
SEWER RENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 200.
Sewers — See Ch. 330.
Water — See Ch. 411.
§ 326-1. Title.
The title of this chapter is "Sewer Rents and Sewer Consumption Fees."
§ 326-2. Purpose; statutory authority.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish sewer rates in the Village of
Sleepy Hollow pursuant to Chapter 14-F of the General Municipal Law of
the State of New York.
§ 326-3. Establishment of rents and sewer consumption fees.
The owner of all premises using the sewer system of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow or any part thereof shall be required to pay sewer rents and sewer
consumption fees for the payment of the costs of the operation,
A. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code inconsistent herewith, for
each code violation involving an illegal residential occupancy or an
over-occupancy of a dwelling or dwelling unit, the owner and any
person who is in charge of the subject building, dwelling, or dwelling
unit at the time of the violation shall be liable to a fine of not less than
$1,000 nor more than $3,500 for the first violation; for a second and any
subsequent violation, the fine shall be not less than $5,000 nor more
than $7,500.
B. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate
and distinct violation.
§ 319-3 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 326-3
1:386
maintenance, repairs and debt service of the Village of Sleepy Hollow sewer
system.
§ 326-4. Sewer system defined.
The sewer system for which the sewer rents and sewer consumption fees
are established and imposed is the entire sewer system within the Village of
Sleepy Hollow as defined in § 451 of the General Municipal Law as it does
from time to time exist.
§ 326-5. Rates. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
All sewer consumption charges and fees shall be established by the Board
of Trustees by resolution, and shall be based upon the consumption of
water on the premises connected with and served by the sewer system.
All sewer rent rates and charges also established by the Mayor and Board
of Trustees by resolution shall be based upon the assessed value of the
premises connected with and served by the sewer system.
§ 326-6. Payments.
Sewer rents shall be billed and payable annually. Sewer consumption fees
shall be billed and payable quarterly, covering a three-month period.
§ 326-7. Authority to fix charges. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall have the power to fix rates and
charges by resolution for all sewer consumption and sewer rents and may
revise these rates and charges, from time to time, as the Mayor and Board
of Trustees shall deem necessary and proper.38
§ 326-8. Preparation and mailing of bills.
A. Bills for all sewer consumption fees contemplated by this chapter shall
be prepared on or about the 30th day following each quarterly period,
commencing with the first day of the Village fiscal year 2004-2005, and
continuing thereafter, and shall be mailed to the owner of the premises
or property as the same appears upon the last completed assessment
roll of the Village of Sleepy Hollow New York. If more than one person
shall appear as the owner of the premises or property, the bill may be
mailed to any one of such persons.
B. Sewer rents will be placed on the property owner's tax bill and payable
in the same manner and with the same penalties as Village taxes.
38.Editor's Note: Original Section No. 8, Annual and quarterly payments, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013.
§ 326-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 326-9
1:387
§ 326-9. Payment due dates.
Bills for sewer consumption fees shall be payable in the face amount without
penalty within 30 days following the date as indicated upon the bill provided
to the consumer. Sewer rents shall be paid in the same manner and the
same time period as Village taxes.
§ 326-10. Penalties for past-due bills.
Penalties shall accrue against sewer consumption fees as follow: There shall
be charged a penalty on past-due sewer consumption fees at the rate of 10%
following 30 days from the date of the billing and the rate of an additional
2% per month for each additional 30 days or part thereof of delinquency.
§ 326-11. Unpaid sewer rents and sewer consumption fees.
Such unpaid sewer consumption fees, together with the amount of the
penalty as herein prescribed and due by reason of nonpayment of such
sewer consumption fees, shall be a lien upon the real property upon which
or in connection with which the sewer consumption fees are used, and if not
paid by February of the fiscal year in which accrued, the amount thereof,
together with the penalty as herein prescribed, shall be included in the
next annual tax levy and shall be levied upon the real property. Unpaid
sewer rents shall also constitute a lien upon the real property upon which
or in connection with which the sewer rents are used and shall be due and
collected and become a lien, in the same manner as Village taxes.
§ 326-12. Sewer fund.
All revenues derived from sewer rents and sewer consumption fees,
including penalties, shall be credited by the Village Treasurer to a special
fund to be known as the "Sewer Fund." All rents, fees and penalties
deposited, together with the interest thereon, shall be used in accordance
with General Municipal Law § 453 and all other applicable laws of the State
of New York.
Chapter 330
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boardinghouses — See Ch. 139.
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Housing standards — See Ch. 245.
Laundries and car washes — See Ch. 259.
Plumbers — See Ch. 304.
Sewer rents — See Ch. 326.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 353.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 358.
Water — See Ch. 418.
§ 326-9 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 326-12
1:388
ARTICLE I
House Sewers and Connections with Public Sewers
§ 330-1. Definition; regulations governing construction.
§ 330-2. Connection required.
Every building requiring drainage and which is adjacent or accessible to a
public sewer shall be properly connected by a separate and independent
connection with such sewer, and no such building shall be used until such
connection has been made in accordance with the requirements of the
Board of Trustees. Where possible, the sewer connection shall be made
directly in front of the building, and in no case shall the house sewer cross
other private property without special permission from the Board.
§ 330-3. Excavations.
All Village regulations governing excavations, etc., in the public streets are
hereby made a part of these rules. The opening of streets and sidewalks
for house sewer connections and the depositing of the excavated materials
must be done in such manner as to occasion the least inconvenience to the
public, and excavations must be sufficiently protected and guarded by day
and also properly lighted by night. At least 1/2 the roadway must be left
clear for vehicles, all necessary bridges provided in streets and sidewalks
and the gutters kept free and unobstructed. The sewer trench must be
refilled with earth, free from large stones, and in layers well wetted and
carefully rammed about the pipe to prevent settlement or a disturbance of
the joints. The paving of streets and sidewalks, including the gravel or other
surface finish of roadways, must be carefully preserved, placed at one side
during the work of excavation, and at its completion replaced in position,
and the pavement or surface must be restored to its original condition and
all rubbish and surplus earth immediately removed.
§ 330-4. Size and connection requirements.
House sewers shall be not less than four inches in diameter and properly
connected by a bend with a four-inch Y branch on the public sewer.
A. The term "house sewer" in these rules and regulations is applied to that
part of any drain or sewer extending from a point five feet outside the
building to its connection with a public sewer, private sewer or septic
tank.
B. All regulations of the Board of Trustees of the Village or other board or
authority governing the construction, connection with or use of the
Village sewers or water, not consistent with these regulations, are
hereby made a part of these rules and regulations.
§ 330-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-5
1:389
§ 330-5. Permits for special cases.
Permits will be granted in special cases, in the discretion of the Board,
for the construction of private sewers of a greater diameter than four
inches, where it is necessary to so connect several buildings which are not
adjacent to any public sewer. Such private sewers must be constructed in
accordance with plans previously approved by the Board and must have
proper manholes for connection with the public sewers.
§ 330-6. Grade.
All house sewers, drains and horizontal soil and waste pipes must be laid as
straight as possible, any change in direction made with proper fittings, and
all such pipes given a fall of at least 1/4 inch per foot and as much more as
may be practicable in each case. No house sewer shall be covered until it
has been examined and approved by the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 330-7. Use of old sewers. [Amended 3-25-1968]
Old house sewers can be used in connection with new buildings or new
plumbing only when they are found, on examination by the Superintendent,
to conform in all respects to the requirements of the Board governing new
house sewers.
§ 330-8. Manholes.
Proper manholes or handholes for inspection and cleaning must be provided
on long lines of house sewers as may be required by the Board of Trustees.
§ 330-9. Responsibility for costs; fees.
§ 330-10. Overflows from cesspools.
No overflow or drain from any cesspool, privy, manure pit or barnyard
shall be connected with the Village sewers or with any sewer, or drain
discharging into the Village sewers, unless intervened with a manhole
properly constructed.
A. The expense of making connections with the sewers, or cutting off such
connections, and when ordered by the Board, and of removing
obstructions in such connecting sewers, shall be borne by the owner of
the property for which the connection is made.
B. The fee for a permit to connect to a municipal sewer line and for a
permit to connect to a municipal water line shall be as set forth in the
fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees. However, in the
event that the Board of Trustees finds, upon application by the property
owner or his agent, that a hardship will be created by the imposition of
said fees, the Board of Trustees may grant a waiver of all or part of said
fees. [Added 10-21-1997 by L.L. No. 15-1997; 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
§ 330-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 330-11
1:390
§ 330-11. Grease traps and catch basins.
No manufacturing establishment, dairy, restaurant, hotel kitchen, laundry,
stable, barn, garage or other building, the drainage of which would be liable
to cause obstructions in or injury to the public sewers, shall be connected
therewith except through proper catch basins or grease traps as required
by the Board. If the drainage from any such building cannot be rendered
harmless to the sewers, such building shall be excluded from the sewer
entirely.
§ 330-12. Steam exhaust and drips.
No steam exhaust, boiler blowoff, or drip pipe from any engine, boiler,
heating apparatus, etc., shall be connected with the house drain or sewer.
Such pipes must first discharge into a proper condensing tank which will
effectually condense all steam or vapor, and from this a proper outlet to the
house sewer outside the house trap may be provided.
§ 330-13. Disconnection of house sewers.
The Board of Trustees shall have power at any time to order the
disconnection of any house sewer through which substances are discharged
which are liable to obstruct or injure the public sewers or disposal plant, or
in the case of plumbing work connected with such house sewer which does
not conform to the requirements of the Board.
§ 330-14. Surface drainage.
No street gutter or surface drain or land drain or subsurface drain of any
kind shall be connected with the public sewer either directly or indirectly.
§ 330-15. Cesspools and privy vaults.
A. No privy vault will be allowed except on special permit in writing from
the Board and then only where it is impossible to connect the premises
with the public sewers and with approval of county authorities.
B. Privy vaults, when so permitted, shall be located at least five feet from
any lot or street line, 10 feet from any rainwater cistern, and at least 50
feet from any well, cistern or other source or storage place for drinking
water. They shall be constructed in the best manner of hard-burned
brick in hydraulic-cement mortar, with arched top and right stone or
iron cover and of dimensions and location as required by the Board, and
shall be built and maintained absolutely watertight. Permits for privy
vaults are temporary permits only, and the vaults must be emptied,
disinfected, cleaned and filled with fresh earth as soon as it is possible
to make connection with a public sewer. The material removed from
cesspools and privy vaults must be deposited in some safe place outside
the Village limits and, as directed by the Board, should comply with the
County Code.
§ 330-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-15
1:391
§ 330-16. Leaders.
§ 330-17. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in
milligrams per liter.
BRANCH VENT — The branches from crown of fixtures trap to the main
vent.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
DRAINAGE WORK — The house sewer and house drain and its horizontal
branches, collectively or separately.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
HOUSE DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the house sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.[Amended
3-25-1968]
HOUSE SEWER — That part of the main drain or sewer extending from a
point five feet outside of the outer wall of the building, vault or area, to its
connection with public sewer, private sewer or septic tank.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
C. House sewers' connection with vaults shall be constructed as provided
for sewer connections and to comply with the County Code.
A. In no case shall the water from any rain leader be allowed to flow
directly upon the sidewalk or adjoining property. The water from said
leaders shall be conducted through cast-iron pipe laid below the surface
of the sidewalk to the street gutter or of tile pipe when conducted to a
leaching cesspool or dry well.
B. Inside leaders must be made of cast-iron, galvanized, wrought-iron or
galvanized-steel pipe of a standard weight, with roof connections made
gas and watertight by means of a heavy lead or copper drawn-tubing
wiped to a brass ferrule or nipple caulked or screwed into the pipe and
to be cast iron five feet outside of building.
C. Rainwater leaders must not be used as or connected to soil, waste or
vent pipes, nor shall any such pipe be used as a leader.
§ 330-15 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 330-17
1:392
INSANITARY — Is applied to the following:
MAYOR AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The duly elected Mayor and Board
of Trustees of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.[Amended 3-25-1968]
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PLUMBING — Includes any and all work in a building or pertaining to
connections to a building wherein said work is included in this Code under
the head of "drainage system" or "gas system" or "water distribution
system."
PLUMBING WORK — The art of installing in buildings the pipes, fixtures
and other apparatus for bringing in the water supply and removing liquid
and water-carried wastes.
PRIVATE SEWER — All sewers that are not constructed by and under the
supervision of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
A. To any fixture whose trap does not maintain a proper seal.
To any fixture not having a proper or sufficient water supply to
thoroughly flush it out and keep it in a clean and wholesome condition.
B.
To any drain, soil, waste or vent pipe which is not gastight or emits any
foul or obnoxious gases or odors.
C.
To any drain, soil, waste or vent pipe that is stopped or partially stopped
up.
D.
To any water-closet compartment which is not thoroughly ventilated or
has the floor saturated with urine or containing a foul odor.
E.
F. To any imperfect fixture, pipe or trap.
G. To any house drain not having fresh air inlet in good condition.
H. To any work not conforming with the rules of this Board.
I. To anything which is detrimental to health.
§ 330-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-17
1:393
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwater, surface water, and groundwaters are not intentionally
admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together
with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwaters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SHALL — Is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
SOIL PIPE — Any line of pipe receiving the discharge of one or more water
closets, with or without other fixtures.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "STORM SEWER") — A sewer which
carries stormwater and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage
and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, or his authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
VENT PIPE — Any special pipe provided to ventilate the system of piping
and to prevent siphonage and back pressure.
VILLAGE — The Incorporated Village of Sleepy Hollow.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 330-17 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 330-17
1:394
ARTICLE II
Materials
§ 330-18. Materials and workmanship.
§ 330-19. Free from defects.
All materials used in any drainage or plumbing system, or part thereof, shall
be free from defects.
§ 330-20. Cast or stamped label.
Each length of pipe, fitting, trap, fixture and device used in a drainage or
venting system shall be stamped or indelibly marked with the weight or
quality thereof and the maker's mark or name.
§ 330-21. Wrought-iron pipe.
All wrought-iron pipe shall conform to the American Society for Testing
Materials "Standard Specifications for Welded Wrought-Iron Pipe" (serial
designation A72-27) and shall be galvanized.
§ 330-22. Steel pipe.
All steel pipe shall conform to the American Society for Testing Materials
"Standard Specifications for Welded and Seamless Steel Pipe" (serial
designation A53-27) and shall be galvanized.
§ 330-23. Brass and copper pipe.
Brass and copper pipe shall conform respectively to the Standard
Specifications of the American Society for Testing Materials for "Brass Pipe,
Standard Sizes," and for "Copper Pipe, Standard Sizes" (serial numbers
B43-24 and B42-24, respectively). Brass and copper pipe shall have fittings
of like material.
§ 330-24. Lead pipe.
All lead pipe shall be of best quality and shall conform to minimum weights
per linear foot as follows: 1 1/2 inch, three pounds; two inches, four pounds;
four inches, eight pounds.
A. All materials must be of the best quality, free from defects, and all work
must be executed in a thoroughly workmanlike manner.
B. All cast-iron pipes and fittings must be uncoated, sound, cylindrical and
smooth, free from cracks, sand holes and other defects, and of uniform
thickness, and of the grade known to commerce as "extra heavy"; also
must conform to the American Society for Testing Materials "Standard
Specifications for Extra-Heavy Cast-Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings" (serial
designation A74-18).
§ 330-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-25
1:395
§ 330-25. Sheet lead.
Sheet lead shall weigh not less than four pounds per square foot.
§ 330-26. Sheet metal ducts.
Sheet copper or brass or galvanized iron duct work shall not be lighter than
No. 26 Brown and Sharp gauge, and individual ducts direct to roof shall be
provided for each compartment. Duct shall be equal in area to at least 144
square inches per bathroom.
§ 330-27. Threaded fittings.
§ 330-28. Calking ferrules.
Brass calking ferrules shall be of the best quality red cast brass known as
"extra heavy."
§ 330-29. Soldering nipples and bushings.
§ 330-30. Floor flanges for water closets.
Floor flanges for water closets shall be beveled and known as "extra heavy
brass."
§ 330-31. Screw caps for cleanouts.
Brass screw caps for cleanouts must be extra heavy, not less than 1/8 inch
thick. The screw cap must have a solid square or hexagonal nut, not less
than one inch high, with at least a diameter of 1 1/2 inches. The body of the
cleanout ferrule must be at least equal in width and thickness to the calking
ferrule for the same size of pipe.
§ 330-32. Cleanouts.
Where cleanouts are required by rules and by the approved plans, the screw
cap must be of brass. The engaging part must have not less than six threads
A. Plain screwed fittings shall be of cast iron, malleable galvanized iron or
brass of standard weight and dimensions.
B. Drainage fittings shall be galvanized recessed cast iron, malleable iron,
or brass, with smooth interior waterway, with threads tapped out of
solid metal.
C. All malleable iron fittings shall be galvanized.
A. Soldering nipples shall be of brass pipe, iron pipe size, or of heavy, red
cast brass, full size, extra heavy.
B. Soldering bushings shall be of brass pipe, iron pipe size, or of heavy, red
cast brass.
§ 330-25 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 330-32
1:396
or iron-pipe size and be tapered. Cleanouts must be of full size of trap up
to four inches in diameter, and not less than four inches for larger traps.
Cleanouts less than four inches must be provided every 20 feet and at every
change in direction. Cleanouts four inches and larger must be provided
every 30 feet and at every change in direction.
§ 330-33. Use of lead pipe.
The use of lead pipe is restricted to the short branches of the soil and waste
pipes, bends and traps. "Short branches" of lead pipe shall be construed to
mean not more than:
5 feet of 1 1/2-inch pipe
5 feet of 2-inch pipe
2 feet of 3-inch pipe
2 feet of 4-inch pipe
§ 330-34. Connections between lead and brass or copper pipes.
All connections between lead pipes and between lead and brass or copper
pipes must be made by means of "wiped" solder joints.
§ 330-35. Lead pipe specifications.
All lead waste, soil and vent pipes must be of the best quality, known in
commerce as "D," and of not less than the following weights per linear foot:
Diameter
(inches)
Weight per Linear Foot
(pounds)
1 1/2 3
2 4
3 6
4 and 4 1/2 8
§ 330-36. Lead traps and bends.
All lead traps and bends must be of the same weight and thickness as
their corresponding pipe branches. Sheet lead for roof flashings must be six
inches from the pipe, and the joint made watertight. All roof flashings must
be lead or copper.
§ 330-37. General regulations.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the Village of Sleepy Hollow, or in any area under the jurisdiction
§ 330-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-37
1:397
of said Village, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the
Village of Sleepy Hollow or in any area under the jurisdiction of said
Village, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. [Amended 3-25-1968]
(1) Each building must be separately and independently connected
with a public or private sewer, or septic tank, except where a
building is located on the rear of the same lot with another
building, when its plumbing and drainage system may be
connected to the house drain of the front building behind the house
trap and fresh-air inlet, which shall be used for both buildings if
sewer-connected or may be connected to the existing septic tank of
the front house and be provided with a separate house trap and
fresh-air inlet.
(2) Every building must have its sewer connections directly in front of
the building, unless permission is otherwise granted by the Board
of Trustees.
(3) Cesspools and privy vaults will not be permitted.
(4) Septic tanks will be permitted only after it has been shown to the
satisfaction of the Board of Trustees that their use is absolutely
necessary.
(5) Where septic tanks are allowed, they must be constructed strictly
in accordance with and conform to the rules and practice used in
the installation of septic tanks.
(6) Upon the construction of a public sewer within a reasonable
distance, the owner of premises on which is located a cesspool,
privy vault or septic tank must have the same emptied, cleaned and
disinfected and filled with fresh earth and have a sewer connection
made in the manner herewith prescribed, when the same shall
become necessary in the opinion of the Board of Trustees.
(7) All pipes issuing from extension or elsewhere, which would
otherwise open within 15 feet of the window of any building, must
be extended on the inside of the building, above the top of any
window located within such distance. When a building exceeds in
height that of an adjoining building, and windows or openings are
cut in the wall on the lot line within 15 feet of the roof terminal of
any soil, waste or vent line now in place or subsequently installed in
the lower building, the owner of the higher building shall defray the
expense of extending said soil, waste or vent lines above the roof of
the higher building or shall himself make such alterations.
§ 330-37 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 330-37
1:398
(8) The arrangement of all pipes must be as straight and direct as
possible. Offsets will be permitted only when unavoidable.
(9) All pipes and traps should, where possible, be exposed to view.
They should always be readily accessible for inspection and
repairing.
(10) All main vent lines shall extend above the attic floor and terminate
below first-floor beams. All fixtures in the house must be vented.
(11)D&M spur fittings must be used for connecting the house sewer to
the main sewer in the street.
§ 330-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-37
1:399

ARTICLE III
Plumbing Systems
§ 330-38. House sewer, drain, trap and fresh-air inlet.
A. Old house sewers can be used in connection with a new building or new
plumbing only when they are found, on examination by the
Superintendent, to conform in all respects to the requirements
governing new sewers. [Amended 3-25-1968]
B. The house sewer must be properly connected with the main sewer in
the street and must be of extra-heavy cast-iron pipe with lead-caulked
joints. An arched or other proper opening must be provided for the
drain in the wall, to prevent damage by settlement.
C. The house drain and its branches must be of extra-heavy cast iron when
underground, and of extra-heavy cast iron or galvanized wrought iron
or steel when aboveground.
D. The house drain, if above the cellar floor, must be supported at intervals
of 10 feet by eight-inch brick piers or suspended from the floor beams,
or be otherwise properly supported by proper hangers placed not more
than 10 feet apart.
E. No steam exhaust, boiler blow off or drip pipe shall be connected with
the house drain. Such pipes must first discharge into a proper
condensing tank and from this a proper outlet to the house sewer
outside of the building must be provided, and a separate vent from
condensing tank to outer air must be provided. In low-pressure steam
systems the condensing tank may be omitted, but the waste
connections must be otherwise as above required.
F. The house drain and house sewer must be run as direct as possible with
a fall of at least 1/4 of an inch per foot, all changes in direction made
with proper fittings, and all connections made with Y branches and 1/8
and 1/16 bends.
G. The house sewer and house drain must be at least four inches in
diameter when receiving the discharge of a water closet. No house
sewer or house drain shall be of less diameter than the largest line of
pipe connected thereon.
H. Full-size Y and T branch fittings for handhole cleanout must be provided
where required on the house drain and its branches. No cleanout need
be larger than six inches in diameter.
I. An iron running trap must be placed in the house drain near the front
wall of the house, and on the sewer side of all connections, except a Y
fitting used to receive the discharge from an automatic sewerage lift or
oil separator, where one is used. If placed outside of the house or below
the cellar floor, it must be made accessible in a brick manhole, the walls
of which must be eight inches thick, with an iron or flagstone cover.
§ 330-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-38
1:401
§ 330-39. Soil and waste lines.
When outside the house it must never be less than three feet below
the surface of the ground. All cleanouts on traps or drains underground
must be made accessible in brick manholes or boxes with suitable
cover.
J. When the plumbing system of any building is altered by the addition of
new soil, waste or vent lines and no house trap and fresh-air inlet exists
on the house drain, same shall be provided.
K. The house trap must have two cleanouts, with brass screw-cap ferrules
caulked in.
L. No curb box or similar device with grating placed in sidewalk will be
permitted for fresh-air inlets.
M. Where the main sewer enters the building, a Y shall be placed on the
end of same and at the bottom of each vertical line of soil pipe; also, a
cleanout shall be placed at the end of each horizontal line and at each
change in direction.
N. A fresh-air inlet pipe must be connected with the house drain just inside
of the house trap and extended to the outer air, terminating with the
open end at least one foot above the grade, and at least two feet away
from any door or window at the most available point to be approved by
the Plumbing Inspector and shown on plans. The fresh-air inlet pipes
shall be 1/2 the diameter of the house drain but not less than four
inches in diameter. The fresh-air inlet shall be equipped with a
perforated brass plate or return bend.
A. All main, soil, waste or vent pipes must be of iron, steel or brass.
B. When they receive the discharge of fixtures on any floor above the first,
they must extend in full caliber at least one foot above the roof coping,
and well away from any and all shafts, windows, chimneys or other
ventilating openings. When less than four inches in diameter, they must
be enlarged to four inches at a point not less than one foot below the
roof surface by an increaser not less than nine inches long.
C. No caps, cowls or bends shall be affixed to the top of such stack. When
roofs are used for drying purposes or roof gardens, all pipes shall be
extended to a height of seven feet.
D. Necessary offsets above the highest fixture branch must not be made at
an angle of less than 45° to the horizontal.
E. Soil and waste pipes must have a proper Y or TY branches for all fixture
connections.
F. No connection to lead branches for water closets or slop sinks will be
permitted except the required branch vent.
§ 330-38 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 330-39
1:402
§ 330-40. Number of toilet fixtures required.
Every office building, school, store, warehouse, manufacturing
establishment or other structure, where workers are or will be employed,
shall be provided with at least one water closet.
§ 330-41. Fixture units.
G. Branch soil and waste pipe must have a fall of at least 1/4 inch per foot.
H. Short TY branches will be permitted on vertical lines only. Long 1/4
bends and long TYs are permitted. Short 1/4 bends and double hubs,
short roof increases and common offsets, and bands and saddles, are
prohibited.
I. All branch soil pipes for water closets shall not be less than four inches.
The diameters of soil and waste pipes must not be less than those given
in the following tables.
A. Water closets.
(1) Water closets shall be provided for each sex according to the
following table. The number of water closets to be provided for
each sex shall in every case be based upon the maximum number of
persons of that sex employed at any one time on the given floor, or
floors, or in the structure for which such closets are provided.
Number of Persons Number of Closets Ratio
1 to 15 1 1 for 15
16 to 35 2 1 for 17 1/2
36 to 55 3 1 for 18 1/3
56 to 80 4 1 for 20
81 to 110 5 1 for 22
111 to 150 6 1 for 25
151 to 190 7 1 for 27 1/7
(2) Thereafter, water closets shall be provided at the rate of one closet
for every 30 persons, except that in schools designed for a
minimum occupancy of 400 pupils, at least one toilet fixture shall
be provided for each 40 pupils, and in toilets for boys, at least 1/4 of
the fixtures shall be water closets.
B. For dwellings to be occupied by one or two families, at least one water
closet shall be provided for each family in the apartment occupied by
such family.
C. Places of public or semipublic assembly accommodating large numbers
of persons shall be provided with a sufficient number of water closets
and urinals as directed by the Inspector.
§ 330-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-41
1:403
A. The following table, based upon the rate of discharge from a lavatory as
the unit, shall be employed to determine fixture equivalents:
Fixture Number of Units
1 lavatory or wash basin 1
1 bathtub 2
1 laundry tray 2
1 sink, except slop sink 2
1 combination fixture 3
1 urinal 3
1 shower bath 2
1 floor drain 2
1 slop sink 3
1 water closet 6
1 slop sink with flushing rim 6
1 drinking fountain 1/2
1 dental cuspidor 1/2
1 bathroom group containing 1 water
closet, 1 lavatory and 1 bathtub, with or
without shower, or 1 shower shall
6
1 bathroom group containing 1 water
closet, 1 lavatory, 1 bathtub and 1 shower
7
Sterilizers with 1/2-inch waste connections 1/2
Each 1,000 gallons of capacity of a
swimming pool
1
B. For fixtures other than those mentioned in the above list, the number of
units shall be established by the size of the waste connections on the
following basis:
Size of Waste Outlets in Fixtures Number of Units
1/2 inch, 3/4 inch, less than 1 inch 1/2
1 inch 1
1 1/4 inches 2
1 1/2 inches 3
2 inches 5 1/2
2 1/2 inches 8
3 inches 15
4 inches 30
5 inches 50
6 inches 80
§ 330-41 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 330-41
1:404
§ 330-42. Minimum size of soil and waste branches.
§ 330-43. Branch soils and wastes.
The required size of branch soils and wastes receiving the discharge of two
or more fixtures shall be determined on the basis of the total number of
fixture units drained by branch soils and wastes, in accordance with the
following table:
Maximum Number
of Fixture Units
Permitted
Maximum Number of
Water Closets
Permitted
Diameter of Branches
(inches)
2 — 1 1/2
9 — 2
20 — 2 1/2
Size of Waste Outlets in Fixtures Number of Units
8 inches 160
C. Where the term "water closet' is used, it shall include bedpan washers,
hoppers and similar fixtures receiving fecal matter.
A. Minimum sizes of soil and waste branches to individual fixtures shall be
in accordance with the following table:
(1) Water closet: four inches.
(2) Floor drain: three inches.
(3) Urinal: two inches.
(4) Slop sink: three inches.
(5) Sink, except slop sink: two inches.
(6) Bathtub: 1 1/2 inches.
(7) Laundry tray: 1 1/2 inches.
(8) Shower bath: two inches.
(9) Lavatory: 1 1/2 inches.
(10) Drinking fountain: 1 1/2 inches.
(11) Dental cuspidor: 1 1/2 inches.
(12) Sterilizers with one-half-inch waste outlet: 1 1/2 inches.
(13) Combination fixture, laundry tubs and kitchen sinks: two inches.
B. The size of any stack, house drain and house sewer shall be at least that
of the largest branch connected to it.
§ 330-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-43
1:405
Maximum Number
of Fixture Units
Permitted
Maximum Number of
Water Closets
Permitted
Diameter of Branches
(inches)
35 1 3
100 11 4
250 28 5
§ 330-44. Soil and waste stacks.
§ 330-45. Size of house drains and house sewers.
A. Soil and waste stacks shall extend through the roof undiminished in size
as such size is established at the base, but never be less than four
inches.
B. Soil and waste stacks shall be as direct as possible, and such stacks
shall be free from sharp angles and turns. The required size of a soil or
waste stack shall be independently determined by the fixture units
connected to such stack and the total length, in accordance with the
following table:
Size of Stacks
Maximum
Number of
Fixture Units
Permitted
Maximum
Number of
Water Closets
Permitted
Diameter of
Stack
(inches)
Maximum
Developed
Lengths
(feet)
4 — 1 1/2 50
14 — 2 75
36 — 2 1/2 100
90 1 3 150
400 40 4 300
1,000 120 5 500
1,800 200 6 Unlimited
3,500 400 8 Unlimited
5,000 600 10 Unlimited
C. When the above table calls for a stack four inches or more in diameter
which does not receive the discharge of any water closet, the diameter
may be reduced one size without changing the loading or the developed
length.
D. It shall be unlawful to discharge water closets into a stack less than
three inches in diameter. It shall be unlawful to discharge more than
one water closet into a three-inch stack.
§ 330-43 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 330-45
1:406
§ 330-46. Acid and other hazardous discharges.
It shall be unlawful to discharge into the regular plumbing system any acids
or liquids of any kind which may be injurious to such system.
§ 330-47. Use of public sewers. [Amended 8-16-1965]
A. The required size of sanitary house drains and sanitary house sewers
shall be determined on the basis of the total number of fixture units
drained by them, in accordance with the following table:
Maximum Number of Fixture
Units Permitted
Diameter of House Drain
(inches)
2 1 1/2
9 2
25 2 1/2
70 3
200 4
400 5
400 5
660 6
1,500 8
2,800 10
5,000 12
B. The minimum size of a house drain receiving the discharge of a water
closet shall be four inches in diameter, continued full size to all vertical
stacks receiving the discharge of a water closet.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters
to any sanitary sewer.
B. Stormwater and all unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer,
combined sewer, or natural outlet.
C. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
§ 330-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-47
1:407
(2) Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to human or animals, create a public nuisance,
or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of
two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
(3) Any waters or wastes having pH lower than 5.5, or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited
to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups,
milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
D. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in
the opinion of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb,
public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to
the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flow and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the
sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited
are:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
(65° C.).
(2) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between
32° F. and 150° F. (0° C. and 65° C.).
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Superintendent.
(4) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
(5) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an
§ 330-47 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 330-47
1:408
excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment
works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for
such materials.
(6) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits
which may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of
the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such
discharge to the receiving waters.
(7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(8) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
(9) Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or
of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, chlorides and
sodium sulfate).
(b) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
(c) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works.
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes containing
"slugs" as defined herein.
(10)Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that
the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements
of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters.
E. Remediation of harmful discharges.
(1) If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in
Subsection D of this section, and which, in the judgment of the
Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, process, equipment, or receiving waters or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may:
§ 330-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-47
1:409
(a) Reject the wastes;
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge
to the public sewer;
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
and/or
(d) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges under the provisions of Subsection J of this section.
(2) If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Superintendent and subject to the requirements of all applicable
codes and laws.
F. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
G. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
H. When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
serviced by a sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling,
and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so
as to be safe and accessible at all times.
I. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the
American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the
control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said
control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon
§ 330-47 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 330-47
1:410
§ 330-48. Stormwater piping.
the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life,
limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine
whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is
appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs
are determined from periodic grab samples.)
J. No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the city for treatment,
subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern.
A. The required sizes of stormwater house drains, house sewers and all
other stormwater piping shall be determined on the basis of the total
drained area in horizontal projection, in accordance with the following
table:
Size of Piping for Stormwater Only
Maximum Drained Area
(square feet)
A B C
Diameter of
Pipe
(inches)
Fall 1/8 inch to
a foot
Fall 1/4 inch to
a foot
Fall 1/2 inch to
a foot
2 250 350 500
2 1/2 450 600 900
3 700 1,000 1,500
4 1,500 2,100 3,000
5 2,700 3,800 5,500
6 4,300 6,100 9,000
8 9,600 13,000 19,000
10 16,500 24,000 35,000
12 27,000 40,000 56,000
B. The size of the horizontal run from the base of the leader to the house
drain, including the trap, shall be in accordance with the above table.
C. Leaders shall be at least of the size required in Column C of the above
table.
§ 330-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-49
1:411
§ 330-49. Main vent connections; vent stacks.
Main vents or vent stacks shall connect at their base to the main soil or
waste pipe at least three feet below the lowest vent branch. Such stacks
shall extend undiminished and unincreased in size above the roof or such
stacks shall be reconnected with the main soil or waste stack at least three
feet above the highest fixture branch. The pipe above the intersection shall
be increased to a minimum of four inches through roof.
§ 330-50. Required size of vents.
§ 330-51. Exceptions to waste and vent tables.
A. The required size of the vent shall be determined on the basis of the size
of the soil or waste stack, the number of fixture units connected to the
vent and the developed length of the pipe, in accordance with the
following table. Vents shall be at least 1 1/2 inches in diameter. The
diameter of every vent stack shall be at least 1/2 the diameter of the soil
or waste stack served. In determining the developed length of vent
pipes, the vent stack and branches shall be considered continuous.
Vent Stacks and Branches
Diameter of Pipe
(inches)
Maximum Number
of Fixture Units
Permitted
Maximum Developed
Length for Each Size
(feet)
1 1/2 6 25
2 40 60
2 1/2 72 100
3 120 150
4 250 250
5 500 300
6 1,250 400
8 2,400 Unlimited
10 3,000 Unlimited
12 5,000 Unlimited
B. Where main stacks are grouped together at the top of a structure into
one pipe which extends through the roof, such combined vent shall be
at least equal in area to 75% of the sum of the areas of the stacks
connecting into such combined vent.
A. Wet vents may be allowed at the discretion of the Plumbing Inspector.
B. A vent branch of 1 1/2 inches may be used for a single set of bathroom
fixtures, one water closet, one basin, one bathtub or shower.
§ 330-49 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 330-51
1:412
§ 330-52. Traps.
C. The exception to soil stacks is that a three-inch soil stack may be used
on bungalow-type homes and in instances where it is impossible to
install another bathroom above, and at the discretion of the Plumbing
Inspector.
D. Floor drains are allowed only where necessary and at the discretion of
the Plumbing Inspector. Floor drains above the first floor must be
vented.
A. No form of trap will be permitted to be used unless it has been
approved by the Plumbing Inspector. No antisiphon trap or deep-seal
siphon-jet fixture shall be approved until it has successfully passed such
test as may be prescribed by the Examining Board of Plumbers.
B. No mason's cesspool, bell, pot, bottle or D-trap will be permitted, nor
any form of trap that is not self-cleaning, nor that has interior chamber
or mechanism, nor any trap except earthenware ones that depend upon
interior partitions for a seal. Backwater or tide valves will only be
permitted when it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Plumbing
Inspector that their use is absolutely necessary and of a type as
approved by him.
C. Every fixture must be separately trapped by a water-sealing trap placed
as close to the fixture outlet as possible.
D. A set of not more than four wash trays may use the same trap, if the
fixtures are located immediately and compactly together. A combination
sink and wash tray may use one trap. Cement wash trays will not be
permitted.
E. The discharge from any fixture must not pass through more than one
trap before reaching the house drain.
F. All traps must be well-supported and set true with respect to their
water levels.
G. All fixtures, other than water closets and urinals, must have strong
metallic strainers or bars over the outlets to prevent obstruction of the
waste pipe. All urinals shall be placed on a concrete step and step to
pitch to urinal.
H. All exposed or accessible traps, except water-closet traps, must have
brass trap screws for cleaning the trap placed on the inlet side, or
below the water level.
I. All iron traps for house drain and other drains must be running traps
with handhole cleanouts of full size of the traps, when same are less
than five inches. All traps underground must be made accessible by
brick manholes with proper covers. In buildings of one or more stories
where fixtures are located on the ground floor, same may be vented by a
§ 330-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-52
1:413
§ 330-53. Safe and refrigerator waste pipes.
two-inch pipe provided that fixtures are not more than 15 feet from the
main soil line which goes directly to the roof.
J. Overflow pipes from fixtures must in all cases be connected on the inlet
side of traps.
K. All earthenware traps must have approved heavy brass floor plates
properly secured to the branch soil pipe and bolted to the trap flange,
with the joint made gastight. The use of rubber washers for floor
connections is prohibited. All floor flanges must be set in place and
inspected before any water closet is set thereon.
L. No trap shall be placed at the foot of main soil and waste pipe lines.
M. Every plunge bath or swimming pool shall be provided with a trap at
least four inches in diameter, and this waste shall be controlled by a
gate valve. Overflow pipes, if provided, must be connected on inlet side
of the trap. Except where an approved antisiphon trap is installed in the
manner specified, such trap must be ventilated by a separate vent line
extended above the roof, of the same size as the trap and water
connection, and system shall be chlorinated.
N. All water-closet seats in public places shall be open front.
O. Every dental cuspidor must be separately trapped by a trap at least 1 1/
2 inches in diameter, which shall be vented, except where an approved
antisiphon trap is installed in the manner specified, and placed as close
to the fixture as possible. The connection between trap and cuspidor
may be 3/4 inch in diameter.
P. The waste of every bar sink, soda fountain and drinking fountain must
discharge over a properly water-supplied, trapped sink with the trap
vented. The main waste lines shall be two inches in diameter and the
branches to fixtures at least 1 1/2 inches in diameter. Drinking
fountains must be trapped and the waste line extended through the
roof. No vent connections need be provided.
A. Safe and refrigerator waste pipes must be of galvanized iron, and be not
less than 1 1/4 inches in diameter nor larger than 1 1/2 inches in
diameter with pipe branches at least one inch in diameter with
strainers over each inlet.
B. Safe and refrigerator waste pipes shall not be trapped. They must
discharge over a properly water-supplied, trapped sink, with the trap
vented unless an approved antisiphon trap is installed in the manner
specified, such sink to be publicly placed and not more than four feet
above the floor. In no case shall any refrigerator or safe waste pipe
discharge over a sink located in a room used for living or cooking
purposes.
§ 330-52 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 330-53
1:414
§ 330-54. Water closets, sinks and wash tubs.
(Applies except as relating to tenement houses and factories.)
C. The branches on vertical lines must be made by Y or TY fittings and
carried up to the safe with as much pitch as possible.
D. Lead safes must be graded and neatly turned over bevel strips at their
edges.
E. Where there is an offset on a refrigerator waste pipe in the cellar, there
must be cleanouts to control the horizontal part of the pipe.
F. In all lodgings and tenement houses, the safe and refrigerator waste
pipes must extend above the roof.
A. Separate water closets and toilet rooms must be provided for each sex
in buildings used as workshops, lofts, office buildings, factories, hotels
and all places of public assembly. Vacuum breakers for flushometers
must be provided.
B. In lodging houses there must be one water closet on each floor, and
where there are more than 15 persons on any floor there must be an
additional water closet on that floor for every 15 additional persons or
fraction thereof.
C. In tenement houses, lodging houses, factories, workshops, and all
public buildings, the entire water closet apartment and side walls to a
height of six inches from the floor, except at the door, must be made
waterproof with asphalt, cement, tile, metal or other waterproof
material as approved by the Board of Trustees.
D. In all buildings, the water closet and urinal apartments must be
ventilated to the outer air by windows opening on the same lot as the
one on which the building, or by a ventilating skylight placed over each
room or apartment wherein such fixtures are located.
E. In all buildings, the outside partition of any water closet or urinal
apartment must be airtight and extended to the ceiling or be
independently ceiled over. When necessary to properly light such
apartments, the upper part of the partitions must be provided with
translucent glass. The interior partitions of such apartments must be
dwarfed partitions.
F. The general water closet accommodation of any building cannot be
placed in the cellar, nor can any water closet be placed outside of a
building, except to replace an existing water closet.
G. In alteration work where it is not practicable to ventilate a water closet
or urinal apartment by windows or a skylight directly to the outer air,
there may be provided a galvanized wrought-iron vent duct extended to
the outer air, which must be equal in area to at least 144 square inches
§ 330-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-54
1:415
for one water closet or urinal, and an additional 72 square inches for
each water closet added therein.
H. All water closets must have six gallons of flow in 10 seconds.
I. All fixtures must have over-rim water supply.
J. All water closets must have earthenware flushing-rim bowls. They must
be set entirely free and open from all enclosing woodwork.
K. Pan, plunger, offset-washout and wash-out, or other water closets
having an unventilated space, or whose walls are not thoroughly
washed out at each discharge, will not be permitted.
L. All urinals must be constructed of materials impervious to moisture,
and that will not corrode under the action of urine. The floor and wall of
the urinal apartments must be lined with similar nonabsorbent and
noncorrosive material.
M. The platforms of treads of urinal stalls must never be connected
independently to the plumbing system, nor can they be connected to
any safe waste pipe.
N. No privy vault or outhouse shall be built on any premises for the use of
workmen during the construction of any building. Instead, there shall
be installed on the premises a temporary water closet connected with
the sewer and supplied with running water.
§ 330-54 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 330-54
1:416
ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous
§ 330-55. Water supply and fixtures.
§ 330-56. Riser lines.
A. All water piping from water mains in the street up to and including
installations pertinent to the water meter shall be installed according to
the regulations of the Department of Public Works of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. All water-supply pipes from the main to the water meter shall be Type K
copper, at least 3/4 inch in size, and all joints must be flared from the
main in the street to the main control valve inside the walls of the
building or meter pit.
C. All house service lines larger than two inches shall be Class D cast-iron
pipe, bitumestic lined, and joints shall be either poured lead, calked or
mechanical joints.
D. All brass pipe for supplies shall be seamless, drawn brass tubing of
"iron-pipe gauge" and thoroughly annealed or an approved type of
copper tubing.
E. All water closets and other plumbing fixtures must be provided with a
sufficient supply of water for flushing to keep them in a clean and
proper condition. Flush tanks must have a capacity of six gallons for
water closets and five gallons for urinals.
A. The diameter of all riser lines in plumbing systems shall not be less than
3/4 inch; except that when lead, copper or brass pipe is used, the
minimum diameter may be 1/2 inch. Separate stopcocks or valves, so
located as to be accessible at all times, shall be placed at the foot of
each riser line and, in all buildings other than residence buildings
occupied exclusively by one or two families, on each branch line from
the riser for each isolated fixture or each group of fixtures, such as
bathroom fixtures, kitchen fixtures, etc., except that only one stopcock
or valve shall be required for the fixtures contained in any one
apartment, suite, store or loft occupied by one tenant, when all the
fixtures contained in each apartment, suite, store or loft are supplied
from one branch line.
B. Diameters of branches to any fixture must not be less than 1/2 inch,
except when used to supply water closets, cisterns or lavatories.
Branches for flush valves for water closets must not be less than 1 1/4
inch in diameter and for urinals not less than 3/4 inch in diameter.
C. Where a hot water supply system is installed, the distance between the
hot and cold water risers should not be less than six inches. Where it is
impossible to place them six inches or more apart, the hot water riser
must be covered with an approved insulating material.
§ 330-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-56
1:417
§ 330-57. Authority of Plumbing Inspector.
The Plumbing Inspector has the authority to supervise new installations of
water piping systems, the replacement of old systems and the authority
to order disconnected any pipe, machine, fixture or apparatus that in his
opinion may possibly be detrimental to the water piping system.
§ 330-58. Sewerage lifts.
When it is necessary to use a sump system and sewerage lift to receive
the discharge from the waste or soil connections of fixtures, same shall be
arranged to be accessible. If discharged with compressed air, it shall be
connected on the sewer side of the house trap. A separate trap and freshair
inlet must be provided on the inlet side of the sump and a four-inch pipe
line shall be continued from the drain discharging into the sump up to and
above the roof, for purposes of ventilation. Relief pipes must be provided
on sewerage receptacles of sumps. Traps of fixtures connected to sump
systems must not be vented to vent lines which are used to ventilate traps
of fixtures on a gravity system. Sump systems should be entirely separate
both as to discharge and venting from the rest of the plumbing system in
buildings.
§ 330-59. Oil separators.
D. All risers and branches must be properly fastened.
E. Relief valves must be provided where necessary.
F. Water siphons are not allowed.
G. All sterilizers must have check valves; and where flushometers are
used, vacuum breakers must be provided.
H. Pressure regulators must be installed in order to protect the water
system in all buildings from excessive water pressure.
A. Oil separators installed in any building where volatile fluids are used
must be arranged to be readily accessible. They must not receive the
discharge of any water closet, rain leader, yard, court or area drain.
B. Oil separators must be connected by a Y branch fitting to the house
drain on the sewer side of the house trap in such a manner that they will
not interfere with the house drain and the rest of the plumbing and
drainage system.
C. Vent lines must be provided to keep the system of drainage controlled
by the oil separator entirely separate from the rest of the plumbing and
drainage system.
D. Vent lines from oil separators shall not be less than two inches in
diameter and must be run on a 45° or 60° angle to extend at least four
§ 330-56 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 330-59
1:418
§ 330-60. Cellar and surface drains.
No street or surface drainage is permitted to be discharged into the public
sewers. In special cases, the drains from cellars and paved areas may be
connected with the house drains as permitted by the Board of Trustees.
Cellar drains must not be connected with the house drain unless there is no
other method possible for securing dry cellars. Dry cesspools or automatic
draining devices or independent subdrains are permitted to be connected
with the house drain; special precautions as to traps, water supply, back
pressure valves, etc., must be adopted as may be required by the Board of
Trustees in each case. Foundation walls must, where required, be rendered
impervious to dampness by the use of coal-tar pitch.
§ 330-61. Testing of plumbing system.
§ 330-62. Gas piping.
feet above the roof pipe and must have a bend at the end of the pipe at
the roof.
A. The entire plumbing and drainage system within the building must be
tested by a plumber, in the presence of the Plumbing Inspector, under a
water test. All pipes must remain uncovered in every part until they
have successfully passed the test. The plumber must securely close all
openings, as directed by the Inspector of Plumbing. The use of wooden
plugs for this purpose is prohibited.
B. At the discretion of the Plumbing Inspector, a water test of the roughing
for the house drain and its branches may be made, provided a ten-foot
head of water is supplied.
C. After the completion of the plumbing work in any new or altered
building and before the building is occupied, a final smoke test must be
applied in the presence of the Plumbing Inspector, except where the
Plumbing Inspector requires a peppermint test.
D. The material and labor for the tests must be furnished by the plumber.
When the peppermint test is used, two ounces of oil of peppermint must
be provided for each line up to five stories and cellar in height, and an
additional ounce of oil of peppermint must be provided for each line
when lines are more than five stories in height. When the results of the
peppermint test are unsatisfactory, the Plumbing Inspector may require
a final smoke test.
E. If the Inspector uses his smoke-test machine, there will be a charge as
set forth in the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
[Amended 10-28-1997; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. The gas pipe system must be constructed in accordance with the
regulations of the company supplying the district and to the satisfaction
of the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 330-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-62
1:419
§ 330-63. Modification of rules.
When, for any reason, it may be impracticable to comply strictly with the
foregoing rules, the Plumbing Inspector shall have the power to modify their
provisions so that the spirit and substance thereof shall be complied with.
§ 330-64. Fees. [Amended 5-2-1989; 8-16-1994 by L.L. No. 11-1994]
All plumbing permit fees shall be established and determined by the Board
of Trustees from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule included at
the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
§ 330-65. Protection from damage. [Added 3-25-1968; 1-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is part of the sewage works.
§ 330-66. Penalties for offenses. [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine
not to exceed $250, 15 days' imprisonment, or both, for each offense.
B. The gas piping of all buildings must be tested by the plumber under an
air-pressure test of 10 pounds per square inch, as required for the
plumbing, and must be proved tight under such test to the satisfaction
of the Plumbing Inspector.
C. All gas stoves, appliances and fixtures must be approved by the
Plumbing Inspector.
D. Approved types of core cocks must be installed at the discretion of the
Plumbing Inspector.
§ 330-62 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 330-66
1:420
Chapter 338
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Fees — See Ch. 200.
Handbills and posters — See Ch. 240.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 338-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Village of Sleepy Hollow Sign Law" and
may be cited as such, and will be referred to as "this chapter."
§ 338-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, welfare and
safety by regulating existing and proposed signs and interior signs placed
for external observation. It is intended to protect property values and create
a more attractive economic climate, to protect and enhance the physical
and natural beauty of the Village by ensuring that signage is appropriate to
the character of Sleepy Hollow, to reduce sign distractions and obstructions
that may contribute to traffic accidents, and to reduce hazards which may
be created by signs in a manner consistent with the legislative intent and
purpose set forth in Chapter 450, Zoning, § 450-2, of the Code of the Village
of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 338-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises, either separate or defined
by permanent party walls within a building, with a common entrance or
entrances for one or more businesses conducted therein.
ERECT — To paint, build, construct, alter, display, relocate, attach, hang,
place, suspend or affix. Such term does not include maintenance and repair,
but does include the repainting or refinishing of a sign in a manner which
changes the color or design of a sign or any of its components.
SIGN — Any material, structure or device which is composed of letters,
pictures or symbols; designed or used for the purpose of attracting, or
which does attract, the attention of the public to the subject matter thereof;
and either located out-of-doors on the exterior of a building or inside
the building within five feet of the window or in a manner to be viewed
principally by passersby. The following are definitions of specific sign types:
§ 330-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-3
1:421
AWNING SIGN — Any visual message incorporated into an awning
attached to a building.
A.
COPY-CHANGE SIGN — A sign on which the visual message may be
periodically changed.
B.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign limited to providing information on the
location of an activity, business or event.
C.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign not permanently attached to or part
of any building but separate and permanently affixed by any other
means, in or upon the ground. Included are pole signs, pylons signs and
masonry wall type signs.
D.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign, including but not limited to neon,
in or upon which an artificial light source is utilized in a manner to
illuminate the information and graphics of the sign.
There are four types:
Self-illuminated, wherein the light source itself is shaped and
utilized to form the sign (e.g., neon or an array of individual
lamps).
(a)
Self-illuminated (internal), wherein a translucent or opaque
material which forms the sign is backlit by the light source and
the light is enclosed from direct view.
(b)
Externally illuminated (direct), wherein the sign is illuminated
by a light source placed in a manner to cast light upon the sign.
(c)
Externally illuminated (indirect), wherein the sign is
illuminated by ambient light.
(d)
(1)
All illuminated signs shall have timers controlled to turn off the
light source by 2:00 a.m.
(2)
E.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign unrelated to a business or profession
conducted, or to a commodity or service sold or offered, upon the
premises where such sign is located.
F.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign, whether on its own trailer, wheels or
otherwise, designed to be movable and not structurally attached to the
ground, a building, structure or other sign.
G.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which is attached to the building wall or
structure and which extends horizontally from the plane of such wall or
structure, extending more than 15 inches.
H.
REPRESENTATIONAL SIGN — A three-dimensional sign built so as to
physically represent the object advertised.
I.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign related to a single activity or event, placed
for a duration of no more than 30 days.
J.
§ 338-3 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 338-3
1:422
SIGN STRUCTURE — The supports, uprights, bracing and framework for
the sign. In the case of a sign structure consisting of two or more sides
where the angle formed between any two of the sides or projections thereof
exceeds 30°, each side shall be considered a separate sign structure.
SIGN SURFACE AREA — The entire area within a single, continuous
perimeter enclosing all elements which form an integral part of the sign.
The structure supporting a sign shall be excluded unless the structure is
designed in a way to form an integral background for the display. Both faces
of a double-faced sign shall be included as surface area of such sign.
STREET — Any public or private way, street, avenue or road.
§ 338-4. Prohibited signs.
Prohibited signs shall be as follows:
WALL SIGN — A sign which is painted on or attached to the outside
wall of a building with the face of the sign in the plane parallel to such
wall.
K.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign visible from a sidewalk, street, or other public
place, painted or affixed on glass or other window material or located
inside within five feet of the window.
L.
SIGN DIRECTORY — A listing of two or more business enterprises,
consisting of a matrix and sign components.
M.
STACKED PRODUCTS AND SHELVING — Stacked products and
shelving for the purpose of displaying products in a window are signs,
as defined in this section, and are subject to the provisions herein.
N.
TRADEMARK SIGN — A sign or structure having a distinct shape which
alone or in conjunction with words or symbols identifies the product
intended to be advertised. [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
O.
A. No off-premises sign shall be allowed other than as permitted under the
exempt sign provision of this chapter.
B. No sign shall be illuminated by or contain flashing, intermittent or
rotating or moving lights.
C. No sign shall emit smoke, vapors, or particles, sound or colors.
D. No sign shall impair or cause confusion of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic, in its design, color or placement. No sign shall impair visibility
for motorists at a street corner or intersection of the street.
E. No sign or sign support shall be placed on the roof of any building.
F. No sign or exterior display shall consist of banners, pennants, flags,
ribbons, streamers, spinners or similar moving, fluttering or revolving
devices.
§ 338-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-4
1:423
§ 338-5. Exempt signs.
The following types of signs may be erected and maintained without permits
or fees, provided that such signs comply with the general requirements of
this chapter and other conditions specifically imposed by this chapter:
G. No more than one illuminated sign may be located closer than five feet
to a display window, and such illuminated sign shall not exceed 18
inches on any side.
H. Signs located in or projecting over a street, except those erected by a
governmental body, are prohibited.
I. Exterior signs containing products or service advertising, trade names
or logotypes separate from the name of the business are prohibited.
J. The use of vacuum plastic formed faced signs or letters is prohibited.
K. Portable signs, as defined by § 338-3 herein, are prohibited.
L. Commercial pan signs are prohibited, except for three-dimensional
letters/logos.
M. Any illuminated tubing or strings of lights outlining roof lines, doors,
windows, wall edges or architectural features of any building is
prohibited.
N. Any sign that obscures a sign displayed by public authority for the
purpose of giving traffic instructions or directions or other information
is prohibited.
O. Any sign that uses the word "stop" or "danger" or otherwise presents or
implies the need or requirement of stopping or caution or the existence
of danger, or which is a copy or imitation of, or which for any reason is
likely to be confused with any sign displayed by a public authority is
prohibited.
P. Any sign that causes any direct glare into or upon any dwelling is
prohibited.
A. Historical markers, tablets and statues, memorial signs and plaques;
names of buildings and dates or erection when cut into any masonry
surface or when constructed of bronze, stainless steel or similar
material; and emblems installed by governmental agencies; religious or
nonprofit organizations, not exceeding six square feet.
B. Flags and insignia of any government, except when displayed in
connection with commercial promotion.
C. On-premises directional signs for the convenience of the general public,
identifying public areas, fire zones, entrances and exits and similar
signs, internally or externally illuminated. Business names shall be
allowed, excluding advertising messages.
§ 338-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 338-5
1:424
D. Nonilluminated warning, private drive, posted or no-trespassing signs,
not exceeding 1 1/2 square feet.
E. Number and nameplates identifying residents, mounted on a house,
apartment or mailbox, not exceeding one square foot in area.
F. Lawn signs identifying residents, not exceeding one square foot or two
square feet if double-faced. Such signs are to be nonilluminated except
by a light which is an integral part of a lamppost if used as a support,
with no advertising message thereon.
G. Private-owner merchandise sale signs for garage sales and auctions,
not exceeding 1 1/2 square feet for a period not exceeding seven days.
H. Temporary, nonilluminated window signs and posters. Placement shall
not exceed 30 days.
I. Holiday decorations, including lighting, which may be displayed in any
district without permit until 10 days after the holiday.
J. At gasoline stations, as follows:
(1) Integral graphics or attached price signs on gasoline pumps.
(2) Two auxiliary signs per station, each not exceeding four square
feet.
(3) Gas stations shall additionally be permitted two price, product or
promotional signs each not exceeding 12 square feet or six square
feet per side if located on the pump island or set no closer than 10
feet to the edge of the pavement, not below 10 feet above the grade
nor situated so as to impair visibility for pedestrians or motorists.
(4) Freestanding product signs, as follows:
(a) A freestanding product sign shall have ten-foot vertical
clearance.
(b) The top of a freestanding sign shall be no greater than 20 feet
above the ground.
K. Trademark signs.
(1) No trademark sign or part of a trademark sign shall project over
any property line.
(2) The top of a freestanding sign shall be no greater than 20 feet
above the ground.
(3) A trademark sign shall be located only in the front yard and shall be
no closer to side lot lines than the required side yard.
(4) There shall be only one trademark sign permitted on any lot
regardless of the number of separate or individual businesses
located on such lot.
§ 338-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-5
1:425
§ 338-6. Signs in commercial districts.
The following regulations apply to signs in commercial districts:
(5) The maximum dimensions of trademark signs shall be three feet
high by three feet wide and be eight inches deep in thickness.
(6) No trademark sign shall be installed on a lot containing a
freestanding sign.
(7) The maximum height of the bottom of a trademark sign above the
ground shall be 10 feet.
L. Directional signs for meetings, conventions and other assemblies,
provided that all such signs shall be removed within 10 days after the
last day of the event to which they pertain.
M. One sign, not exceeding six square feet, listing the architect, engineer,
contractor and/or owner, on premises where construction is in
progress. Such sign shall be removed promptly upon completion of the
work.
N. Official notices or advertisements posted or displayed by or under the
direction of any public officer or court officer in the performance of his/
her official duties, provided that all such signs shall be removed not
later than 10 days after the last day of the period for which the same are
required to be displayed in order to accomplish their purpose.
O. Signs advertising only the name, time and place of any bona fide fair,
carnival, festival, bazaar or similar event when conducted by a public
agency or for the benefit of any civic, fraternal, religious or charitable
cause, provided that no sign in any R District shall exceed 20 square
feet in area or be displayed except on the immediate site of the event to
which it pertains; no such sign in any C District shall exceed in area the
maximum area of a sign permitted on the lot in that district; and
provided further that all such signs shall be removed within 10 days
after the last day of the event to which they pertain.
P. Any informational or directional sign erected by a public agency or
under the authorization of a public agency.
A. Except as otherwise provided, no person shall erect or relocate any sign
without first obtaining a permit from the Building Inspector. Within nine
months of the effective date of this chapter, a permit shall also be
obtained for any sign in existence as of the effective date of this chapter,
unless specifically excluded by the exempt signs provision under
§ 338-5.
B. Signs shall be in keeping with the architectural design of the building
upon which they are placed, the design of the neighboring properties
and adjoining signs and the character of Sleepy Hollow.
C. Each business establishment shall be limited to:
§ 338-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 338-6
1:426
(1) One principal sign per facade identifying the name and type of
business, with a maximum of two signs in the case of a building
fronting on two or more rights-of-way, except for signs for which no
permit is required under § 338-5 of this chapter.
(2) One secondary sign identifying the name and type of business
located on the front flap of an awning or on the front door, and one
such secondary sign in one window of a second-floor business.
D. Signs shall be limited to three colors (black, white, natural finish; tints
of the same color shall be considered separate colors). The return edge
of the letter forms and graphic symbols shall be the same color as that
of the face. Metallic, iridescent and day-glo bright colors are prohibited.
Use of natural bronze, aluminum and stainless steel metals and genuine
gold and silver leaf is permitted.
E. Dimensions of permitted signs shall be as follows:
(1) The maximum vertical dimensions or height of any sign affixed to a
building facade shall be 24 inches, and the maximum horizontal
dimension or length shall not exceed 75% of the street frontage of
the business establishment upon which such sign is erected or
maintained. In any case, however, the maximum horizontal
dimension or length of such sign shall not exceed 20 feet on any
street frontage for the same business establishment.
(2) For circular, oval, square or other nonrectangular signs, the total
sign area shall not exceed nine square feet.
(3) The maximum overall height of letter groups, including upper- and
lowercase letters, and graphic symbols shall be 18 inches. Where
there is more than one line of letters and symbols, the combined
height of the letters and symbols shall not exceed 12 inches,
including the space between the lines.
(4) Where the design of an existing building facade incorporates a
specific area for signs, the height and length of the signs shall be
restricted to the dimensions of this area. Such signs may not,
however, exceed maximum dimensions as stated above.
F. Placement of signs.
(1) Signs shall be placed parallel to the facade of the building; and,
except for marquees of theaters in operation and awnings, no part
of the sign shall project more than eight inches beyond the face of
the building in any direction.
(2) The lower edge of a sign placed on a facade shall not be located
above the level of the floor of the second story of the building upon
which the sign is placed.
G. Temporary signs, advertising display panels, posters and similar
graphic material relating to general sales and information, special
§ 338-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-6
1:427
events and offerings, and sales promotions may be displayed without a
permit, for a duration of no more than 30 days, provided that:
(1) No sign shall exceed 1 1/2 square feet per display window.
(2) They are neatly and professionally rendered and displayed and are
mounted on firm material in a true square manner.
(3) Not more than one such sign per display window and a maximum of
four such signs per facade may be displayed at any one time.
(4) All such signs in this category must be dated.
(5) Freestanding signs must be at least three feet above ground level
and less than 10 feet above ground level. Freestanding signs are
prohibited on Beekman Avenue, Cortlandt Street and Valley Street
due to the congested nature of these areas.
(6) No temporary signs, advertising display panels, posters and similar
graphic material shall be posted on the exterior of buildings or
structures.
H. Signs on accessory buildings or buildings incidental to the principal
building in which the business is located shall be allowed as a portion of
the total allowable sign area computed using the frontage of the
principal building only.
I. Sign directories. An off-street shopping plaza or building housing
multiple businesses or professional offices will be permitted a sign
directory. Each business within the plaza/building may have a sign
within the directory. They shall be equal in size and shape and shall not
exceed three square feet in size. The directory sign may not exceed:
(1) Thirty square feet for five or fewer businesses.
(2) For each additional business, add five square feet.
(3) Total not to exceed 75 square feet.
J. One illuminated sign, as defined in § 338-3, identifying the name and
description of the business shall be permitted on each street facade for
the ground floor use of a business establishment. For a business located
on two or more rights-of-way, a maximum of two such illuminated signs,
one on each facade, shall be permitted.
K. The design and appearance of the light fixture shall be fitting and
appropriately integrated with the architectural character of the
building facade and that of its neighbors.
L. Future and proposed illuminated signs, interior. Externally illuminated
signs, as defined in § 338-3, are permitted in the windows of a business
establishment, if designed to identify the name and type of business.
Such sign(s) may not be in addition to a sign on the building exterior,
except that the name of the business may also be located on the front
§ 338-6 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 338-6
1:428
§ 338-7. Signs in residential districts.
The following regulations apply to signs in residential districts:
valance of an awning or on the front door in accordance with these
regulations.
M. Future and proposed illuminated sign light sources.
(1) Light sources, with the exception of neon, shall be shielded or
screened in a manner so as not to be seen by passersby from a
normal viewing angle. Intense or glaring light is to be avoided.
(2) Light sources shall be limited to natural white incandescent or
fluorescent lamps.
(3) Light fixtures and sources shall be designed to cause a reasonable
uniform distribution of light on the full extent of the sign(s).
N. Signs accessory to parking areas. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
(1) Signs designating entrances to or exits from a parking area shall be
permitted, provided the size of any sign shall not exceed two
square feet in area.
(2) Signs designating the identity and condition of use of parking areas
shall be permitted, provided the size of any such sign shall not
exceed nine square feet in area. Not more than one sign may be
placed upon any property unless such property is located on a
corner, in which event two such signs may be permitted, one facing
each street.
A. Every sign in an R District shall either:
(1) Be placed flat against a building, projecting not more than six
inches therefrom, on the front thereof and not extending above the
actual height thereof.
(2) Be located completely apart from the building, directly in front
thereof, at a distance of not less than 15 feet from the front lot line
and not exceeding five feet in height.
B. No sign in an R District shall be illuminated by other than indirect
lighting, with the source thereof so shielded that it illuminates only the
face of the sign.
C. The following types of signs are permitted in all R Districts:
(1) Name plates and identification signs.
(a) Signs indicating the name or address of the occupant or a
permitted home occupation or profession, provided that they
shall not exceed one square foot in area.
§ 338-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-7
1:429
§ 338-8. Signs on public property.
§ 338-9. Political signs. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(b) Only one sign shall be permitted per dwelling unit except in the
case of corner lots, where two such signs, one facing each
street, shall be permitted.
(c) For multiple-dwelling structures, a single identification sign
not exceeding six square feet in area.
(2) Sales or rental or development signs.
(a) Signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which
they are located, provided they shall not exceed six square
feet.
(b) Not more than one such sign may be placed upon any property
or erected per building in accordance with Subsection A.
(c) Such signs shall be promptly removed when premises are sold
or rented.
(3) Private driveways.
(a) Signs indicating the private nature of a driveway, provided that
the size of any such sign shall not exceed 1 1/2 square feet in
area.
A. With the exception of any sign erected by the Village, town, county,
state or other governmental authority, and all signs pertaining to traffic
regulations and parking regulations, no signs, temporary or permanent,
shall be located within or upon the right-of-way of any Village, town,
state or county road or highway or upon any Village, town, state or
other publicly owned land.
B. No utility pole, light pole, parking meter, structure or tree located in
any public right-of-way, publicly owned land, or public easement shall
be used for posting of signs.
C. The Superintendent of Highways shall be authorized to remove any sign
placed upon any property owned by the Village of Sleepy Hollow,
including but not limited to highways, parks or other public lands. Signs
shall be held for a period of 72 hours; and if not claimed by the owner
within the seventy-two-hour period, the Superintendent of Highways is
authorized to dispose of said signs. There shall be a fee as set forth in
the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees, for any
person or organization redeeming a sign seized. [Amended 1-22-2013
by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. A temporary permit shall be required for each political sign. However, a
political party or candidate may obtain one temporary permit for all
§ 338-7 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 338-9
1:430
§ 338-10. Structural and general safety regulations.
§ 338-11. Nonconforming signs. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
signs, provided that the location of each sign is stated in the
application.
B. The fee for an individual temporary political sign permit or a group
temporary political sign permit shall be as set forth in the fee schedule
included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
C. The maximum size of political signs in a commercial district shall be 16
square feet.
D. The maximum size of political signs in a residential district shall be
three square feet.
E. Political signs may be installed no sooner than 30 days prior to the
political campaign to which they apply and must be removed no later
than 10 days after the election for political office for which said signs
were placed.
A. All signs, together with all their supports, braces, hoods, guys, and
anchors, shall be kept in good repair and shall be painted or cleaned as
often as necessary to maintain a clean, neat, safe and orderly
appearance. The time period for correction of disrepair shall not exceed
10 days from the date of service of notice of violation, pursuant to
Chapter 310, Property Maintenance, Article I, of the Code of the Village
of Sleepy Hollow.
B. Any sign shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind
pressure load consistent with environmental conditions in the Village of
Sleepy Hollow and shall comply with all applicable building codes of
New York State.
C. All signs shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to allow free
ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign shall
be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
A. All signs and supporting structures which do not conform to the
provisions of this chapter upon the date of adoption, or as subsequently
amended, shall be brought into compliance within 18 months from the
effective date of this chapter or subsequent amendments.
B. Upon and after the expiration of such 18 months, the owner of the
property on which such sign is located and/or the owner of such sign
shall be in violation of this chapter until the sign is removed. The Village
of Sleepy Hollow may, with 30 days' prior written notice to the property
and sign owner(s), remove such sign at the expense of the property and/
or sign owner without further notice or further proceedings. The
expense may be recovered by the Village in an action pursuant to this
§ 338-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-11
1:431
§ 338-12. Existing illuminated signs.
Existing illuminated signs are those existing before the effective date of this
chapter and for which a valid permit was issued.
§ 338-13. Permit required.
Except as specifically exempted by § 338-5 hereof, no sign may be erected
or displayed on a building facade, awning or on or within a window without
first obtaining a permit from the Building Inspector.
§ 338-14. Application for permit.
chapter, which shall be instituted in the appropriate court having
jurisdiction over this matter.
A. Businesses with more than one existing illuminated sign per street
facade shall remove the excess sign(s) within six months of the effective
date of this chapter.
B. Self-illuminated product and brand name advertising signs are
prohibited on the building exterior or in the window within five feet of
the glass or within the interior arranged in a manner intended to be
seen by passersby. Such signs shall be removed from the premises
within a period of six months of the effective date of this chapter.
A. An application for a sign permit shall be made to the Building Inspector
and shall comply with these regulations. The Building Inspector shall
forward all complete applications to the Architectural Review Board for
review.
B. An application for a sign permit shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) A drawing of the signs, accurately showing dimensions, with a scale
of not less than one inch equals one-foot. The size and layout of the
letter forms and graphics and materials, colors and thickness shall
be indicated.
(2) Samples of each material and color to be used in the sign.
(3) Photographs clearly showing the building facade in its entirety and
that of the immediately adjacent building. One photograph should
be a close-up of where the proposed sign will be erected.
(4) Consent to the erection of the sign by owner of the premises on
which the sign is to be erected.
(5) Any additional documents that the Building Inspector may request.
(6) An application fee must accompany each application.
§ 338-11 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 338-15
1:432
§ 338-15. Right of appeal.
Any applicant for a permit or any person who was ordered by the Building
Inspector to incur expenses in connection with a sign and any person
dissatisfied with any refusal order of the Building Inspector may appeal
to the Architectural Review Board within 15 days from the date of such
refusal, order or decision. A public hearing on any appeal shall be warned
by posting notice in a newspaper at least 15 days prior to the hearing.
Such notice shall contain the time, location and date of the hearing and a
reasonable description of the appeals hearing.
§ 338-16. Variances.
§ 338-17. Decisions on appeal.
In rendering a decision or in rejecting an appeal, the Architectural Review
Board will issue findings of fact within 45 days of the final hearing on the
appeal.
§ 338-18. Permit fees.
The permit fees shall be determined by resolution of the Board of Trustees
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.39
§ 338-19. Void permits.
A sign permit shall be void if the sign authorized thereunder has not
been erected within 180 days from the date of issuance. The owner of
or applicant for said sign shall be responsible for establishing the date of
erection in the issued sign permit.
§ 338-20. Conditions for continued display.
A. The Architectural Review Board may vary the provisions of this chapter
when in specific cases it finds:
(1) That enforcement would cause unnecessary hardship to the
appellant due to unusual topography, building features or locations,
traffic features or other such characteristics.
(2) That the variance is the minimum relief required.
(3) That the intent of this chapter is not substantially altered.
B. The Architectural Review Board may attach such safeguards and
conditions as it considers necessary and appropriate to implement the
purpose and intent of this chapter in rendering its decisions.
A. The applicant shall be responsible for the occurrence of all dimensions
relating to the building and the sign. In cases where the actual sign
39.Editor's Note: See the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
§ 338-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-20
1:433
§ 338-21. Removal of certain signs.
§ 338-22. Revocation of permit.
§ 338-23. Awnings.
does not conform to the approved design, the applicant may be required
at his/her own expense to remove, correct or replace the sign.
B. Signs shall be maintained in good and complete condition, with panels,
letter forms and graphics firmly mounted and in true alignment and
finishes in good repair.
A. Any sign which at any time no longer advertises a bona fide business or
activity other than one being conducted on the premises on which such
sign is located, or a product or service other than those offered on such
premises, or which does not comply with the regulations established for
the issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed
prohibited and shall be brought into compliance with this chapter.
B. If necessary, the Village of Sleepy Hollow may remove such sign(s), and
the expense may be recovered by the Village in action on this chapter,
which shall be instituted in the appropriate court having jurisdiction
over the matter.
A. The Building Inspector may revoke a sign permit at any time where the
sign erected or maintained thereunder violates this chapter.
B. Notice of such revocation and the reason therefor shall be given in
writing by the Building Inspector to the person named in the
application by mailing the same to him/her at his/her address as given
in the application and to the last known owner of the premises on which
the sign is placed by mailing the same to said owner, at the address as
shown on the assessment roll of the Village and by filing a copy of said
notice in the office of the Village Clerk.
A. The following outlines the preferred characteristics of an awning to be
included in a site plan application:
(1) Awnings shall be of the standard, barrel or hoop design and
fabricated to conform to the shape and dimensions of window and
doorway openings. Other configurations shall not be permitted
except where specifically necessitated by an unusual window
shape.
(2) Awnings may be stationary or nonstationary (operable).
(3) Operating arms and braces shall be fully concealed from end view
when the awning is in an open position.
(4) Awning material shall be limited to two colors. Black, white and
tints of the same color shall be considered separate colors.
§ 338-20 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 338-23
1:434
§ 338-24. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Any person(s) violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to penalties not to exceed $250, 15 days' imprisonment, or both, per day per
violation.
Chapter 347
Metallic, iridescent and other bright colors are prohibited. The
awning support and finish structure, mechanism and enclosure
housing shall be a neutral color, harmonious with the material of
the building facade and awning fabric.
(5) Awning material shall be fabric. The use of metal, plastic or other
rigid materials is not permitted. Fabric shall be canvas duck or
vinyl-coated canvas. Solid vinyl fabric is prohibited. (The minimum
weight of the fabric shall be 10 ounces per square yard for canvas,
and 12 ounces per square yard for vinyl-coated canvas.)
(6) The minimum height from the sidewalk to any part of the awning
covering or its support frame when closed or extended shall be
seven feet.
(7) The awning, including the operating mechanism, enclosure
housing (where of the nonstationary type) shall be installed in a
manner which does not cover the solid wall surface or architectural
features of the building facade. Generally, awnings shall be fitted
and mounted within the architectural frame of the window and
door openings. Any overlap of the awning onto adjoining building
surfaces where necessitated by the particular characteristics of the
building facade shall be limited to six inches.
(8) Awning enclosure housings which are integrated and recessed
within the window head construction are preferred.
(9) Awning graphics shall be limited to the business name and property
address. Phone numbers shall be prohibited on awnings.
B. The following shall be included with an awning application:
(1) A drawing accurately depicting dimensions of the storefront and
the awning in fully open position at a scale of not less than one inch
equals one-foot.
(2) A photograph clearly showing the building facade in its entirety
and its relationship to immediately adjoining buildings.
Photographs must be a minimum of eight inches by 10 inches in
size. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(3) A sample of awning fabric and colors.
§ 338-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-24
1:435
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 148.
Dumpsters — See Ch. 175.
Excavation, filling and topsoil removal — See
Ch. 190.
Landscapers — See Ch. 225.
Littering — See Ch. 263.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Trees — See Ch. 385.
§ 338-24 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 338-24
1:436
ARTICLE I
Solid Waste Disposal
[Adopted 9-8-1975 (Ch. 48A of the 1965 Code)]
§ 347-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Solid Waste Disposal Law."
§ 347-2. Purpose. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
The purpose of this article is to provide for the disposal of all solid waste
generated in this municipality in compliance with federal and state
standards for the control of air, water and ground pollution through
participation in the current Westchester County, New York, solid waste
management plan, adopted by the Westchester County Board of Legislators.
§ 347-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COLLECTOR OF SOLID WASTE — Any person duly licensed or authorized
to engage in, or who engages in, the business of collecting, storing,
transporting and disposing of solid waste as defined herein.
PLAN — The current Westchester County, New York, solid waste
management plan, as adopted by the County Board of
Legislators.[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
SOLID WASTE — Includes all manner of useless or unwanted or discarded
solid or semisolid nontoxic, domestic, commercial, industrial, institutional,
construction and demolition waste materials, except hazardous, toxic,
chemical, human or rendering wastes.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Any fixed facility that is established, maintained
and operated, either as its primary function or in support of some other
facility or operation, for the transfer, treatment, disposal or salvage of solid
waste. It includes but is not limited to any facility that is established for
the purpose of transferring, bailing, composting, incinerating, recycling,
separating, salvaging, shredding or landfilling any solid waste or any
combination of functions thereof, including stationary compactors located
at points of collection.
§ 347-4. Transfer of solid waste. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
This municipality shall deliver or cause to be delivered to a solid waste
facility or facilities designated by Westchester County, and licensed,
operated or approved by Westchester County, all solid waste collected or
caused to be collected within the boundaries of this municipality, subject
to such restrictions as may be required by the county in conformity with
the plan, except that bona fide recycling or resource recovery programs
§ 347-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-4
1:437
or drives within this municipality and operated or permitted by it may be
exempted from this section with the approval of Westchester County.
§ 347-5. Regulation of collectors.
In consideration of the assumption by Westchester County of responsibility
for the disposal of all solid waste collected in this municipality in compliance
with federal and state standards for the control of ground, air and water
pollution, this municipality agrees to refrain from exercising its powers
to impose permitting requirements for collectors of solid waste at such
time as Westchester County shall adopt requirements for the licensing and
regulation of said collectors on a county-wide basis.
§ 347-6. Payment of fees. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Recognizing that the county plan offers the most efficient and least costly
method of solid waste disposal in compliance with federal and state
standards for the control of air, ground and water pollution, this
municipality agrees to pay all reasonable fees set by Westchester County for
the disposal of solid waste.40
40.Editor's Note: Original § 48A-7, When effective; exception, of the 1965 Code, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013.
§ 347-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 347-6
1:438
ARTICLE II
Garbage and Recycling
[Adopted 4-26-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005 (Ch. 24 of the 1965 Code)]
§ 347-7. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Garbage Collection and Anti-Litter Law."
§ 347-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASHES — The residue from coal or other fuel.
BUSINESS — A building or property used for business, manufacturing or
other commercial purposes.
GARBAGE — Every waste accumulation of animal, vegetable, fruit, similar
organic matter and all other materials to be disposed of not defined under
the definitions of "recyclables" or "trash" as set forth herein.
GARBAGE BAG — A plastic bag at least 1.5 mils thick, the weight of which
does not exceed the ability of the bag to hold the material in it without
breaking when picked up by the neck.
MECHANICALLY EMPTIED CONTAINER (also known as a "DUMPSTER")
— A one-and-one-half-cubic-yard container, the make and model of which is
compatible with Village collection trucks (such as the J&T Metal Products
Co., Inc. Model RL 1 1/2 or its equivalent). All such containers shall be on
functioning casters and shall be equipped with lift bars which measure 77 1/
2 inches from end to end.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
RECYCLABLES — Those goods or material recovered from the solid waste
stream which are suitable for and capable of reuse in original or changed
form, provided that the same are not hazardous or toxic-type materials as
defined by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
Said recyclables shall include any materials mandated for recycling by the
county, state, federal government or Village of Sleepy Hollow.
RESIDENCE — A building or property used for residential purposes and
containing one or more dwelling units.
TRASH — Household furnishing, clothing and appliances placed out for
disposal, provided that the same are not hazardous or toxic materials as
defined by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
WASTE CONTAINER (commonly called a "GARBAGE CAN") — A watertight,
nonrusting metal or plastic container of substantial construction equipped
with a tight-fitting cover made of the same material as the container and
two substantial handles. The General Foreman of Public Works may set the
allowable shape, capacity, and weight of waste containers by regulation
§ 347-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-8
1:439
pursuant to § 347-9 of this Chapter 347. The Village shall not be responsible
for breakage of waste containers. Securely tied plastic bags at least 1.5 mils
thick, the weight of which does not exceed the ability of the bag to hold
the material in them without breaking when picked up by the neck, may be
utilized but must be placed in a waste container.[Amended 6-13-2017 by
L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 347-9. Responsibility for garbage and trash removal; rules and
regulations. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
The removal and disposal of garbage, trash and recyclables in the Village of
Sleepy Hollow, New York shall be under the jurisdiction of the Department
of Public Works, and the General Foreman of Public Works is hereby
empowered to make and publish regulations concerning the days and times
of collection of garbage, combustible rubbish, trash and recyclables, the
location and number of containers and any and all other regulations
pertaining to the collection and disposal of these wastes as he may deem
advisable, provided that such regulations are not contrary to this article,
and further provided that no regulation shall become effective until a copy
thereof is filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 347-10. Maintenance of waste containers, mechanically emptied
containers and container areas/enclosures.
A. All waste containers and mechanically emptied containers shall be
maintained in a good condition by the owner thereof and shall not be
permitted to have any ragged or sharp edges or any other defects liable
to hinder collection or harm the person collecting the contents thereof.
B. Should any waste container or mechanically emptied container
deteriorate to such an extent that it becomes dangerous and liable to
injure or hinder the person collecting the contents of said waste
container or mechanically emptied container, or should it leak, it must
be replaced with a proper waste container or mechanically emptied
container within one week after receipt of a written notice from the
Department of Public Works of said condition. Said notice may be
placed on the defective waste container or mechanically emptied
container. The Village reserves the right to refuse to pick up garbage in
such defective containers or remove the containers.
C. It shall be the duty of each owner and/or tenant of a residence and each
owner/and or tenant of a place of business, factory, industrial plant or
other similar place to provide himself with the approved waste
containers and mechanically emptied containers for the disposal of
garbage, trash and recyclables to hold the waste accumulation between
the periods of collection by the Department of Public Works, or
provision shall be made for collection by a private collector.
D. Container areas and enclosures shall be maintained in a neat and clean
condition, free from vermin, bees, insects and other pests at all times.
§ 347-8 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 347-10
1:440
§ 347-11. Use of waste containers and mechanically emptied
containers.
Waste containers and mechanically emptied containers shall be kept
covered at all times with proper, tight-fitting covers except while garbage
is being put into such containers or while the same are being emptied. It
shall be unlawful for anyone other than authorized collectors to disturb any
containers or to remove the covers of any of the contents thereof or cause
the contents thereof to be strewn or scattered on the lawns, sidewalks,
streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, empty lots or any other public or private
place in the Village.
§ 347-12. Preparation of garbage, trash, rubbish and/or refuse for
collection.
E. Container areas shall be kept free of litter, garbage, recyclables and
garbage drippings that are not inside the waste containers or
mechanically emptied containers.
F. Container areas and enclosures shall be maintained free of snow and
ice.
G. Container areas and enclosures shall be accessible for collection at all
times. Garbage containers/dumpsters shall be kept moveable and freewheeling
at all times.
A. Where waste containers are being used, all garbage must be drained
and wrapped in plastic bags before being placed in the waste container.
B. Papers, magazines, newspapers, cut and flattened paper or cardboard
shall be separated from commingled items and placed into brown paper
bags or loose in the recycling container. Boxes shall be flattened and
placed inside each other. Commingled items for recycling shall be
placed in a separate recycling container in the manner mandated by the
Westchester County curbside recycling guidelines. Items for recycling
shall be collected on scheduled recycling collection days. Plastic and
Styrofoam packing materials and all hardcover books are not
recyclable. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
C. Dead shrubbery, limbs or trees, flowers, hedge clippings and the like
may be deposited for collection, provided that the same are cut into
lengths of not greater than five feet and are securely tied in bundles not
more than two feet in diameter. Unbundled yard waste must be placed
in biodegradable paper bags. Yard waste will be collected on days and
at time determined by the Village. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
D. Placing leaves into the gutter or Village street is not permitted except
on the dates specified in the Village's Annual Fall Leaf Collection
Program. Leaves must be placed in bags approved by the Village for
§ 347-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-12
1:441
§ 347-13. Responsibility for disposal facilities.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall be responsible for the operation
of Village-owned disposal facilities, including but not limited to the hours of
operation, material which may be deposited therein and method of disposal.
§ 347-14. Collection regulations and practices.
collection on the scheduled leaf collection days, unless the Department
of Public Works directs otherwise.
E. No garbage, trash, recyclables or waste shall be put out on the street in
the residential area for collection by any person before 6:00 p.m. on the
night preceding collection nor after 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection,
nor in the business area (Zone C-2) for collection. All waste containers
and mechanically emptied containers must be removed from the
curbside and returned to the appropriate place of storage by the end of
the day on the day of collection.
F. Garbage, recyclables or trash ready for collection shall be placed at the
curb or in approved collection stations. No such material generated
within a business or residence shall be placed in receptacles located at
Village parks or upon Village streets or other public locations
maintained by the Village.
G. The General Foreman of Public Works may allow such exceptions to the
provisions of this § 347-12 and make such other regulations pursuant to
§ 347-9 of this Chapter 347 as may be appropriate to allow for periodic
"bulk collection" of items such as furniture and appliances that are too
large to be placed in a waste container or, if applicable, a recycling
container. [Added 6-13-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
A. Limitations on properties served. It shall be the duty of every person
who accumulates garbage, recyclables or trash to prepare the same for
removal by the Department of Public Works in the Village of Sleepy
Hollow, except where disposition by a private collector has been
arranged. Empty cardboard or wooden cartons which have not been
flattened shall not be picked up.
B. Availability and extent of service.
(1) Not more than four thirty-two-gallon containers of garbage, trash,
rubbish and/or refuse shall be collected in any one week, with no
more than two such containers being picked up at any one time.
This limitation shall apply to single-family homes.
(2) Multiple residences, businesses, stores, factories or similar
establishments disposing of garbage, trash, rubbish, and/or refuse
in excess of eight waste containers per week shall instead provide
one or more mechanically emptied containers which are
compatible with the Village collection trucks for mechanical
§ 347-12 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 347-14
1:442
dumping and in the quantity as determined by the Superintendent
of Public works in his/her sole discretion.
(3) Businesses, stores, factories, restaurants or other commercial
establishments disposing of garbage, trash, rubbish and/or refuse
in excess of eight containers per pickup shall instead provide one
or more mechanically emptied containers which are compatible
with the Village collection trucks for mechanical dumping and in
the quantity as determined by the Superintendent of Public Works.
A waiver of this requirement may be granted by the Superintendent
of Public Works at his/her sole discretion.
(4) Any person providing one or more mechanically emptied containers
may opt out of Village collection and instead have his or her
garbage and/or recyclables collected by a private carter. Such
private collection shall be made at least once per week. Any such
owner choosing to have his garbage collected by a private carter
shall notify the Superintendent of Public Works in writing that
Village pickup will not be required for the next calendar year and
advising on which day of the week the private collection will be
made. This notice shall be received by the Village no later than
January 30 to be effective for the fiscal year commencing on June 1
of that same year. Property owners who have not so notified the
Village will have waived their opportunity to opt out for that fiscal
year.
(5) The Superintendent of Public Works is hereby authorized to
arrange date and time schedules for the collection of garbage,
recyclables and trash for the various sections of the Village.
(6) Where the property owner or tenant has provided an approved
garbage container which can be mechanically emptied into a
Village truck, the Superintendent of Public Works may authorize
Village trucks to enter upon such property with the written
permission of the owners. The location of the containers must be
approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
(7) The Superintendent of Public Works shall not be required to
remove construction debris, mechanically operated vehicles or
machinery or any parts thereof, including tires.
C. Responsibility of employees. Each and every agent, officer or employee
of the Village engaged in the work of collecting and removing garbage,
recyclables and trash from the premises shall in no way interfere with,
disturb, break, destroy, handle, take or use any article or substance or
trespass upon the property of the householder insofar as the
requirements of such collections shall warrant.
D. The General Foreman of Public Works may allow such exceptions to the
provisions of this § 347-14 and make such other regulations pursuant to
§ 347-9 of this Chapter 347 as may be appropriate to allow for periodic
"bulk collection" of items such as furniture and appliances that are too
§ 347-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-14
1:443
§ 347-15. Power and authority to fix charges.
The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall have the power to fix charges to
be imposed on commercial establishments and all other properties and
premises, whether residential or otherwise, from which garbage, rubbish
and trash are removed by the Village and to revise these charges from
time to time as the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall deem necessary and
proper.
§ 347-16. Preparation and mailing of bills.
Bills for all garbage collection services contemplated by this article shall
be prepared on or before the 30th day following each quarterly period,
commencing with the first day of the Village fiscal year 2005-2006, and
continuing thereafter, and shall be mailed to the owner of the premises
or property as the same appears upon the last completed assessment roll
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, New York. If more than one person shall
appear as the owner of the premises or property, the bill may be mailed to
any one of such persons.
§ 347-17. Payment due date.
Bills for garbage collection services provided pursuant to this article shall
be payable in the face amount without penalty within 30 days following the
date as indicated upon the bill mailed to the consumer.
§ 347-18. Penalties for past-due bills.
Penalties shall accrue against garbage collection fees as follows: There
shall be charged a penalty on past-due sanitation fees at the rate of 10%
following 30 days from the date of billing and the rate of an additional 2%
per month for each additional 30 days or part thereof of delinquency.
§ 347-19. Unpaid garbage fees.
Such unpaid garbage fees shall constitute unpaid garbage fees, and those
amounts, together with the amount of penalty as herein prescribed and due
by reason of nonpayment of such garbage fees, shall be a lien on the real
property upon which or in connection with which the garbage collection
is used, and if not paid by February 1 of the fiscal year in which accrued,
the amount thereof, together with the penalty as herein prescribed, shall
be included in the next annual tax levy and shall be levied upon the real
property.
§ 347-20. Deposit on streets prohibited; landscaping and
construction waste.
large to be placed in a waste container or, if applicable, a recycling
container. [Added 6-13-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
§ 347-14 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 347-20
1:444
§ 347-21. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place or cause
to be placed in or upon any public street, sidewalk, or alley of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow any ashes, dirt, rubbish, glass, garbage, paper,
recyclables, box material or any other type of waste, sweepings, litter
or trash except as might be provided for in this article.
B. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of providing
landscaping services or cutting or trimming trees or shrubs or in the
rehabilitation, home improvement, construction and/or demolition of
buildings shall be responsible for the disposal of such plant materials,
trees, tree and shrub cuttings and trimmings or discarded building
materials at the expense of such person, firm or corporation. It shall be
unlawful for such person, firm or corporation to deposit the aforesaid at
any location within the Village, either privately or publicly owned.
C. The General Foreman of the Department of Public Works or his
designee or the Building Inspector or his designee may issue a
summons for a violation of this chapter. [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place or cause
to be placed in or upon any street, sidewalk, or alley of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow any unwrapped mattress or box spring. Any item of
bedding (mattresses and box springs) included for rubbish collection
must be fully encased in sealed plastic and shall be disposed of in
accordance with this article. The Building Inspector or his/her
designee, Police Chief or his/her designee, or Superintendent of Public
Works or his/her designee may issue a summons for any violation of this
requirement. [Added 8-8-2017 by L.L. No. 7-2017]
A. The Superintendent of Public Works or his designee may issue a
summons to any person charging him with a violation of this article or
Chapter 825 of the Westchester County Code, Westchester County
Source Separation Law, as amended, or any other provisions thereof,
which summons shall be returnable in the Village Court of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow. All violations of Chapter 825 of the Westchester County
Code, Westchester County Source Separation Law, shall be subject to
fines and penalties as stated in Section 825.80, Penalties and
Enforcement, upon conviction thereof.
B. Except as provided in Subsection C hereof, any person violating any of
the terms of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a fine
of not less than $50 nor more than $250 for each of the first three
violations thereof; not less than $100 nor more than $400 for each of
the fourth and fifth violations thereof; and not less than $200 nor more
$700 for each violation thereafter committed within a three-year
period, looking back from the date of the violation, regardless of the
fines imposed on the prior violations. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs or
§ 347-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-21
1:445
§ 347-22. Fees for special services.
continues. A separate fine of not less than $200 nor more than $500
shall be assessed against any violator if the Village of Sleepy Hollow is
required to remove the garbage, trash or refuse.
C. Any person, firm, corporation, municipality, municipal corporation or
any other entity who or which shall fail to pay the charges established
in accordance with § 347-15 of this article shall, in addition to being
required to obtain the mandated permit, be subject to a fine of not less
than $250 nor more than $1,000 for each violation thereof, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which
such violation occurs or continues. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
A. Fees for special services and special pickups not otherwise provided for
in this article shall apply as shall be set, from time to time, by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
B. All fees for such special services shall be approved by the Department
of Public Works prior to completion and must be prepaid in the office of
the Village Clerk, who shall issue a receipt for such payment prior to the
rendering of such services by the Department of Public Works.
§ 347-21 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 347-22
1:446
Chapter 353
STORM SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 330.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 358.
Water — See Ch. 411.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 418.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 347-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 347-22
1:447

ARTICLE I
Illicit Discharges, Activities and Connections
[Adopted 2-22-2005 by L.L. No. 3-2005]
§ 353-1. Purpose and intent.
§ 353-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — Employees or designees of the
director of the municipal agency designated to enforce this article.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits. Currently these include construction projects resulting in land
disturbance of five acres or more. Beginning in March 2003, NPDES
Stormwater Phase II permits will be required for construction projects
resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include
A. The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the Village of Sleepy Hollow through
the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage
system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and
state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the
introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process.
B. The objectives of this article are to:
(1) Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.
(2) Prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
(3) Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this article.
§ 353-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-2
1:449
but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and
demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 353-9 of this article.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the EPA [or
by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)] that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide
basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discharged
or abandoned objects, ordnance, and accumulations, so that same may
cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes, sewage, fecal coliform and
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including
but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain
or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by
an authorized enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
B.
§ 353-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 353-2
1:450
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or -altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
§ 353-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
§ 353-4. Responsibility for administration.
The Building Department shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the
authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the Director
of the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
§ 353-5. Interpretation.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 353-6. Discharge prohibitions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges.
§ 353-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-6
1:451
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials,
including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable
water quality standards, other than stormwater.
(2) The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal
discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as
described as follows:
(a) The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this article. Water line flushing or
other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn
watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater,
groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated
pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not
including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl
space pumps, air-conditioning condensation, springs,
noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or
wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated, typically less
than one PPM chlorine), fire-fighting activities, and any other
water source not containing pollutants.
(b) Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(c) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the
time of the test.
(d) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater
discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered
under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection
Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain
system.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
§ 353-6 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 353-6
1:452
§ 353-7. Suspension of MS4 access.
§ 353-8. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Building Inspector prior to the allowing of discharges to
the MS4.
§ 353-9. Monitoring of discharges.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
Building Inspector or General Foreman may, without prior notice,
suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or
may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment or to
the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United
States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in
an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps
as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or
waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.
(1) Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may
have his/her or its MS4 access terminated if such termination
would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized
enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of the MS4 access. The violator may petition the
authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing.
(2) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior
approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The Building Inspector shall be permitted to enter and inspect
facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger
has security measures in force which require proper identification
and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall
§ 353-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-9
1:453
make the necessary arrangements to allow access to
representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the Building Inspector ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the
conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and
federal law.
(3) The Building Inspector shall have the right to set up on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of
the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
(4) The Building Inspector has the right to require the discharger to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling
and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own
expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality
shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the
Building Inspector and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing
such access shall be borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Building Inspector access to a
permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit
and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a
NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial
activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized
enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for
the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by
this article.
(7) If the Building Inspector has been refused access to any part of the
premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able
to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency
may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 353-9 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 353-10
1:454
§ 353-10. Use of best management practices to prevent, control,
and reduce stormwater pollutants.
The Village Board and Planning Commission will adopt requirements
identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility
which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater,
the storm drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner or
operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at its
own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or
watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is or may
be the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said
person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent
the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer
system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity,
to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of
this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES
permit.
§ 353-11. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse
so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 353-12. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain
system, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such release.
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in
person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the Building Inspector within three business days
of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from
§ 353-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-12
1:455
a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge
and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be
retained for at least three years.
§ 353-13. Enforcement.
§ 353-14. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received
within 10 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the
appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place
within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision
of the municipal authority or its designee shall be final.
§ 353-15. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 10
days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of
the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized
A. Notice of violation. Whenever the Building Inspector finds that a person
has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article,
the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written
notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require,
without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
§ 353-12 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 353-15
1:456
enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation
and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner,
agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for
the purposes set forth above.
§ 353-16. Cost of abatement of violation.
Within 10 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the
assessment within 10 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely
manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the
expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become
a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the
property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this article shall become liable to the Village by reason of such
violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments.
Interest at the rate of 9% per annum shall be assessed on the balance
beginning on the first day following discovery of the violation.
§ 353-17. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the authorized
enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations
or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
§ 353-18. Alternative remedies.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized
by this article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a
violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling,
attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
§ 353-19. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 353-20. Criminal prosecution; recovery of costs.
§ 353-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-20
1:457
§ 353-21. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in the this article are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and
it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek
cumulative remedies.
§ 353-22. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect 30 days after its final passage
and adoption. All prior laws and parts of laws in conflict with this article are
hereby repealed.
A. Any person who has violated or continues to violate this article shall be
liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law and shall
be subject to a criminal penalty of $250 per violation per day and/or
imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 15 days.
B. The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney's fees,
court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this
article, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
§ 353-20 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 353-22
1:458
Chapter 358
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavation, filling and topsoil removal — See
Ch. 190.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 220.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 353.
Waterfront consistency review — See Ch. 414.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 418.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 425.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 353-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-22
1:459

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 358-1. Findings of fact.
It is hereby determined that:
§ 358-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter, along with the stormwater control regulations
included in Chapter 450, Zoning, Article XVII, is to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and
safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing
within this jurisdiction and to address the findings of fact in § 358-1 hereof.
A. Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition.
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
waterborne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and
other desirable species.
C. Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat.
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby
increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation.
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream base flow.
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the municipality.
G. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities.
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety.
I. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
§ 358-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-2
1:461
This chapter, along with the stormwater control regulations included in
Chapter 450, Zoning, Article XVII, seeks to meet those purposes by
achieving the following objectives:
§ 358-3. Statutory authority.
In accordance with § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of
New York, the Village Board of Trustees has the authority to enact local
laws and amend local laws for the purpose of promoting the health, safety
or general welfare of the Village of Sleepy Hollow and for the protection and
enhancement of its physical environment. The Village Board of Trustees of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow may include in any such local law provisions
for the appointment of any municipal officer, employees, or independent
contractor to effectuate, administer and enforce such local law.
§ 358-4. Applicability; stormwater management officer.
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate
Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02, or as
amended or revised;
B. Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
General Permit for Construction Activities GP-02-01, or as amended or
revised;
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
D. Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development activities which would otherwise degrade local water
quality;
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable;
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management
practices and to ensure that these management practices are properly
maintained and eliminate threats to public safety; and
G. Encourage the use of green infrastructure practices to control
stormwater runoff such as protecting natural areas, reducing
impervious cover, and runoff reduction techniques to the maximum
extent practicable. [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 358-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 358-4
1:462
§ 358-5. Exemptions.
The following activities may be exempt from review under this chapter,
along with the stormwater control regulations included in Chapter 450,
Zoning, Article XVII:
A. This chapter, along with the stormwater control regulations included in
Chapter 450, Zoning, Article XVII, shall be applicable to all land
development activities as defined in Chapter 450, § 450-72.
B. The municipality shall designate a stormwater management officer, who
shall accept and review all stormwater pollution prevention plans and
forward such plans to the applicable municipal board. The stormwater
management officer may:
(1) Review the plans; or
(2) Upon approval by the Village Board of Trustees of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow, engage the services of a registered professional
engineer to review the plans, specifications and related documents
at a cost not to exceed a fee schedule established by said governing
board.
C. All land development activities subject to review and approval by the
Village of Sleepy Hollow under subdivision, site plan, and/or special
permit regulations shall be reviewed subject to the standards contained
in this chapter, along with the stormwater control regulations included
in Chapter 450, Zoning, Article XVII.
D. All land development activities not subject to review as stated in
Subsection C shall be required to submit a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) to the stormwater management officer, who
shall approve the SWPPP if it complies with the requirements of this
chapter, along with the stormwater control regulations included in
Chapter 450, Zoning, Article XVII.
A. Agricultural activity as defined in Chapter 450, Zoning, § 450-72.
B. Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads are
subject to this chapter, along with the stormwater control regulations
included in Chapter 450, Zoning, Article XVII.
C. Routine maintenance activities that disturb fewer than five acres and
are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity or original purpose of a facility.
D. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the stormwater management officer.
E. Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved
by the Village of Sleepy Hollow on or before the effective date of this
chapter.
§ 358-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-5
1:463
F. Land development activities for which a building permit has been
approved on or before the effective date of this chapter.
G. Cemetery graves.
H. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds
of posts or poles.
I. Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or
natural resources.
J. Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetable and other plants primarily for use by that person and
his or her family.
K. Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing
structure.
§ 358-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 358-5
1:464
ARTICLE II
Erosion and Sediment Control
§ 358-6. Adoption.
The Erosion and Sediment Control Law of the Village of Sleepy Hollow is
hereby adopted.
§ 358-7. Construction inspections.
A. Erosion and sediment control inspections.
(1) The Village of Sleepy Hollow stormwater management officer may
require such inspections as necessary to determine compliance
with this article, and may either approve that portion of the work
completed or notify the applicant wherein the work fails to comply
with the requirements of this article and the stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) as approved. The stormwater
management officer may conduct the inspection, or, upon approval
of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, engage the
services of a registered engineer to conduct the inspection at a cost
not to exceed a fee schedule established by the governing board. To
obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the Village of Sleepy
Hollow enforcement official at least 48 hours before any of the
following as required by the stormwater management officer:
(a) Start of construction.
(b) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures.
(c) Completion of site clearing.
(d) Completion of rough grading.
(e) Completion of final grading.
(f) Close of the construction season.
(g) Completion of final landscaping.
(h) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(2) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted, except for
site stabilization, until any violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the stormwater
management officer.
B. Stormwater management practice inspections. The Village of Sleepy
Hollow stormwater management officer is responsible for conducting
inspections of stormwater management practices (SMPs). All applicants
are required to submit "as built" plans for any stormwater management
§ 358-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-7
1:465
§ 358-8. Performance guarantees; recordkeeping.
practices located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan
must show the final design specifications for all stormwater
management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer.
C. Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection
programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including, but
not limited to, routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses
or industries of a type associated with higher-than-usual discharges of
contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more
likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal
water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES stormwater permit;
and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under
environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not
limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling
discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in
drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage
control facilities and other stormwater management practices.
D. Submission of reports. The Village of Sleepy Hollow stormwater
management officer may require monitoring and reporting from
entities subject to this article as are necessary to determine compliance
with this article.
E. Right of entry for inspection. When any new stormwater management
facility is installed on private property or when any new connection is
made between private property and the public stormwater system, the
landowner shall grant to the Village of Sleepy Hollow the right to enter
the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the
purpose of inspection as specified in Subsection C.
A. Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Village of Sleepy Hollow
in its approval of the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the Village
of Sleepy Hollow may require the applicant or developer to provide,
prior to construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable
letter of credit from an appropriate financial or surety institution which
guarantees satisfactory completion of the project and names the Village
of Sleepy Hollow as the beneficiary. The security shall be in an amount
to be determined by the Village of Sleepy Hollow based on submission
of final design plans, with reference to actual construction and
landscaping costs. The performance guarantee shall remain in force
until the surety is released from liability by the Village of Sleepy Hollow,
provided that such period shall not be less than one year from the date
of final acceptance or such other certification that the facility(ies) has
been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and
§ 358-7 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 358-8
1:466
§ 358-9. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
specifications and that a one-year inspection has been conducted and
the facilities have been found to be acceptable to the Village of Sleepy
Hollow. Per-annum interest on cash escrow deposits shall be reinvested
in the account until the surety is released from liability.
B. Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the
developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or
industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required
to provide the Village of Sleepy Hollow with an irrevocable letter of
credit from an approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper
operation and maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion
control facilities both during and after construction, and until the
facilities are removed from operation. If the developer or landowner
fails to properly operate and maintain stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control facilities, the Village of Sleepy Hollow
may draw upon the account to cover the costs of proper operation and
maintenance, including engineering and inspection costs.
C. Recordkeeping. The Village of Sleepy Hollow may require applicants
subject to this article to maintain records demonstrating compliance
with this article.
A. Notice of violation. When the Village of Sleepy Hollow determines that a
land development activity is not being carried out in accordance with
the requirements of this article, it may issue a written notice of violation
to the landowner. The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the landowner, developer or applicant.
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring.
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land
development activity into compliance with this chapter, along with
the stormwater control regulations included in Chapter 450,
Zoning, Article XVII, and a time schedule for the completion of such
remedial action.
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed.
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days
of service of the notice of violation.
§ 358-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-9
1:467
§ 358-10. Fees for services.
The Village of Sleepy Hollow may require any person undertaking land
development activities regulated by this article to pay reasonable costs at
prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP maintenance
performed by the Village of Sleepy Hollow or performed by a third party for
the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
B. Stop-work orders. The Village of Sleepy Hollow may issue a stop-work
order for violations of this article. Persons receiving a stop-work order
shall be required to halt all land development activities, except those
activities that address the violations leading to the stop-work order. The
stop-work order shall be in effect until the Village of Sleepy Hollow
confirms that the land development activity is in compliance and the
violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stopwork
order in a timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary
penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in
this article.
C. Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is
conducted contrary to this article may be restrained by injunction or
otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
D. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
E. Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this article,
the stormwater management officer may prevent the occupancy of said
building or land.
F. Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its
undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken
within a reasonable time after notice, the Village of Sleepy Hollow may
take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien
upon the property until paid.
§ 358-9 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 358-10
1:468
Chapter 362
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles, in-line skates and
skateboards — See Ch. 135.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 151.
Dumpsters — See Ch. 175.
Excavation, filling and topsoil removal — See
Ch. 190.
Littering — See Ch. 263.
Public gatherings — See Ch. 268.
Notification of defects — See Ch. 276.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 299.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 400.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 358-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 358-10
1:469

ARTICLE I
General Use Regulations
[Adopted 8-18-1937 (Ch. 50, Art. I, of the 1965 Code); amended in
its entirety 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 362-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUTTER — That portion of the street immediately adjoining the curb.
PAVEMENT — Includes a macadam, asphalt, brick, concrete or other
similarly improved roadbed and is applied only to the portion of the street
between the sidewalks or established curblines.
SIDEWALK — The structure of stone, brick, cement or other material used
as a thoroughfare for pedestrians along the side of the street where one has
been constructed pursuant to a local law or otherwise, and in case no such
structure has been made it shall be deemed to be a space at least four feet
in width on each side of the several streets.
STREET — Includes a highway, road, avenue, lane or alley which the public
has a right to use.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire width of a street between property
lines measured at right angles to the center line of the street.
§ 362-2. Gutters.
All gutters in the Village shall be maintained and preserved free from all
sticks, stones, dirt, refuse, snow, ice or other obstructions, so as to permit
the free flow of water thereon at all times.
§ 362-3. Removal of road material prohibited.
No person shall, without permission from the Board of Trustees, remove or
cause to be removed any earth, stones, sand, gravel or other part of the
highway from any street, lane, alleys, sewer, square, public ground or road
within the bounds of this Village.
§ 362-4. Access or exit on curbs or gutters prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall place or cause to be placed any bridge,
planks, boards or other material over or upon any curb or gutter in this
Village so as to provide a means of access to or egress from his or her
or its premises, and no person, firm or corporation shall construct, erect
or build any driveway or roadway over any sidewalk in this Village, so as
to provide means of access to and egress from the street to the adjoining
premises, without first having obtained a permit for the same from the
Board of Trustees, upon proper written application therefor.
§ 362-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-5
1:471
§ 362-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not to exceed $250, 15 days' imprisonment, or both, for
each offense.
§ 362-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 362-5
1:472
ARTICLE II
Street Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 8-18-1937; amended in its entirety 12-3-1979 by L.L. No.
8-1979 (Ch. 50, Art. II, of the 1965 Code)]
§ 362-6. Permit required. [Amended 7-20-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981;
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
No person, firm or corporation, including public service companies and
municipalities other than the Village of Sleepy Hollow, shall make any
excavation in any street or highway in the Village of Sleepy Hollow for
any purpose without first obtaining a permit therefor from the office of the
Village Clerk or the person performing the duties of said office.
§ 362-7. Application requirements. [Amended 7-20-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981; 5-1-1990; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. Applications for permits shall be filed in writing to the Village Clerk
upon application blanks which shall be provided or in such other
manner as shall from time to time be prescribed. Applications shall
state the nature, location, extent and purpose of the proposed
excavation.
B. Applications by public service companies must be accompanied by a
general undertaking in such form as may be approved by the Village
Clerk. Said general undertaking is tendered to assure that after
completing the excavation, said applicant shall leave the street,
highway, sidewalk, pavement, curb or gutter in the same condition as it
was prior to the excavation.
C. Applications by persons, firms or corporations other than public service
companies for excavations in the street or highway must be
accompanied by the permit fee set forth in the fee schedule included at
the end of Chapter 200, Fees, along with a minimum cash deposit with
the Village Clerk of $1,500 or such sum as may be computed and
required by the Superintendent of Public Works, based upon prevailing
rates for labor and materials that would be required, in his sole
discretion, to restore such excavation to a safe and secure roadway, to
assure that after completing the excavation, said applicant shall leave
the street, highway, pavement and curb or gutter in the same condition
as it was prior to the excavation. In the event that the applicant fails to
repair or replace such pavement, curb or gutter within the time
provided in the permit and to the complete satisfaction of the
Superintendent of Public Works, the deposit shall be forfeited to the
extent necessary to repair such surface as left undone by the applicant
or repaired in a manner unsatisfactory to the Superintendent of Public
Works.
§ 362-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-8
1:473
§ 362-8. Permit fee. [Amended 5-1-1990; 8-16-1994 by L.L. No.
11-1994]
Each applicant must pay a fee to be established and determined by the
Board of Trustees from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule
included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees, to the Village Clerk for each
excavation, except those for utility poles.
§ 362-9. Insurance requirements. [Amended 7-20-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. Prior to commencement of any work under this article and until
completion and final acceptance of the work, the applicant shall, at its
sole expense, maintain the following insurance on its own behalf, and
furnish to the Village of Sleepy Hollow certificates of insurance
evidencing same and reflecting the effective date of such coverage as
follows. The term "applicant" as used herein shall mean and include
subcontractors of every tier.
(1) Worker's compensation and employers’ liability policy, covering
operations in New York State. Where applicable, United States
Longshore and Harbor Workers Compensation Act Endorsement
and Maritime Coverage Endorsement shall be attached to the
policy; waiver of subrogation to be included.
(2) New York State disability, covering all employees.
(3) A commercial general liability policy, with limits of no less than
$1,000,000 each occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate limits for bodily
injury and property damage.
(a) The policy shall include coverage for:
[1] Premises and operations.
[2] Products/Completed operations.
[3] Independent contractors.
[4] Personal and advertising injury.
[5] Blanket contractual liability.
[6] XCU.
(b) The Village of Sleepy Hollow and its assigns, officers,
employees, representatives and agents should be named as
additional insureds on the policy using ISO Additional Insured
Endorsement CG 20 10 11/85 or an endorsement providing
equivalent or broader coverage and shall apply on a primary
and noncontributory basis, including any self-insured
retentions. The certificate of insurance should show this
§ 362-8 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 362-9
1:474
applies to the general liability coverage on the certificate, and
an additional insured endorsement shall be attached.
(c) To the extent permitted by New York law, the applicant waives
all rights of subrogation or similar rights against the Village of
Sleepy Hollow, its assigns, officers, employees, representatives
and agents.
(d) General aggregate coverage shall apply separately to each
project.
(e) Cross liability coverage.
(4) Comprehensive automobile policy, with limits no less than
$1,000,000 bodily injury and property damage liability, including
coverage for owned, nonowned, and hired private passenger and
commercial vehicles.
(a) The Village of Sleepy Hollow and its assigns, officers,
employees, representatives and agents should be named as
additional insureds on the policy. The certificate of insurance
should show that this applies to the automobile liability
coverage on the certificate, and an additional insured
endorsement shall be attached.
(b) To the extent permitted by New York law, the applicant waives
all rights of subrogation or similar rights against the Village of
Sleepy Hollow, its assigns, officers, employees, representatives
and agents.
(c) If applicable, the policy should be specifically endorsed to
cover snow plow operations.
(5) Umbrella liability, with limits of no less than $1,000,000 each
occurrence/$1,000,000 aggregate, including coverage for general
liability, automobile, workers’ compensation and professional
liability (if applicable).
(6) Professional liability (if applicable), with limits no less than
$1,000,000 per claim.
(7) Owners’ and contractors’ protective liability policy, with limits no
less than $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate shall be
taken out, with the Village of Sleepy Hollow as the named insured,
and shall be maintained during the life of the contract, which will
protect the Village of Sleepy Hollow from claims for damages for
personal injury, liability, accidental or wrongful death, as well as
property damage which may arise from operations under the
contract, whether such operations are by the applicant or by any
subcontractor or by anyone directly or indirectly employed by
either party.
§ 362-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-9
1:475
§ 362-10. Notice of excavation. [Amended 7-20-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981]
The Superintendent of Public Works may require any person making a
highway excavation pursuant to a permit granted hereunder to give notice
of such excavation to public service companies or municipal districts having
lines, mains or other property in the streets; and when such notice shall
have been required, no work shall be commenced or done under such
permit until such required notice has been fully complied with to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Works.
(8) Bid, performance and labor and material bonds, if required in the
specifications. These bonds shall be provided by a New York State
admitted surety company in good standing.
(9) Property insurance. The applicant shall cover materials being
installed on site, in transit, and/or at any other location.
(10) Asbestos/Lead abatement and environmental clean-up, if
applicable. Coverage for the removal of asbestos and/or lead and
related pollution events, including coverage for third-party liability
claims for bodily injury, property damage and clean-up costs:
$1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate, including
products and completed operations. If a retroactive date is used, it
must pre-date the inception of the contract.
B. Certificates shall provide that 30 days’ written notice prior to
cancellation or expiration be given to the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
Policies that lapse and/or expire during the term of the work shall be
recertified and received by the Village of Sleepy Hollow no less than 30
days prior to expiration or cancellation.
C. The applicant shall furnish to Village of Sleepy Hollow certificates of
insurance as evidence of coverage prior to commencement of work and
naming Village of Sleepy Hollow as an additional insured by
endorsement. The applicant acknowledges that failure to obtain such
insurance on behalf of the Village of Sleepy Hollow constitutes a
material breach of contract and subjects it to liability for damages,
indemnification and all other legal remedies available to the Village of
Sleepy Hollow. The failure of the Village of Sleepy Hollow to object to
the contents of the certificate or absence of same shall not be deemed a
waiver of any and all rights held by the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
D. The cost of furnishing the above insurance shall be borne by the
applicant; there will be no direct payment for this work. Costs will be
deemed to have been included in the price bid for all scheduled items.
E. All carriers listed in the certificates of insurance shall be A.M. Best
rated A VII or better and be licensed in the State of New York.
§ 362-9 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 362-11
1:476
§ 362-11. Safety requirements. [Amended 7-20-1981 by L.L. No.
4-1981]
Any person making an excavation covered by this article shall erect suitable
barriers or guards for the protection of persons using the streets or
sidewalks and, in addition thereto, shall set up and maintain during the
hours of darkness sufficient lights or flares to properly illuminate the area.
He shall also take all necessary precautions for the protection of the
property of the Village, of public service companies or municipal districts
and of others who may be endangered by such excavation or the work
incident thereto and shall comply with all directions given by the
Superintendent of Public Works with respect to such barriers, lights, flares
and protective measures.
§ 362-12. Construction specifications; traffic control.
A. Work under the permit shall be completed within 30 days from the date
of the issuance of the permit and continued in an expeditious manner
unless extension of this period is approved by the Superintendent of
Public Works. [Amended 7-20-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
B. Construction.
(1) When work is being performed on any Village street, no pavement
cuts or trenches are to be left unfilled overnight except in
emergencies, and in such cases, adequate precautions must be
exercised to protect traffic. When working on any Village street or
road, contractors must complete final backfilling of any trench
within 18 days from the time of its opening.
(2) All pipes or mains crossing highway pavement shall, whenever
possible, be driven beneath the roadway without disturbance from
the edge of the pavement. Such crossover pipes shall, whenever
possible, be enclosed in sleeves or larger pipes so that repairs or
replacements may be made in the future without future
disturbance of the roadway pavement.
(3) In the event that a trench is opened, the trench will be compacted
to within four inches of the road surface after completion of the
necessary work and construction. The existing asphalt surface shall
then be cut back at least 12 inches on either side of the undisturbed
subgrade.
(4) At the discretion of the Superintendent of Public Works, the contact
surfaces, the packed surfaces and/or adjacent pavement edges
shall be painted and sealed with approved bituminous and/or
bluestone material before or after placing the course of asphalt,
which shall be four inches of New York State Specification 1-A hot
plant mix. This course shall be rolled with an eight- to ten-ton roller,
and surface variations in excess of 1/4 inch shall be eliminated or
the pavement relaid. [Amended 7-20-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
§ 362-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-12
1:477
§ 362-13. Penalties for offenses.
(5) If the trenchwork is in the earthen shoulder of the roadway, the
proper compaction as outlined above shall apply, with the addition
of a covering of sod or grass seeding as specified by the
Superintendent of Public Works. [Amended 7-20-1981 by L.L.
No. 4-1981]
C. Traffic control. Traffic is to be maintained at all times during the
progress of work. Adequate signs, barricades and lights necessary to
protect the public shall be provided. Flagmen to direct traffic shall be
employed continuously during periods when only one-way traffic can be
maintained or when equipment is operated back and forth across the
pavement areas. No construction equipment or materials shall be left
on the pavement after working hours, nor shall any construction
equipment or materials be placed in any way, manner or location that
will obstruct the highway or railroad warning signs. Barricades,
whether in sidewalk or roadway areas, shall have prominently
displayed for police convenience the address and telephone number of
someone available 24 hours a day who shall reestablish the same in an
emergency. Access to adjacent property shall be maintained.
D. Notification. The applicant will be responsible for notifying the
Superintendent of Public Works 24 hours prior to street opening and
street closing. [Amended 7-20-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981]
A. Any person committing an offense against any provision of this article
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The continuation of an offense shall constitute, for each
day the offense is continued, a separate and distinct violation.
B. In addition to the above-provided penalty, the Board of Trustees may
also maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the Village in a
court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain
by injunction the violation of this article.
§ 362-12 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 362-13
1:478
ARTICLE III
Snow and Ice
[Adopted 8-18-1937 (Ch. 50, Art. IV, of the 1965 Code)]
§ 362-14. Removal of snow and ice. [Amended 10-23-1978;
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013; 10-17-2017 by L.L. No. 9-2017]
No owner of any real property in the Village of Sleepy Hollow shall allow
snow, ice, or other substance to accumulate or remain upon any sidewalk
improved for public pedestrian use which either is in any portion of a street
between the owner's property boundary line and the curbline of a street or
lateral line of uncurbed roadway that abuts the owner's real property or is
on the owner's real property and runs substantially alongside a street or
roadway that abuts the owner's real property, so as to impede or render
dangerous public travel thereon for a longer period than 24 hours.
§ 362-15. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 11-15-1994 by L.L. No.
16-1994; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Any person or persons or agent of any nonresident owner who shall permit
such snow or ice so to accumulate and remain for a longer period than that
above specified after notice to remove the same shall be liable to a penalty
of $250, 15 days' imprisonment, or both, for each offense. In addition to
such penalty, the Board of Trustees may have said snow or ice or other
substance removed and the cost and expense of so removing the same shall
be levied, assessed and collected from such owner, occupant or agent in the
manner prescribed by law.
§ 362-16. Oral notice sufficient.
Oral notice by any member of the Police Department shall be deemed
sufficient for the purpose of this article.
§ 362-17. Liability for snow and ice on sidewalks. [Added 6-15-1998
by L.L. No. 3-1998; amended 10-17-2017 by L.L. No. 9-2017]
Notwithstanding anything contained in § 362-16 herein, any owner of any
real property in the Village of Sleepy Hollow who permits snow or ice to
accumulate and remain upon any sidewalk improved for public pedestrian
use which either is in any portion of a street between the owner's property
boundary line and the curbline of a street or lateral line of uncurbed
roadway that abuts the owner's real property or is on the owner's real
property and runs substantially alongside a street or roadway that abuts the
owner's real property shall be liable to any party for injuries sustained as a
result thereof.
§ 362-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-17
1:479

ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk Sales, Displays and Cafes
[Adopted 1-28-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
§ 362-18. Permit required.
No person shall engage in the selling or display for sale of merchandise of
any kind on, over or upon any sidewalk, or in the operation of a sidewalk
cafe, except upon the granting of a permit therefor by the Village Board
of Trustees pursuant to this article, and in accordance with the terms and
conditions of such permit.
§ 362-19. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY — A public telephone, mailbox, bench, or other
facility provided for the use of the general public.
SIDEWALK — Any area between the curbline and a structure, whether
publicly or privately owned, which is used by the public or open to use by
the public.
SIDEWALK CAFE — An outdoor dining area located on a sidewalk.
§ 362-20. Sidewalk displays.
The Village Board of Trustees is hereby authorized to grant permits for the
use of the sidewalk for the display for sale of flowers, floral arrangements
and ornamental shrubbery upon the following terms and conditions:
A. The permit shall be valid only during a single calendar year and shall
permit the regulated activity only during the period from April 1 to
September 30 of such year.
B. The permitted activity shall be conducted only as an accessory to a
business establishment lawfully operating on the first floor of premises
in the C-2 Zoning District, on the sidewalk in front of the principal place
of business of such establishment, and by the entity which operates
such establishment. All sales shall be conducted within such
establishment. No cash register or other facility for the exchange of
currency or otherwise receiving payment for goods and services shall
be permitted on the sidewalk.
C. The applicant shall have the consent of the owner and lessee, if any, of
the premises in front of which the permit activity is to be conducted.
D. There shall be no less than eight feet from the curbline to the front of
the nearest structure. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 362-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-20
1:481
E. No sidewalk display shall be nearer than seven feet to the curb; except
that if the sidewalk is 24 feet or more in width, then the distance from
the curb shall be not less than 1/3 of the width of the sidewalk.
F. The applicant shall at all times maintain free and clear from all
obstruction an aisle not less than four feet in width providing access to
any establishment fronting on said sidewalk.
G. No permanent structure may be affixed to the sidewalk or any building.
The applicant shall be responsible for any damage caused to any
sidewalk or public property.
H. The sidewalk use shall not interfere with access to any public service
facility.
I. No outdoor lighting or live or mechanical music shall be permitted.
J. No sidewalk display shall be permitted after 9:00 p.m., or when the
entity with which it is associated is not open to the public.
K. The applicant shall agree, on a form approved by the Village Attorney,
to indemnify and save harmless the Village of Sleepy Hollow, its
officers, agents, attorneys and employees, from and against any claim
of loss, liability or damage by any person arising as a result of the
applicant's operation of the sidewalk use.
L. The applicant shall obtain, and maintain in full force and effect
throughout the terms of the permit, a policy of general liability
insurance. The applicant shall file with the Village Board of Trustees,
prior to the issuance of the permit, a certificate evidencing the requisite
insurance. The policy shall:
(1) Name the Village of Sleepy Hollow, its officers, agents, attorneys
and employees as additional insured;
(2) Have a combined single limit of not less than $1,000,000; and
(3) Contain a provision prohibiting its cancellation except upon 20
days' notice to the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
M. The applicant shall file with the Village Treasurer, prior to the issuance
of the permit, a cash deposit in the amount of $500 as security for the
faithful performance by the applicant of the terms and conditions of the
permit. Said deposit shall be maintained by the Village Treasurer in a
separate, interest-bearing account, for the benefit of the applicant, and
shall be returned to the applicant with interest, but less any
administrative sanctions imposed by the Village Board of Trustees
pursuant to § 362-26 of this article, within 30 days of the revocation of
the permit.
§ 362-20 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 362-21
1:482
§ 362-21. Sidewalk cafes.
The Village Board of Trustees is hereby authorized to grant permits for
the use of the sidewalks for sidewalk cafes upon the following terms and
conditions:
A. The applicant shall comply with all of the terms and conditions for a
sidewalk display permit set forth in § 362-20 above, except for that of
§ 362-20A. [Amended 2-4-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
(1) The permit shall be valid only during a single calendar year and
shall permit the regulated activity only during the period from
January 1 through December 31 of such year.
B. The applicant shall delineate the cafe area by a removable physical
barrier separating patrons from pedestrian traffic. The delineation and
layout of the cafe area shall be consistent with the site plan submitted
by the applicant.
C. No sidewalk cafe may be operated except:
(1) As an accessory to a restaurant or retail food store lawfully
operating on the first floor of premises in the C-2 Zoning District;
(2) On the sidewalk in front of the principal place of business of such
entity; and
(3) By the entity which operates the restaurant or retail food store.
D. No sidewalk cafe shall operate after 12:00 midnight or when the entity
with which it is associated is not open to the public.
E. Furnishing of a sidewalk cafe shall consist solely of readily removable
umbrellas, covers, railings, tables, chairs, planters containing live
plants, waste receptacles and accessories. Furnishings may not be
attached, even in a temporary manner, to the sidewalk or other public
property, or to any building or structure. All furnishings shall be
removed from the sidewalk and stored in an approved manner when the
sidewalk cafe is not in operation.
F. All food and beverages to be served at sidewalk cafes shall be prepared
within the existing restaurant or retail food store.
G. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining, maintaining in full
force and effect, and complying with the terms and conditions of any
permit which may be required under another law or regulation for the
serving of food or beverages, including alcoholic beverages, at a
sidewalk cafe.
H. Sidewalk cafes, the public property on which they are located, and the
surrounding area shall at all times be kept free and clear of litter,
debris, and any substance that may damage the sidewalk or cause
pedestrian injury.
§ 362-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-21
1:483
§ 362-22. Special sidewalk sales. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, the Building
Inspector may permit the selling and display for sale of merchandise on,
over or upon the sidewalk at any location within the Village for a period
not to exceed seven days in conjunction with organized sidewalk sales days
open to participation by all retail merchants within the Village.
§ 362-23. Application for permit.
§ 362-24. Determination on application.
The Village Board of Trustees shall grant or deny an application for a permit
pursuant to this article within 90 days of its complete submission.
§ 362-25. Notice of violation; revocation or suspension of permit;
administrative sanctions. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Upon a finding by the Building Inspector that the applicant has violated
any provision of this article or the terms and conditions of the permit, or
has engaged in any practice in conjunction with the regulated sidewalk
activity which constitutes a danger to the health or safety of any patron
or pedestrian, the Building Inspector shall give notice to the applicant
I. The applicant shall maintain a sufficient number of receptacles for the
disposal of waste, properly covered to prevent infestation by insects.
Such receptacles shall be emptied as often as is necessary, but in no
event less than once per day.
J. There shall be no less than four feet from the curbline to the sidewalk
café. [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. Application for a permit pursuant to this article shall be made on a form
designated by the Village Board of Trustees and approved by the Village
Attorney. Such form shall contain at least the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The propose site for the activity;
(3) In the case of an application for a sidewalk cafe, a site plan showing
the proposed layout.
(4) In the case of an application for the selling or display for sale of
merchandise, a description of the merchandise proposed to be sold.
(5) Signature of the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the
property fronting the commercial activity.
B. The application shall be accompanied by an application fee in the
amount determined by the Board of Trustees and set forth in the fee
schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees, of the Village Code.
§ 362-21 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 362-25
1:484
to correct such violation or cease such practice within 24 hours. If the
applicant fails to comply with such notice, the Building Inspector may
suspend the permit for a period not in excess of 30 days, during which
time the applicant shall be entitled to a hearing, at which the applicant may
be represented by counsel, to present evidence in his behalf and confront
the evidence against him. If, upon considering the evidence presented at
the hearing, the Building Inspector adheres to the finding, the Building
Inspector may reinstate the permit with additional conditions related to the
violation or improper practice which has been found, or revoke the permit
and forfeit the applicant's cash deposit. In addition to, or in substitution
for, the suspension or revocation of the permit, the Building Inspector may
impose an administrative sanction in an amount determined by the Building
Inspector to be the cost to the Village of the applicant's failure to comply
with the terms of this article or the permit issued to the applicant pursuant
hereto, which such sanction shall be deducted by the Village Treasurer from
the applicant's cash deposit. The suspension, revocation or other action
taken pursuant to this section shall not relieve the applicant or any other
person from any liability which may be imposed pursuant to other sections
of the Village Code.
§ 362-26. Reservation of rights.
Neither the adoption of this article, nor the granting of any permit pursuant
hereto, shall be construed as a waiver of any right, privilege or immunity of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow concerning its public easement over the streets
and sidewalks, or of any requirement of law concerning the liability of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow with respect to streets and sidewalks, whether
express or implied.
§ 362-27. Effective date.
This article shall take effect on March 31, 2003.
§ 362-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-27
1:485

ARTICLE V
Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted 10-17-2017 by L.L. No. 9-2017]
§ 362-28. Duty of owner to maintain sidewalk.
It shall be the duty of the owner of any real property in the Village of Sleepy
Hollow to maintain at all times free from litter, debris, paper, dirt, garbage,
or junk and in good repair and in safe condition for public use any sidewalk
improved for public pedestrian use which either is in any portion of a street
between the owner's property boundary line and the curbline of a street or
lateral line of uncurbed roadway that abuts the owner's real property or is
on the owner's real property and runs substantially alongside a street or
roadway that abuts the owner's real property, and any such owner shall be
liable to any party for injuries sustained as a result of the owner's failure to
do so.
§ 362-29. Notice of required repair or improvement.
If any sidewalk described in § 362-28 shall at any time require repair
or improvement in the judgment of the Village Architect or the Village
Architect's designee, the Village Architect or designee may serve a written
notice, either personally or by mail, upon the owner or owners of the real
property obligated to maintain the sidewalk under § 362-28, requiring the
owner or owners thereof to repair or improve such sidewalk so as to put the
same in good repair and a safe condition within 10 days of the service of
such notice, or such longer period as the Village Architect may determine is
appropriate under the circumstances.
§ 362-30. Failure to comply; authority of the Village Architect.
If any owner served with a notice under § 362-29 neglects or refuses to
repair or improve such sidewalk within the time limited therefor, the Village
Architect or the Village Architect's designee may forthwith have such
repairs and improvements made in such manner as the Village Architect
shall deem proper and suitable and shall file with the Village Treasurer a
certificate of the expense thereof, together with a description of the real
property on or beside which such repair or improvement is made.
§ 362-31. Billing of expense; assessment.
The Village Treasurer shall bill the expense of any repair or improvement
made pursuant to § 362-30 to the owner or owners of property who were
obligated to make them under § 362-28; and if the owner or owners of
such property refuse or neglect to pay the expense of said repairs or
improvements, said expense shall be assessed against the property on the
next completed assessment roll and collected in the same manner as other
truces levied on the said roll.
§ 362-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-31
1:487

ARTICLE VI
Cost Sharing Program
[Adopted 2-19-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
§ 362-32. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a cost sharing program available
to all owners of real property in the Village of Sleepy Hollow under which
the Village will contribute towards sidewalk repair and maintenance.
§ 362-33. Applications.
An owner of real property in the Village of Sleepy Hollow with an
application to repair or maintain sidewalks in the Village dated on or
after January 1, 2019, and on or before April 30, 2019, may also apply
for inclusion in this cost sharing program upon delivery to the Building
Department of:
§ 362-34. Criteria for inclusion.
The Building Department shall review each application for inclusion in the
cost sharing program and:
A. $50 application fee.
B. A signed contract for the sidewalk repair or maintenance with an
insured home improvement contractor licensed by the Westchester
County Department of Consumer Protection.
A. Approve the scope of work.
B. Determine eligibility. To qualify for the program, only sidewalks/
driveway aprons or portions thereof exhibiting any or all of the
following shall be considered:
(1) Sidewalks/portions that exhibit differential sidewalk elevations. A
differential sidewalk that exceeds 1/2 inch vertical is a condition
that warrants removal and replacement.
(2) Cracked or broken sidewalk/portion with any of the following:
(a) Cracking or deteriorating joints at least one inch wide by 12
inches long.
(b) Chipped off areas at least three inches along any one side.
(c) Pitted areas with any pit larger than 1 1/2 inches and at least 1/
2 inch deep.
(3) Signs of ponding water:
(a) Excessive sloping, greater than one inch per 12 inches.
§ 362-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 362-34
1:489
§ 362-35. Compliance with laws.
All work under this cost sharing program shall comply with the Americans
with Disabilities Act and other applicable laws.
§ 362-36. Completion.
Upon satisfactory completion of the work and an owner of real property's
payment for it, the Village will reimburse the owner on an equal, 50/50 basis
up to $3,000.
§ 362-37. Supersession.
This article shall supersede any inconsistent provision of NYS Highway Law
§ 142-c and NYS Village Law Article 6.
(b) Sloping contributing to erosion.
(4) Deviation from Village, state, and federal standards.
§ 362-34 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 362-37
1:490
Chapter 367
TATTOOING
§ 367-1. Findings.
It has been the experience of other municipalities that tattooing has led to
increased cases of serum hepatitis. It has also been their experience that
regulatory measures have proved ineffective in eliminating this health risk
because of the inability to supervise tattooing establishments at all times.
The Village of Sleepy Hollow also lacks the resources and personnel to
supervise tattooing establishments on an ongoing basis. Accordingly, the
Board of Trustees finds that in this Village as in other communities, a ban
on tattooing except for medical purposes is the only feasible means of
protecting the public against disease from this source.
§ 367-2. Tattooing prohibited; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tattoo a human being within the
Village of Sleepy Hollow, except that tattooing may be performed for
medical purposes by a person licensed or otherwise authorized pursuant to
the Education Law to practice medicine or osteopathy.
§ 367-3. Penalties for offenses. [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a maximum fine of $250 or a maximum term
of imprisonment of 15 days, or both, for each offense. Each day of
noncompliance after notice to correct shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 370
TAXATION
§ 362-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-3
1:491

ARTICLE I
Utility Tax
[Adopted 5-31-1950 (Ch. 51 of the 1965 Code)]
§ 370-1. Tax imposed.
Pursuant to the authority granted by New York Village Law § 5-530, a tax
equal to 1% of its gross income from June 1, 1950, is hereby imposed upon
every utility doing business in the Village of Sleepy Hollow which is subject
to the supervision of the State Department of Public Service, which has
a gross income for 12 months, ending May 31, in excess of $500, except
motor carriers or brokers subject to such supervision under Transportation
Law § 240 et seq., and a tax equal to 1% of its gross operating income is
hereby imposed for the same period upon every other utility doing business
in the Village of Sleepy Hollow which has a gross operating income for
12 months, ending May 31, in excess of $500, which taxes shall have
application only within the territorial limits of the Village of Sleepy Hollow
and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees imposed by any
other provision of law for the same period. Such taxes shall not be imposed
on any transaction originating or consummated outside of the territorial
limits of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, notwithstanding that some act be
necessarily performed with respect to such transaction within such limits.
§ 370-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale,
conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect
to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in gross
income), made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by
the purchaser in the Village of Sleepy Hollow, including cash, credits and
property of any kind or nature (whether or not such is made or such service
is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on account of the
cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or services
or other costs, interest or discount paid or any other expense whatsoever;
also, profits from the sale of securities; also, profits from the sale of real
property growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property;
also, profit from the sale of personal property (other than property of a kind
which would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on hand
at the close of the period for which a return is made); also, receipts from
interest, dividends and royalties, derived from sources within the Village
of Sleepy Hollow other than such as are received from a corporation a
majority of whose voting stock is owned by the taxpaying utility, without
any deduction therefrom for any expenses whatsoever encumbered in
connection with the receipt thereof; and also profits from any transaction
(except sales for resale and rentals) within the Village of Sleepy Hollow
whatsoever.
§ 370-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2
1:493
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignees of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity or any other entity, and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court whatsoever or by any
other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions
of the state or municipality and public districts.
TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES — Telephony or telegraphy, or
telephone or telegraph service, including, but not limited to, any
transmission of voice, image, data, information and paging, through the
use of wire, cable, fiber-optic, laser, microwave, radiowave, satellite or
similar media or any combination thereof and shall include services that
are ancillary to the provision of telephone service (such as, but not limited
to, dial tone, basic service, directory information, call forwarding, calleridentification,
call-waiting and the like) and also include any equipment and
services provided therewith; provided the definition of "telecommunication
services" shall not apply to separately stated charges for any service which
alters the substantive content of the message received by the recipient from
that sent.[Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
UTILITY — Every person, including every provider of telecommunications
services, subject to the supervision of either division of the State
Department of Public Service, except persons engaged in the business
of operating on the public highways of this state omnibuses, having a
seating capacity of more than seven persons, and persons engaged in
the business of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars of
operating railroads other than street surface, rapid transit, subway and
elevated railroad; and also includes every person (whether or not such
person is subject to such supervision) who sells gas, electricity, steam,
water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy, delivered through mains,
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article or of § 186-a of the
Tax Law, the words "gross income" shall include:
In the case of a utility engaged in selling telephony or telephone
service, only receipts from local exchange service wholly
consummated within the Village; and
(1)
In the case of a utility engaged in selling telegraphy or telegraph
service, only receipts from transactions wholly consummated
within the Village.
(2)
A.
The words "gross operating income" mean and include receipts
received in or by reason of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for
ultimate consumption of use by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam,
water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy, or in or by reason of the
furnishing for such consumption or use of gas, electric, steam, water,
refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service in the Village of Sleepy
Hollow, including cash, credits and property of any kind or nature,
without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property
sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs, interest
or discount paid or any other expenses whatsoever.
B.
§ 370-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 370-2
1:494
pipes or wires, or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator,
telephone or telegraph service, by means of mains, pipes or wires,
regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such person
or are only incidental thereto or of whether use is made of the public
streets.[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 370-3. Records required.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the Treasurer may require, and such records
shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the Treasurer may
consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be
kept longer.
§ 370-4. Filing of tax return.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file, on or before September
25, December 25, March 25 and June 25, a return for the three calendar
months preceding each such return date, including any period for which
the tax imposed hereby or by any amendment hereof is effective, each of
which returns shall state the gross income or gross operating income for
the period covered by each such return. Returns shall be filed with the
Treasurer of the Village, on a form to be furnished by him for such purpose,
and shall contain such other data, information, or matter as the Treasurer
may require to be included therein. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions of this article, any utility whose average gross income, or
average operating income, as the case may be, for the aforesaid threemonth
period is less than $1,500, may file its returns for such periods
on June 25, 1951. The Treasurer, in order to ensure payment of the tax
imposed, may require at any time a further or supplemental return, which
shall contain any data that may be specified by the Treasurer. Every return
shall have annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility making the
same, or of the owner or of the copartner thereof, or of the principal officer
of the corporation, to the effect that the statements contained therein are
true.
§ 370-5. Payment due upon filing.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall
pay to the Treasurer the tax imposed by this article for the period covered
by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of filing the
return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which the
return is required to be filed.
§ 370-6. Notice of insufficient payment.
In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient return is not
filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice from the Treasurer
or if no return is made for any period, the Treasurer shall determine the
§ 370-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-6
1:495
amount of tax due from such information as he is able to obtain and,
if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of external indices or
otherwise. The Treasurer shall give notice of such determination to the
person liable for such tax. Such determination shall finally and irrevocably
fix such tax, unless the person against whom it is assessed shall, within 30
days after the giving of notice of such determination, apply to the Treasurer
for a hearing or unless the Treasurer, of his own motion, shall reduce the
same. After such hearing, the Treasurer shall give notice of his decision to
the person liable for the tax. The decision of the Treasurer may be reviewed
by certiorari, if certiorari therefor is made within 30 days after the giving
of notice of such decision. An order of certiorari shall not be granted unless
the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed with penalties thereon, if any,
shall be first deposited with the Treasurer and an undertaking filed with
him in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme
Court shall approve, to the effect that, if such order be dismissed or the tax
confirmed, the applicant for the order will pay all costs and charges which
may accrue in the prosecution of the certiorari proceeding, or at the option
of the applicant, such undertaking may be in a sum sufficient to cover the
tax, penalties, costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the applicant
shall not be required to pay such tax and penalties as a condition precedent
to the granting of such order.
§ 370-7. Service of notice. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to such person at the
address given by him in the last return filed by him under this article or,
if no return has been filed, then to such address as may be obtainable.
The mailing of such notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of
the same by the person to whom addressed. Any periods of time, which is
determined according to the provisions of this article by the giving of notice,
shall commence to run from the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 370-8. Penalty for failure to file return.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return, or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof, within the time required by this article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of such tax for each month the amount of tax due, plus
1% of such tax for each month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the
first month, after such return was required to be filed or such tax became
due; but the Treasurer, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit
all or any portion of such penalty.
§ 370-9. Refunds.
If within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty the payer thereof
shall make application for a refund thereof and the Treasurer or the court
shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was
erroneously or illegally collected, the Treasurer shall refund the amount so
§ 370-6 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 370-9
1:496
determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund may be
made on the initiative of the Treasurer. However, no refund shall be made
of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of the Treasurer as
hereinbefore provided unless the Treasurer, after a hearing as hereinbefore
provided or of his own motion, shall have reduced the tax or penalty
or it shall have been established in a certiorari proceeding that such
determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds shall be made out of
moneys collected under this article. An application for a refund, made as
hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for the revision of
any tax or penalty complained of and the Treasurer may receive additional
evidence with respect thereto. After making his determination, the
Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the person interested, and he shall be
entitled to a certiorari order to review such determination, subject to the
provisions hereinbefore contained relating to the granting of such an order.
§ 370-10. Tax borne by utility. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and may be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the utility
to customers or others.
§ 370-11. Failure to pay.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Treasurer, bring
an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any judgment
obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Treasurer. Each such tax
and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person liable to pay the
same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the tax and penalty
imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 370-12. Powers of Treasurer.
In the administration of this article, the Treasurer shall have power to make
such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as may be
necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance of his duties
and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records relating to
the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony and proofs,
under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his official duty
under this article and to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses
and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 370-13. Confidentiality of information; penalties for offenses.
A. Except in accordance with the proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the Treasurer or any agent,
clerk or employee of the Village of Sleepy Hollow to divulge or make
known in any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating
income or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this
§ 370-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-13
1:497
§ 370-14. Use of taxes and penalties.
All taxes and penalties received by the Treasurer for taxes heretofore or
hereafter imposed under this article shall be credited and deposited by him
in the general fund of the Village.
article. The officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not
be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained
in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow in an action or proceeding under the
provisions of this article or on behalf of the State Department of
Taxation and Finance in an action or proceeding under the provisions
of the Tax Law of the State of New York or on behalf of any party
to any action or proceeding under the provisions of this article when
the returns or facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action
or proceeding, in either of which events the court may require the
production of and may admit in evidence so much of said returns or of
the facts shown thereby as are pertinent to the action or proceeding
and no more. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery
to a person, or his duly authorized representative, of a copy of any
return filed by him, nor prevent the identification of particular returns
and the items thereof or the publication of delinquent lists showing the
names of persons who have failed to pay their taxes at the time and
in the manner provided for by this article, together with any relevant
information which in the opinion of the Treasurer may assist in the
collection of such delinquent taxes or the inspection by the Village
Attorney or other legal representatives of the Village of Sleepy Hollow
of the return of any person who shall bring action to set aside or review
the tax based thereon or against whom an action has been instituted in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Penalty. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding six months, or both, and if the offender is an officer, agent,
clerk or employee of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, he shall be dismissed
from office and shall be incapable of holding any office or employment
in the Village of Sleepy Hollow for a period of five years thereafter.
C. Exception. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the Treasurer
may exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any other city or first class
village in the State of New York information contained in returns filed
under this article, provided such other city or village grants similar
privileges to the Village of Sleepy Hollow, and provided such
information is to be used for tax purposes only and the Treasurer shall,
upon request, furnish the State Department of Taxation and Finance
with any information contained in such returns.
§ 370-13 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 370-14
1:498
ARTICLE II
Homestead Base Proportion
[Adopted 12-19-1989 by L.L. No. 19-1989 (Ch. 29A of the 1965
Code)]
§ 370-15. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The Board of Trustees adopts the homestead base proportion pursuant to
Real Property Tax Law § 1903.
§ 370-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-15
1:499

ARTICLE III
Tax Abatement for Rent-Controlled and Rent-Regulated Properties
Occupied by Senior Citizens or Disabled Individuals41
[Adopted 12-17-1991 by L.L. No. 9-1991 (Ch. 50B, Art. I, of the 1965
Code)]
§ 370-16. Definitions.
The terms "dwelling unit," "head of household," "income," "income tax year,"
"increase in maximum rent or legal regulated rent" and "members of the
household," as used in this article, shall have the meanings set forth in
§ 467-b, Subdivision 1, of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 370-17. Amount of abatement.
In accordance with § 467-b of the Real Property Tax Law, there shall be
granted a tax abatement of taxes of the Village of Sleepy Hollow imposed
on real property containing a dwelling unit, as defined herein, by one of the
following amounts:
§ 370-18. Income limits; procedure for determination.
As required by § 467-b, Subdivision 3, of the Real Property Tax Law, the
following provisions are included in and are part of this article:
A. Where the head of the household does not receive a monthly allowance
for shelter pursuant to the Social Services Law, an amount not in excess
of that portion of any increase in maximum rent or legal regulated rent
which causes such maximum rent or legal regulated rent to exceed 1/3
of the combined income of all members of the household.
B. Where the head of the household receives a monthly allowance for
shelter pursuant to the Social Services Law, an amount not in excess of
that portion of any increase in maximum rent or legal regulated rent
which is not covered by the maximum allowance for shelter which such
person is entitled to receive pursuant to the Social Services Law.
A. No tax abatement shall be granted if the combined income of all
members of the household for the income tax year immediately
preceding the date of making application exceeds $40,000, provided
that when the head of the household retires before the commencement
of such year and the date of filing the application, the income for such
year may be adjusted by excluding salary or earnings and projecting his
retirement income over the entire period of such year. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013; 1-2-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
B. For a dwelling unit where the head of the household qualifies as a
person with a disability pursuant to Subdivision 5 of Real Property Tax
41.Editor's Note: This article, formerly titled "Tax Abatement for Rent-Controlled Properties
Occupied by Senior Citizens," was renamed 1-2-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018.
§ 370-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-18
1:501
Law § 467-b, no tax abatement shall be granted if the combined income
for all members of the household for the current income tax year
exceeds the maximum income in Subsection A above, which such head
of the household would not be eligible to receive cash supplemental
security income benefits under federal law during such tax year.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
C. Upon issuance of a tax abatement certificate as provided in Subdivision
4 of § 467-b of the Real Property Tax Law, the amount set forth in said
certificate shall be deducted from the legal maximum rent or legal
regulated rent chargeable for a dwelling unit of a head of the
household.
D. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a head of the
household to whom a then-current, valid tax abatement certificate has
been issued moves his principal residence from one dwelling unit to a
subsequent dwelling unit located within the same municipal
corporation, the head of the household may apply for a tax abatement
certificate relating to the subsequent dwelling unit, and such certificate
may provide that the head of the household shall be exempt from paying
that portion of the maximum rent or legal regulated rent for the
subsequent dwelling unit which is the least of the following:
(1) The amount by which the rent for the subsequent dwelling unit
exceeds the last rent, as reduced, which the head of the household
was required to actually pay in the original dwelling unit.
(2) The last amount deducted from the maximum rent or legal
regulated rent pursuant to this section in the original dwelling unit.
(3) Where the head of the household does not receive a monthly
allowance for shelter pursuant to the Social Services Law, the
amount by which the maximum rent or legal regulated rent of the
subsequent dwelling unit exceeds 1/3 of the combined income for
all members of the household.
E. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a head of the
household to whom a then-current, valid tax abatement certificate has
been issued moves his principal residence from one dwelling unit
subject to the provisions of Article II, IV, V or XI of the Private Housing
Finance Law to a subsequent dwelling unit subject to either the Local
Emergency Housing Rent Control Act42 or to the Emergency Tenant
Protection Act of 197443 which is located within the same municipal
corporation, the head of the household may apply for a tax abatement
certificate relating to the subsequent dwelling unit, and such certificate
may provide that the head of the household shall be exempt from paying
that portion of the maximum rent or legal regulated rent for the
subsequent dwelling unit which is the least of the following:
42.Editor's Note: See § 8601 et seq. of the Unconsolidated Laws.
43.Editor's Note: See § 8621 et seq. of the Unconsolidated Laws.
§ 370-18 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 370-18
1:502
§ 370-19. Application for certificate; issuance.
The head of the household must apply every two years to the appropriate
rent-control agency for a tax abatement certificate on a form prescribed
by said agency. A tax abatement certificate setting forth an amount not
in excess of the increase in maximum rent or legal regulated rent for the
taxable period or such other amount as shall be determined under this
article shall be issued by said agency to each head of the household who is
found to be eligible under this article on or before the last date prescribed
(1) The amount by which the rent for the subsequent dwelling unit
exceeds the last rent, as so reduced, which the head of the
household was required to actually pay in the original dwelling
unit.
(2) The most recent amount so deducted from the maximum rent or
legal regulated rent in the original dwelling unit.
(3) Where the head of the household does not receive a monthly
allowance for shelter pursuant to the Social Services Law, the
amount by which the maximum rent or legal regulated rent of the
subsequent dwelling unit exceeds 1/3 of the combined income of all
members of the household.
F. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, where a
head of the household holds a current, valid tax abatement certificate
and, after the effective date of this subsection, there is a permanent
decrease in the combined income of all members of the household in an
amount which exceeds 20% of such income as represented in such head
of the household's last approved application for a tax abatement
certificate or for renewal thereof, such head of the household may, upon
renewal or one year after the issuance or renewal of such tax
abatement certificate, apply for a redetermination of the amount set
forth therein. Upon application, such amount shall be redetermined so
as to reestablish the ratio of adjusted rent to income which existed at
the time of approval of such head of the household's last application for
a tax abatement certificate or for renewal thereof; provided, however,
that in no event shall the amount of the adjusted rent be redetermined
to be, in the case of a head of the household who does not receive a
monthly allowance for shelter pursuant to the Social Services Law, less
than 1/3 of the combined income of all members of the household or, in
the case of a head of the household who receives a monthly allowance
for shelter pursuant to the Social Services Law, less than the minimum
allowance for shelter which such head of the household is entitled to
receive pursuant to such law. For purposes of this subsection, a
decrease in the combined income of all members of the household shall
not include any decrease in such income resulting from the manner in
which income is calculated pursuant to any amendment to Subsection D
of this section made on or after April 1, 1987. For purposes of this
subsection, "adjusted rent" shall mean maximum rent or legal regulated
rent less the amount set forth in a tax abatement certificate.
§ 370-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-19
1:503
by law for the payment of the taxes or the first installment thereof of any
municipal corporation which has granted an abatement of taxes. Copies of
such certificate shall be issued to the owner of the real property containing
the dwelling unit of the head of the household and to the collecting officer
charged with the duty of collecting the taxes of the Village.
§ 370-20. Eligibility.
Eligibility shall be determined as of a date prescribed by the appropriate
rent control agency. No pro-rata refund of taxes paid prior to such eligibility
date or a credit therefor against next succeeding tax periods shall be
granted.
§ 370-21. Deduction from taxes; lien upon property after vacancy.
§ 370-22. Rent overcharge.
Where a tax abatement certificate has been issued to a head of the
household as authorized by this article and the landlord collects or attempts
to collect all or part of the amount covered by such tax abatement
certificate, the amount of such abatement shall be deemed a rent
overcharge under the applicable rent control or rent regulation law.
A. The amount set forth in a tax abatement certificate for a calendar year
will be added as an appropriation item to the next fiscal year's budget
so that the total tax levy is adjusted to pay for the abatement. The
payment for the abatement will be made in the first month of the new
fiscal year. [Amended 4-15-1997 by L.L. No. 10-1997]
B. Upon the vacancy of a dwelling unit for which an abatement certificate
has been issued, the owner thereof shall remit a pro-rata portion of the
tax abatement to the collecting officer of the Village, and any amount
due by reason of such vacancy shall be a lien upon the property on and
after the date of such vacancy.
§ 370-19 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 370-22
1:504
ARTICLE IV
Exemption for New Commercial, Business or Industrial Projects
[Adopted 8-4-1992 by L.L. No. 5-1992 (Ch. 50B, Art. II, of the 1965
Code)]
§ 370-23. Percentage of exemption.
The percentage of exemption from real estate taxation and special ad
valorem levies imposed by the Village of Sleepy Hollow for new commercial,
business or industrial projects under § 485-b of the Real Property Tax Law
is reduced to zero.
§ 370-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-23
1:505

ARTICLE V
Collection of Property Taxes
[Adopted 8-30-1994 by L.L. No. 12-1994 (Ch. 50B, Art. III, of the
1965 Code)]
§ 370-24. Authority; continuation of enforcement.
Pursuant to § 6 of Chapter 602 of the Laws of 1993, as amended by Chapter
532 of the Laws of 1994, the Village of Sleepy Hollow hereby enacts by
local law not subject to referendum to provide that the collection of property
taxes shall continue to be enforced pursuant to Title 3 of Article 14 of the
Real Property Tax Law, as in effect on December 31, 1994.
§ 370-25. Filing.
Upon adoption, and no later than October 1, 1994, a copy of this article shall
be filed with the New York State Board of Equalization and Assessment.44
44.Editor's Note: The former Board of Equalization and Assessment is now known as the
"Board of Real Property Services."
§ 370-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-25
1:507

ARTICLE VI
Capital Improvement Exemption
[Adopted 11-1-1994 by L.L. No. 13-1994 (Ch. 50B, Art. IV, of the
1965 Code)]
§ 370-26. Exemption granted.
Residential buildings reconstructed, altered or improved subsequent to the
first day of January 1995 for residential purposes shall be exempt from
taxation and special ad valorem levies to the extent provided hereinafter.
§ 370-27. Terms and conditions.
A. Such buildings shall be exempt for a period of one year to the extent of
100% of the increase in assessed value thereof attributable to such
reconstruction, alteration or improvement and for an additional period
of seven years; provided, however, that the extent of such exemption
shall be decreased by 12 1/2% of the initial exemption each year during
such additional period; provided, further, that such exemption shall be
limited to $80,000 in increased market value of the property
attributable to such reconstruction, alteration or improvement, and any
increase in market value greater than such amount shall not be eligible
for the exemption pursuant to this article. For the purposes of this
article, the market value of the reconstruction, alteration or
improvement shall be equal to the increased assessed value
attributable to such reconstruction, alteration or improvement divided
by the most recently established state equalization rate, except where
the state equalization rate or special equalization rate equals or
exceeds 95%, then the increase in assessed value attributable to such
reconstruction, alteration or improvement shall equal the market value
of such reconstruction, alteration or improvement. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. No such exemption shall be granted for reconstruction, alterations or
improvements unless:
(1) Such reconstruction, alteration or improvement was commenced
subsequent to the first day of January 1995; and
(2) The value of such reconstruction, alteration or improvement
exceeds $3,000; and
(3) The greater portion, as so determined by the square footage, of the
building reconstructed, altered or improved is at least five years
old.
C. For purposes of this article, the term "reconstruction, alteration or
improvement" shall not include ordinary maintenance and repairs.
§ 370-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-28
1:509
§ 370-28. Application. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of such
building on a form prescribed by the State Board. The original shall be filed
with the Assessor of the Village on or before January 1 of each year.
§ 370-29. Approval.
If the Assessor is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to this article, he shall approve the application, and such building
shall thereafter be exempt from taxation and special ad valorem levies as
herein provided commencing with the assessment roll prepared after the
taxable status date referred to in § 370-27 of this article. The assessed value
of any exemption granted pursuant to this article shall be entered by the
Assessor on the portion of the assessment roll provided for property exempt
from taxation.
§ 370-30. Definition.
For the purposes of this article, a "residential building" shall mean any
building or structure designed and occupied exclusively for residential
purposes by not more than two families.
§ 370-31. Cessation of exemption upon change in use or ownership.
In the event that a building granted an exemption pursuant to this article
ceases to be used primarily for residential purposes or title thereto is
transferred to other than the heirs or distributees of the owner, the
exemption granted pursuant to this article shall cease.
§ 370-28 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 370-31
1:510
ARTICLE VII
Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 3-22-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995 (Ch. 50B, Art. V, of the 1965
Code)]
§ 370-32. Valuation of property; amount of exemption.
§ 370-33. Definitions.
Terms used in this article shall be subject to the definition of § 102 of the
Real Property Tax Law.
A. Notwithstanding the limitation on the amount of exemption prescribed
in the Village Code under Chapter 50A45, if the total assessed value of
the real property for which such exemption has been granted increases
or decreases as a result of a revaluation or update of assessments and a
material change in level of assessment, the Assessor shall increase or
decrease the amount of such exemption by multiplying the amount of
such exemption by such change in level of assessment. If the Assessor
receives a certification after the completion, verification and filing of
the final assessment roll, the Assessor shall certify the amount of
exemption as recomputed pursuant to this section to the local officers
having custody and control of the roll, and such local officers are hereby
directed and authorized to enter the recomputed exemptions certified
by the Assessor on the roll.
B. Owners of property who previously received an exemption pursuant to
Chapter 50A46 of the Village Code, but who opted instead to receive
exemption pursuant to § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law, may again
receive an exemption pursuant to this section upon application by the
owner within one year of the adoption of this article. The Assessor shall
then recompute all exemptions granted pursuant to this section by
multiplying the amount of each such exemption by the accumulative
change in level of assessment certified by the State Board measured
from the assessment roll immediately proceeding the assessment roll
on which exemptions were first granted; provided, however, that if an
exemption pursuant to this section was initially granted to a parcel on a
later assessment roll, the accumulative change in level factor to be used
in recomputing that exemption shall be measured from the assessment
roll immediately preceding the assessment roll on which that exemption
was initially granted. No refunds or retroactive entitlements shall be
granted.
45.Editor's Note: Ch. 50A of the 1965 Code, Tax Exemption for Veterans, adopted 9-24-1984
by L.L. No. 4-1994, was repealed 12-19-1989 by L.L. No. 18-1989.
46.Editor's Note: Ch. 50A of the 1965 Code, Tax Exemption for Veterans, adopted 9-24-1984
by L.L. No. 4-1994, was repealed 12-19-1989 by L.L. No. 18-1989.
§ 370-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-33
1:511

ARTICLE VIII
Income and Expense Statements
[Adopted 5-28-2002 by L.L. No. 6-2002 (Ch. 50B, Art. VI, of the
1965 Code)]
§ 370-34. Required for income-producing property.
Where real property is income-producing property, the owner shall be
required to submit annually to the Village Assessor, not later than the first
day of September, a statement of all income derived from and all expenses
attributed to the operation of such property as follows:
§ 370-35. Declaration required.
Such statements shall contain the following declaration: "I certify that all
information contained in this statement is true and correct to the best of
my knowledge and belief. I understand that the willful making of any false
statement of material fact herein will subject me to the provisions of law
relevant to the making of false instruments and will render this statement
null and void."
§ 370-36. Form.
The form on which such statement shall be submitted shall be prepared by
the Village Assessor, and copies of such form shall be made available at the
Village offices in the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
A. Where the owner's books and records reflecting the operation of the
property are maintained on a calendar-year basis, the statement shall
be for the calendar year preceding the date on which the statement
shall be filed.
B. Where the owner's books and records reflecting the operation of the
property are maintained on a fiscal-year basis for federal income tax
purposes, the statement shall be for the last fiscal year concluded as of
the first day of August preceding the date on which the statement shall
be filed.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections A and B of this section,
where the owner of the property has not operated the property and is
without knowledge of the income and expenses of the operation of the
property for a consecutive twelve-month period concluded as of the first
day of August preceding the date on which the statement shall be filed,
then the statement shall be for the period of ownership.
D. The Village Assessor may for good cause shown extend the time for
filing an income and expense statement by a period not to exceed 30
days.
§ 370-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-36
1:513

ARTICLE IX
Cold War Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 8-12-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
§ 370-37. Legislative findings and intent.
§ 370-38. Grant of exemption; amount.
An exemption from taxation of 15% of the assessed value of property owned
by an eligible person, as set forth below, is hereby granted with respect to
Village taxes. This exemption shall not exceed the ceiling limits imposed by
Real Property Tax Law § 458-b(2)(a) and (b), as may be amended from time
to time.
§ 370-39. Eligibility.
Such exemption shall be granted to veterans of the armed services who
meet the eligibility requirements as set forth on forms provided by the
Village Assessor, including, but not limited to, the following:
§ 370-40. Permanently disabled veterans.
A disabled veteran, as defined by the Real Property Law of the State of New
York and covered by this period of eligibility, shall be granted an exemption
A. The purpose of this article is to establish a real property tax exemption
for Cold War veterans. A Cold War veteran is one who served in the
United States Armed Forces during the time period commencing on
September 2, 1945, and ending on December 26, 1991. The further
intended purpose of this article is to extend real estate tax exemptions
to these peacetime service men and women.
B. The cost of the volunteer property tax deductions shall be charged back
to the Village as a whole.
A. The applicant shall be an honorably discharged veteran for the period
of eligibility prescribed by Real Property Tax Law § 458-b.
B. The applicant resides in the Village of Sleepy Hollow, which is his/her
primary residence.
C. The property is the primary residence of the applicant.
D. The property is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided,
however, that in the event that any portion of such property is not used
exclusively for the applicant's residence, but is used for other purposes,
such portion shall be subject to taxation and the remaining portion only
shall be entitled to the exemption provided by this article.
E. Any additional criteria established pursuant to the Real Property Tax
Law of the State of New York as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 370-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-40
1:515
equal to 1/2 of his/her service-connected disability rating, subject to the
applicable ceiling limits.
§ 370-41. Application for exemption.
Application for such exemption shall be filed with the Village Assessor on
or before the taxable status date on a form prescribed by the State Board,
along with verifying documentation.
§ 370-42. Expiration.
Exemptions shall expire after 10 years. Disability exemptions shall expire
on the cessation of the disability.
§ 370-43. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon filing with the Secretary of State and
apply to the tax rolls for the Village year 2009/2010.
§ 370-40 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 370-43
1:516
ARTICLE X
Exemption for Members of Volunteer Fire Departments and
Ambulance Companies
[Adopted 8-12-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
§ 370-44. Legislative findings and intent.
§ 370-45. Grant of exemption.
An exemption from taxation of 10% of the assessed value of property owned
by an eligible person, as set forth below, is hereby granted with respect to
Village taxes.
§ 370-46. Eligibility.
Such exemption shall be granted to an enrolled active member of an
incorporated Village volunteer fire department or ambulance company,
provided that such member meets the eligibility requirements as set forth
on forms provided by the Village Assessor, including, but not limited to, the
following:
A. The citizens of the Village of Sleepy Hollow benefit greatly from the
existence of a volunteer fire department and ambulance company. The
volunteer fire fighters and members of the volunteer ambulance
company perform an invaluable service to their community without
compensation.
B. The New York State Real Property Tax Law has recently been amended
by the addition of new § 466-d, which permits Westchester County
municipalities to grant a partial tax exemption on real property owned
by an enrolled member of an incorporated volunteer fire department or
ambulance company, or such enrolled member and spouse. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
C. The cost of the volunteer property tax deductions shall be charged back
to the Village as a whole.
A. The Village continues to recognize the member as eligible for
exemption and grants the member an exemption under the exemption
provided under New York State Real Property Tax Law § 466-d.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. The applicant resides in the Village of Sleepy Hollow, which is served by
the volunteer fire department or ambulance company.
C. The property is the primary residence of the applicant.
D. The property is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided,
however, that in the event that any portion of such property is not used
exclusively for the applicant's residence, but is used for other purposes,
such portion shall be subject to taxation and the remaining portion only
shall be entitled to the exemption provided by this article.
§ 370-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-46
1:517
§ 370-47. Permanently disabled volunteers.
Any volunteer fire fighter or volunteer ambulance worker who receives the
exemption provided for by this article who becomes permanently disabled
due to the exercise of his or her duties as such fire fighter or ambulance
worker and who is prevented from being certified as an active service
member therefor shall be entitled to the annual certification during the
period of his or her disability.
§ 370-48. Application for exemption.
Application for such exemption shall be filed with the Village Assessor on
or before the taxable status date on a form prescribed by the State Board,
along with verifying documentation.
§ 370-49. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon filing with the Secretary of State and
apply to the tax rolls for the Village year 2009/2010.
E. The applicant has been certified by the volunteer fire department or
ambulance company as an enrolled member of such volunteer fire
department or ambulance company for at least five years. The applicant
must timely submit annual proof of such certification, together with the
application for an exemption, to the Village Assessor.
§ 370-46 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 370-49
1:518
Chapter 373
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 200. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 400.
§ 370-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-49
1:519

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 373-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the
following words shall have the meanings given to them by this section:
CRUISING — The operation of a taxicab upon public streets, when not
employed by a passenger, and by words or actions seeking employment.
DRIVER'S LICENSE — Permission granted to any person in accordance with
this chapter to drive upon the streets of such Village any permitted taxicab.
LIVERY CAB — Any taxicab carrying persons at special instance and
request, per unit of time, by the hour, day or week or fraction thereof.
OPERATOR — Any person owning or having control of the use of one or
more taxicabs used for hire upon the streets of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
PERSON — One or more persons of either sex, natural persons,
corporations, partnerships, associations, joint-stock companies, societies
and all other entities of any kind capable of being sued.
POLICE COMMISSIONER — The Chairman of the Public Safety Committee
of the Board of Trustees.
STREET — Any street, alley, avenue, court, bridge, lane or public place in
the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying persons
for hire, whether the same be operated from a street stand or subject
to calls from a garage, or otherwise operated for hire, except vehicles
subject to the provisions of the Transportation Corporations Law, or used by
undertakers in carrying on their undertaking business. All taxicab vehicles
authorized by the Village of Sleepy Hollow to operate as taxicabs must have
New York State Department of Motor Vehicles taxi plates or be licensed as
a "muni-car" by the Westchester County Taxi and Limousine Commission.
TAXICAB DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab, whether such person
is the owner of such taxicab or employed by a taxicab owner or operator.
TAXICAB LICENSE — Permission granted by the Village of Sleepy Hollow
to any person to operate or keep for hire any taxicab in such Village.
TAXICAB STAND — Any place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere
which is exclusively reserved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for the
use of taxicabs.
WESTCHESTER COUNTY TAXI AND LIMOUSINE COMMISSION (WCTLC)
— The agency providing a for-hire vehicle driver permit to operate a taxicab
within the jurisdiction boundaries of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 373-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-2
1:521
§ 373-2. General requirements.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or keep for hire or pay
within the limits of the Village of Sleepy Hollow any taxicab without first
having obtained and paid for a license to drive, a permit for operating or
keeping for pay or hire, or both, and having the same in force and effect,
under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 373-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 373-2
1:522
ARTICLE II
Driver's Licenses
§ 373-3. Driver's license required.
No person shall drive a taxicab and no person shall permit anyone to drive a
taxicab within the limits of the Village of Sleepy Hollow without such driver
having first obtained and paid for and having in force and effect a driver's
license under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 373-4. Examination of drivers.
The Westchester County Taxi and Limousine Commission shall examine and
license all drivers.
§ 373-5. Application for license.
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license must apply through and be
licensed by the Westchester County Taxi and Limousine Commission with a
for-hire vehicle driver permit.
§ 373-6. Effect of issuance of license.
Upon application and/or licensing by the Westchester County Taxi and
Limousine Commission, the driver shall be deemed licensed to operate as
a taxicab driver within the Village of Sleepy Hollow. Any taxicab driver's
license issued by the Village prior to the adoption of this chapter shall
remain valid as a taxicab driver's license within the geographic boundaries
of the Village until such license has expired.
§ 373-7. Form and terms of license.
Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the foregoing requirements, there shall be
issued to the applicant a license which shall be in such form as issued by
the Westchester County Taxi and Limousine Commission. Driver's licenses
shall be issued on a basis determined by the WCTLC.
§ 373-8. Driver's badge.
Each licensed driver shall use as a badge the license issued by the WCTLC,
which must, under penalty of revocation of the license, be conspicuously
displayed upon demand when he is engaged in this employment.
§ 373-9. Renewal of license.
Taxicab driver's licenses may be renewed according to the procedures
established by the Westchester County Taxi and Limousine Commission. No
taxicab driver's license issued by the Village of Sleepy Hollow that expires
after the adoption of this chapter may be renewed by the Village. Applicants
must apply for and be licensed through the WCTLC.
§ 373-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-10
1:523
§ 373-10. Fees.
The fees for a driver's license or renewal or for the reissuance of a lost or
destroyed license shall be established and determined by the Westchester
County Taxi and Limousine Commission.
§ 373-11. Suspension or revocation of license.
A driver's license or permit may at any time be suspended or revoked as
governed by the rules and regulations of the Westchester County Taxi and
Limousine Commission or as otherwise determined by the WCTLC.
§ 373-10 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 373-11
1:524
ARTICLE III
Taxicab Permits
§ 373-12. Permit required; application.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated a
taxicab upon the streets of the Village of Sleepy Hollow without first having
obtained from the Village Clerk a taxicab permit under the provisions of
this chapter. Such permit shall be issued as of May 1 and shall expire April
30, next succeeding, unless sooner suspended or revoked. Application for a
taxicab permit shall be made by the owner upon blank forms furnished by
the Village Clerk. Such application shall contain:
§ 373-13. Inspection required.
No vehicle shall be permitted until it has been inspected (New York State
inspection certificate) and examined and found to be in a thoroughly safe
condition for the transportation of passengers; clean, fit, of good
appearance and well painted and varnished. The Chief of Police, or someone
designated by him, shall make such examination and inspection before a
permit is issued. The Village Clerk shall refuse a permit to or, if already
issued, revoke or suspend a permit of any vehicle found by the Chief of
Police or someone designated by him to be unfit or unsuited for public
patronage.
§ 373-14. Fees.
Vehicle permit fees shall be as set forth in the fee schedule included at the
end of Chapter 200, Fees.
§ 373-15. Issuance of permit.
If, upon inspection, a taxicab is found to be of lawful construction and in
proper condition, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and
upon the approval of the application and the payment of the permit fee
A. The name, age and residence of the person applying for the permit, and
what if any, previous experience he has had in such business; if the
applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers of
said corporation, together with the names and addresses of the person
or persons who will actually manage the business.
B. The type of motor vehicle to be used, the factory number, the state
license number, the vehicle year and the seating capacity according to
its certificate of title.
C. Whether previously licensed to operate a taxicab, and if so, where.
D. Whether a license to operate a taxicab has ever been revoked and, if so,
for what cause.
E. Such other information as the Village Clerk may deem necessary.
§ 373-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-15
1:525
hereinbefore set forth, the same shall be permitted by delivering to the
owner a card of such size and form as may be prescribed by the Village
Clerk. The card shall contain the official permit number of the taxicab and
vehicle identification number, together with the date of inspection of the
same and a statement to the effect that in case of any complaints, the
Village Clerk shall be notified, giving the permit number of the taxicab.
Such card shall be signed by the Village Clerk and shall contain blank
spaces upon which an entry shall be made of the date of every inspection
of the vehicle by the Chief of Police or his representative and blank spaces
upon which a record may be made of any convictions, arrests, serious
complaints or reprimands. The permit card shall be of a distinctly different
color each year, and the permit number assigned hereunder shall, in each
case, be the same as that assigned to the vehicle for that year by the
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles pursuant to law. Any permittee who
defaces, obliterates or changes any official entry made upon his permit card
shall have his permit revoked. If a taxicab shall be disabled, disqualified for
service or sold, the permittee thereof shall promptly notify the Village Clerk
in writing of such fact. The Village Clerk may, at his or her discretion, allow
the permit of any taxicab which has been sold to be transferred and used by
the purchaser, provided that such taxicab and the purchaser thereof meet
the requirements of this chapter. There shall be a fee as forth in the fee
schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees, for the transfer of each
permit. Should the state license number of a taxicab be changed during the
life of the taxicab permit, such change and number shall be immediately
reported by the permittee to the Village Clerk.
§ 373-16. Determination of number of permits.
A. The Public Safety Committee may at any time and shall before the first
day of November in each year report to the Board of Trustees the
number of taxicabs which in its opinion should be granted permits for
the next ensuing year. Recommendations made in such report shall be
based on the population of the Village, the number of persons taking
trains and arriving by trains at the Tarrytown and Philipse Manor
stations and the conditions of taxicab service. The Board of Trustees
shall consider such report and recommendations and may determine by
resolution the number of taxicabs needed to provide safe and adequate
service with a reasonable rate of return to taxicab owners on their
investment and reasonable compensation to taxicab drivers. After
adoption of such resolution, a notice containing a copy of the resolution
shall be mailed by the Village Clerk, not later than the first day of
December, to each owner of a then-permitted taxicab.
B. After adoption of such resolution, the permitting officials shall be
guided thereby in the issuance of any permits. If such determination
shows the need of additional permits, such permits shall be allocated as
fairly as may be possible to then-existing permittees, if such permittees
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the permitting officials that they are
qualified to assume the duties and obligations imposed by this chapter.
If such determination shows the need of reducing the number of
§ 373-15 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 373-16
1:526
permits, no then-existing permittee shall be refused a permit so long as
he can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the permitting officials that he
is qualified to continue to fulfill the duties and obligations imposed by
this chapter. In the granting of permits, consideration shall be given to
the period of years during which the then-existing permittees shall have
continuously rendered safe and adequate taxicab service in the Village.
§ 373-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-16
1:527

ARTICLE IV
Fares and Charges
§ 373-17. Fares.
The Village of Sleepy Hollow is hereby divided into zones as shown on a
map entitled "Taxicab Zones, Village of Sleepy Hollow," which map is hereby
declared to be a part of this chapter. The fares to be charged by the owners
or drivers of taxicabs for the transportation of passengers within the Village
shall not exceed the amounts shown on the fee schedule included at the end
of Chapter 200, Fees. Every owner shall procure and furnish for each driver,
and each driver shall keep conspicuously displayed within the taxicab he is
operating, at a place where it will be before a passenger's eyes and easily
read, a copy of said map and the schedule of rates.
§ 373-18. Payment of fares.
A. All rates are based on starting from Sleepy Hollow and Tarrytown
zoning lines.
B. Zones.
(1) Zone I: all those remaining areas or places situated in the Village of
Sleepy Hollow not specified in Zone II.
(2) Zone II: all of Philipse Manor, Sleepy Hollow Manor, Phelps
Memorial Hospital, Webber Avenue and Sleepy Hollow Cemetery.
C. Charges may be imposed for:
(1) A continuous ride in Zone I, and for each additional separate fare
within Zone I. A charge may be made for groups of two or more
who are all discharged at one stop within Zone I.
(2) A continuous ride into Zone II, and for each additional separate
fare within Zone II. A charge may be made for groups of two or
more who are all discharged at one stop within Zone II.
D. A per-fare discount will be given to all senior citizens.
E. In the event that gas prices rise to the levels indicated in the fee
schedule, a surcharge shall be added to each fare.
(1) The Chief of Police shall set the surcharge rate on the first Monday
of each month, and said surcharge shall stay in effect until a new
surcharge rate is set. The Chief of Police or his designee shall notify
all permittees of the surcharge rate in writing.
(2) Gas prices will be indexed in the manner and by a standard as
determined from time to time by the Mayor and Board of Trustees
in consultation with the Chief of Police.
§ 373-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-18
1:529
A. Prepayment. Every driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand
payment of the legal fare in advance and may refuse employment unless
so prepaid, but no driver of a taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect
to convey any orderly person or persons upon request anywhere in the
Village unless previously engaged or unable to do so. No driver of a
permitted taxicab shall carry any person other than the passenger first
employing a taxicab without the consent of such passenger.
B. Disputed fares. All disputes as to fares shall be determined by the
officer in charge of police headquarters. Failure to comply with such
determination shall subject the party offending to the issuance of a
Village summons, with a set fine of $50. Whenever a passenger asks for
a receipt, it shall be given to him by the driver. Such receipt shall show
the name of the driver, the name of the owner of the taxicab, the
number of the taxicab, the time when the trip began and ended and the
amount of fare collected.
C. Overcharge. No persons shall charge or attempt to charge any
passenger a greater rate of fare than that to which the taxicab is
entitled under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 373-18 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 373-18
1:530
ARTICLE V
Taxicab Stands
§ 373-19. Location and designation.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to locate and designate taxicab
stands. He shall further designate the number of such taxicabs that shall be
allowed to stand at any of the places designated by him and shall provide a
metal sign, which shall be attached to a post or stanchion adjacent to such
stand, and on which sign shall be placed the number of vehicles allowed
on the particular stand. Owners of any property may apply to the Chief of
Police for the establishment of a taxicab stand adjacent to their premises,
stating in such application the number of taxicabs they desire to occupy
such stand. Such application shall be granted solely in the discretion of
the Chief of Police and may be revoked by him at any time. There shall be
delivered to the owner of the property making such application a metal sign
to be affixed to the stanchion on the curb or other conspicuous place setting
forth the number of taxicabs that will be allowed on such stand.
§ 373-20. Regulation of taxicabs at stands.
Only taxicabs in such numbers as are set forth on the metal sign may remain
at the stand while waiting for employment, and only in single file, pointed in
accordance with the traffic regulations. No taxicab standing at the head of
any such line shall refuse to carry any orderly person applying for a taxicab
who agrees to pay the proper rate of fare; but this shall not prevent any
person from selecting any taxicab he may desire on the stand whether it be
at the head of a line or not. As the taxicabs leave the line with passengers,
those behind shall move up, and any taxicab seeking a space on the stand
shall approach the same only from the rear of the stand and shall stop as
near as possible to the last taxicab on the stand. No taxicab shall stand
within 10 feet of any crosswalk, nor shall any taxicab remain unattended at
any taxi stand.
§ 373-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-20
1:531

ARTICLE VI
Use and Operation
§ 373-21. Cruising and soliciting.
No cruising shall be permitted. No taxicab, while awaiting employment by
passengers, shall stand on any public street or place other than at or upon
a taxicab stand designated or established in accordance with this chapter.
No person shall be allowed to ride on the front seat with the driver except
a paying fare, and any driver who shall permit this may be deprived of his
license. It shall be the duty of all public officers to notify the Village Clerk
of any violation of this provision.
§ 373-22. Use and disposition of badges, cards, licenses and
permits.
Every person to whom a badge, card, license or permit has been issued
under the provisions of this chapter shall, upon discontinuing or abandoning
the operation or driving of a taxicab, return such badge, card, license or
permit to the Village Clerk unless such badge, card, license or permit shall
not be assigned or transferred to any other person or be applicable to
any motor vehicle other than the one specified therein. Any licensee who
permits his license, permit, badge or card to be used by any other person
and any person who uses such license, badge or card granted or given to
any person shall each be guilty of a violation of this chapter. Whenever a
license, permit, badge or card shall be lost, stolen or destroyed without fault
on the part of the holder, his agent or employee, a duplicate in lieu thereof
under the original application may be issued by the Village Clerk upon the
filing of a sworn affidavit containing the facts of such loss or theft and upon
the payment of the cost of such duplicate badge or tag.
§ 373-23. Identification of vehicle.
Every taxicab, except a private livery cab, shall have, at a minimum, the
name of the taxicab owner or the company name permanently painted or
labeled in letters at least two inches in height with at least one-quarter-inch
stroke and in proper and distinct colors on both sides of such taxicab, and
no other words or numbers shall appear on the sides of such taxicab which
may lead to confusion in quickly identifying such taxicab.
§ 373-24. Use for unlawful purposes.
It shall be unlawful for any licensed driver of any taxicab to misrepresent
the name of employer or knowingly to receive or transport any person or
persons who intend to commit any unlawful act in such vehicle, during the
voyage or at the termination thereof, whether within such vehicle or not. It
shall also be unlawful for any such driver to solicit or procure or to aid or
assist in soliciting or procuring any person to ride in a permitted taxicab
with the intent to commit any unlawful act therein or at any time during the
voyage or the termination thereof, whether within the vehicle or not.
§ 373-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-25
1:533
§ 373-25. General regulations.
A. Every holder of a taxicab license shall at all times keep the inside of the
cab operated by him in a clean and sanitary condition and shall at least
once each day thoroughly clean the inside of such taxicab.
B. No taxicab shall be used to convey any person affected with a
contagious disease. Should it be found by the owner or driver that a
taxicab has been so used, he shall immediately so report to the Village
authorities and such vehicle shall not again be used until it has been
thoroughly cleaned and fumigated under the direction of a local
hospital or health authorities.
C. Every owner of a taxicab shall provide windows in the tonneau of each
cab sufficient in number and of such size and dimensions that at all
times persons may be readily seen through such window with sufficient
distinctness to identify such person.
D. Every owner of a taxicab shall furnish for each such vehicle and every
driver shall, when driving conditions make the same advisable, use
chains on both rear wheels when there is snow or ice on the pavement.
E. No owner or driver of a taxicab shall at any time so fasten or lock the
doors on a taxicab that it is impossible for a passenger to open the same
from the inside. Every owner shall provide means for unfastening doors
on taxicabs so that such doors may be readily opened on the inside by a
passenger.
F. Changes of address of the owner or driver shall be reported to the
Village Clerk in writing within three days.
G. All such vehicles licensed for hire shall be considered commercial
vehicles and as such shall be subject to Village regulations governing
the overnight parking of commercial vehicles. All vehicles registered as
a taxicab, livery cab, muni-cab, omnibus, or otherwise as a vehicle for
hire shall be considered commercial vehicles and as such shall be
subject to Village regulations governing overnight parking of
commercial vehicles.47
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 373-25 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 373-25
1:534
ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 373-26. Penalties for offenses.
A. Owners. Any owner and/or driver of a taxicab not licensed, permitted or
equipped in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or of a
taxicab the permit for which has been suspended or revoked, who
engages in the business of a taxicab as defined herein, or attempts to
engage in such business or solicits passengers for hire, shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment for not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
B. Drivers. Any person, not having been duly licensed as a taxicab driver,
or any person whose license as such driver has been revoked, or any
person whose license has been suspended and who, during the term of
suspension, drives for hire a taxicab upon the streets, shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $250 or
imprisonment for not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
C. Upon conviction of any person for any violation of a provision of this
chapter for which no punishment is specifically provided, the
punishment upon conviction for such violation shall be a fine of not
more than $250 or imprisonment for not exceeding 30 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment.
D. Suspension and revocation of license or permit. In addition to the fine,
imprisonment, or both, authorized by this chapter, any licensee or
permittee shall be subject to the suspension or revocation of his license
or permit upon conviction for any violation of this chapter. The Chief of
Police may, in his discretion, suspend, or revoke a license or permit
granted under any provision of this chapter, pending or in advance of
the criminal prosecution of the licensee or permittee.
§ 373-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 373-26
1:535
Chapter 377
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 362. Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 377-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless
the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and
words used in the singular number include the plural number.
AFFILIATED PERSON — Each person who falls into one or more of the
following categories: each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling
interest in the applicant; each person in which the applicant has, directly or
indirectly, a controlling interest; each officer, director, joint venturer or joint
venture partner of the applicant; and each person, directly or indirectly,
controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the applicant;
provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the Village or any
creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and
which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling
interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common
management or common control with the applicant.
CABLE SERVICES — "Cable services" as defined in the Communications Act
of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the
Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time
to time (the "Cable Act"). In the event that "cable services" is no longer
defined in the Cable Act or the definition of "Cable Act" otherwise becomes
inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the
Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the
Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable.
CONTROL or CONTROLLING INTEREST — Actual working control in
whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control
through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control,
as the case may be, of the applicant or the equipment in the streets. A
rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest
shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any
person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more than 10% of any
person (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as
"controlling person"). "Control" or "controlling interest" as used herein may
be held simultaneously by more than one person or group of persons.
§ 373-26 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 377-1
1:536
EQUIPMENT — The poles, wires, electrical conductors, conduits, subways,
manholes, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances that are used to provide
telecommunications services.
FRANCHISE — An initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the
Village in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which authorizes
the occupation and use of the streets to provide telecommunications
services.
MAY — "May" is permissive.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the Village or his/her designee.
ORDINANCE — This chapter and all modifications and amendments
thereto.
PERSON — Any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint
venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or
not for profit, but shall not mean the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
REVOCABLE LICENSE — An initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued
by the Village in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which
authorizes the limited occupation and use of specifically identified streets,
provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited
circumstances set forth in § 377-2B, G and H of this chapter.
SHALL — "Shall" is mandatory and not merely directive.
STREETS — The surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and
all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges,
tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rightsof-
way within or belonging to the Village.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — All transmissions, between or among points
specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing without change
in the form or content of the information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER — Any person who:
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — The offering of
telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of
users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the
Owns, constructs, operates or maintains equipment in the streets used
to provide telecommunications services regardless of whether such
telecommunications services originate or terminate in the Village; or
A.
Provides telecommunications services that originate or terminate in the
Village by means of: specifically identifiable equipment in the streets,
which equipment is owned by such person or made available to such
person under a lease or any other arrangement for a period longer than
120 days; or equipment in the streets if the use of such equipment is
continuing and substantial, and the Village has determined that it is
necessary and appropriate to impose the requirements of this chapter
in order to preserve the application of this chapter on a competitively
neutral and nondiscriminatory basis consistent with applicable law.
B.
§ 377-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-1
1:537
facilities used. The term "telecommunications services" shall not include
cable services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — The plant, equipment, real property
(including interests in real property), tangible and intangible personal
property, buildings, offices, furniture, customer lists, cable, wires, optical
fibers, amplifier, antenna, and all other electronic devices, equipment and
facilities used to provide telecommunications services.
VILLAGE — The Village of Sleepy Hollow, New York.
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The Board of Trustees of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow or any successor thereto.
§ 377-2. Granting authority.
A. No person shall use or occupy the streets as a telecommunications
provider, or construct, operate or maintain equipment in the streets
used to provide telecommunications, without a franchise or revocable
license granted by the Village. A franchise or revocable license granted
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be construed
to grant any rights or authorization to provide cable services in the
Village, and any person seeking to provide cable services in the Village
shall first obtain a separate franchise in accordance with applicable law.
B. Any person seeking to use the streets to construct, operate or maintain
equipment to provide telecommunications for or in connection with the
internal operations of such person's business, residence or
employment, and not for or in connection with the provision or offering
of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person in the
Village, shall first obtain a revocable license in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
C. The Board of Trustees may grant one or more franchises and revocable
licenses in accordance with this chapter, provided that the Board of
Trustees reserves the right to modify any provision of this chapter by
amendment hereof.
D. The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by
adoption of a separate law by the Board of Trustees and shall be on
such terms and conditions as shall be specified in said separate law
and/or a franchise or license agreement between the Village and the
franchisee or licensee.
E. Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The
Village specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such
additional franchises, revocable licenses or other authorizations for use
of the streets by any means, as the Village deems appropriate.
F. A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the Village.
§ 377-1 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 377-2
1:538
§ 377-3. Compliance with rules; permits required.
§ 377-4. Submission of application.
G. A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use
and occupy specifically identified streets to provide
telecommunications services and shall be granted only if:
(1) The use or occupation of such streets, together with all revocable
licenses previously granted to such person and affiliated persons,
shall not exceed 2,500 linear feet; or
(2) The use or occupation of such streets does not involve the offering
or provision of telecommunications services to any person within
the Village.
H. In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a
telecommunications provider to exceed or fail to comply with the limits
specified in Subsection G(1) or (2) above, then such
telecommunications provider must apply for a franchise in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, and the use of specifically identified
streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall
thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise
that may be granted.
A. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the Village may adopt rules,
policies and requirements to carry out the purposes and provisions of
this chapter. Each applicant, franchisee and licensee shall comply with
such rules, policies and requirements.
B. No person shall construct or install any equipment in the streets used to
provide telecommunications services without first obtaining such
permits or other authorizations as may be required by the Village. No
permits or other authorizations for such construction or installation
shall be issued prior to the granting of a franchise or a revocable license
pursuant to this chapter or such other authorization as may be required
by applicable law.
A. Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted to
the Department of Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings and
Building Compliance with a copy also to be submitted to the Village
Counsel. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. An application shall contain the following information with respect to
the proposed franchise or revocable license and such other information
with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license as the
Village may deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with applicable
law:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
person the Village may contact concerning the application.
§ 377-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-4
1:539
§ 377-5. Responsibilities of applicants.
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable
license to comply with all applicable laws, resolutions, rules, regulations
and other directives of the Village and any federal, state or local
governmental authority having jurisdiction.
§ 377-6. Negotiation of agreement.
If an application is complete and otherwise complies with applicable law,
resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the Village, including
the provisions of this chapter, the Village shall enter into negotiations with
the applicant to determine whether such applicant and the Village are able
to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable
license in accordance with §§ 377-9 and 377-10 of this chapter. The Village
may reject any application which is incomplete or otherwise fails to comply
with applicable law, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of
the Village and any federal, state or local authority having jurisdiction.
§ 377-7. Factors for review of application.
(2) A description of the telecommunications services proposed to be
provided, including, without limitation, a description of facilities
and equipment.
(3) A description of the proposed franchise area or, in the case of a
revocable license, the specifically identified streets and/or portions
thereof proposed to be used.
(4) A proposed construction schedule and sequence.
(5) A map showing the proposed location of the applicant's
telecommunications system.
(6) Proposed financing plans for the construction and operation of the
telecommunications system by which the proposed
telecommunications services would be provided.
(7) A description of the legal, financial, technical and other
appropriate qualifications of the applicant to hold the franchise or
revocable license.
(8) Ownership of the applicant and identification of all affiliated
persons.
A. In making any determination hereunder regarding any application for a
franchise or revocable license, the Village Board may consider such
factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, provided such
factors are consistent with applicable law, including, without limitation:
(1) The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the
Village, including the value of any facilities and
§ 377-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 377-7
1:540
§ 377-8. Procedure for consideration of and action on applications.
telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the
Village;
(2) The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications
of the applicant;
(3) The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the Village
in good condition throughout the term of the franchise or revocable
license;
(4) Any services or uses of the streets that may be precluded by the
grant of the franchise or revocable license; and the adverse impact
of the proposed franchise or revocable license on the efficient use
of the streets or utilities at present and in the future;
(5) The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction
and physical requirements and to abide by all lawful conditions,
limitations, requirements and policies with respect to the franchise
or the revocable license;
(6) The adequacy of the terms and conditions of the proposed franchise
or revocable license agreement to protect the public interest,
consistent with applicable law; and
(7) Any other public interest factors or considerations that the Village
has a lawful right to consider and that are deemed pertinent by the
Village for safeguarding the interests of the Village and the public.
B. Consistent with applicable law, the Village may develop and implement
policies and requirements to ensure that the streets have sufficient
capacity to reasonably accommodate existing and future uses in a
rational and efficient manner. In evaluating an applicant for a franchise
or revocable license, the Village may consider an applicant's proposals
for addressing capacity needs and compliance with Village policies and
requirements.
A. The Village Board may make such investigations and take or authorize
the taking of such other steps as the Village Board deems necessary or
appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and
revocable licenses and to determine whether a franchise or revocable
license should be granted to an applicant and may require the applicant
to furnish additional data for this purpose. In considering applications,
the Village Board may seek advice from Village officials, departments,
agencies, commissions or boards, from such other advisory bodies as it
may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may
request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the
Village Board, which may include recommendations with respect to
such applications.
§ 377-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-8
1:541
§ 377-9. Terms and conditions of franchise.
B. Consistent with applicable law, upon completion of the steps deemed
appropriate by the Village Board, the Village Board may grant or deny a
special franchise or revocable license and may specify the conditions
under which the franchise or revocable license is granted.
A. The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant
to this chapter shall be set forth in a separate law granting the
franchise and/or in a separate written agreement. A franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter shall not become effective until said separate
law becomes effective and any separate agreement is executed by both
parties.
B. Such separate law or written agreement shall address, among other
things, the following subjects:
(1) The term of the franchise;
(2) The franchise area and the telecommunications services to be
offered;
(3) The compensation to be paid to the Village, which shall include the
payment of fees and/or the provision of facilities or services;
(4) The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or
cancelled;
(5) The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or
letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the
franchisee's obligations under the franchise;
(6) The Village's right to inspect the facilities and records of the
franchisee;
(7) Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the
franchisee;
(8) The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate
books of account and records, and the Village's inspection rights
with respect thereto;
(9) Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction
methods;
(10) Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all
applicable Village, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and
policies;
(11) The obligation of the franchisee to supply an engineering site plan
showing the proposed location of the applicant's
telecommunications system, including any manholes or overhead
poles, the size, type and proposed depth of any conduit or other
§ 377-8 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 377-9
1:542
§ 377-10. Terms and conditions of revocable license.
enclosure, and the relationship of the system to all existing poles,
utilities, sidewalks, pavement, telecommunications systems, and
other improvements in the streets, all of which shall be subject to
approval by the appropriate Village departments;
(12) Provisions to restrict the assignment or transfer of the franchise
without the prior written consent of the Village;
(13) Remedies available to the Village to protect the Village's interest in
the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with the terms and
conditions of the franchise;
(14) Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary
licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations,
rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction
over the franchisee, including the Federal Communications
Commission;
(15) Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of
the Village and the delivery of public services from damage or
interruption of operations resulting from the construction,
operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements
relating to the franchise;
(16) Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use
of the streets of the Village are disrupted in connection with the
construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and
(17) Such other provisions as the Village determines are necessary or
appropriate in furtherance of the public interest, consistent with
applicable law.
A. The terms and conditions applicable to any revocable license granted
pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in a separate law granting the
revocable license and/or in a separate written agreement. A revocable
license granted pursuant to this chapter shall not become effective until
the separate law granting the license becomes effective and any
separate written agreement is executed by both parties.
B. Such separate law and/or written agreement shall address the same
subjects as listed in § 377-9 of this chapter, subject to the following
limitations:
(1) The revocable license shall be for a term not to exceed 10 years
from the date that the law granting the revocable license becomes
effective;
(2) The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the Village
for cause or for the Village's purposes; and
§ 377-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-10
1:543
Chapter 385
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavation, filling and topsoil removal — See
Ch. 190.
Dumpsters — See Ch. 175.
Fees — See Ch. 200.
Landscapers — See Ch. 225.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 425.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 385-1. Declaration of policy; scope.
The planting and maintenance of trees have a direct relationship on the
health, safety, beauty and welfare of the community, inasmuch as trees
provide shade, reduce the need for air conditioning, absorb air pollution
and provide oxygen to the air, stabilize soil and reduce erosion and flooding,
offer a natural barrier to noise and enhance the beauty and appearance
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow. Conversely, indiscriminate and excessive
cutting of trees and damage to trees in order for the creation of subdivisions
and on private property cause barren and unsightly conditions, increase
surface drainage problems thereby increasing municipal expense to control
drainage, impair the stability and value of improved and unimproved real
property and cause deterioration of the community, all of which adversely
affect the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Village
of Sleepy Hollow. Therefore, it is the intent of this chapter that all the trees,
as hereinafter defined, on private as well as public property within the
Village of Sleepy Hollow shall come under the jurisdiction of this chapter.
(3) The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses
previously granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not
authorize the occupation and use of more than 2,500 linear feet of
specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the
streets does not involve the offering or provision of
telecommunications services to any person in the Village.
C. In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a
telecommunications provider to exceed or fail to comply with the limits
specified in Subsection B(3) of this section, then such
telecommunications provider must apply for a franchise in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, and the use of specifically identified
streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall
thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise
that may be granted.
§ 377-10 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 385-2
1:544
§ 385-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated. References herein to "Village officials" shall mean the person
from time to time holding the title indicated or such other title as may
hereafter be designated by the Village to have equivalent responsibilities.
CROWN — Shall include its upper trunk stem, leaders and branches. In
general, the leaf or foliage extent (dripline) shall define the size and
dimensions of the root system of the tree.
DEAD TREE — Any deciduous tree which fails to leaf out during the growing
and flowering season or any coniferous tree which sheds all its needles and
fails to green in the growing season may be considered as "dead." Such
dead trees may constitute a hazard to people and property if allowed to
decay and fall.
DESTROY — With respect to any tree, any action that either immediately or
within the course of a relatively short time (within five years of the initiation
of such action) will cause the death of the tree. Such action shall include but
not be limited to causing or permitting oil, gasoline, herbicide, paint, brine,
hot water, steam or other gaseous or liquid or solid substances which are
deleterious to trees to contact any tree or to enter the soil about the base
or root system of, or altering the grade around, any tree in any manner that
may injure or kill the tree.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
public agency, public utility organization of any kind or any agent of any
thereof, excluding the General Foreman and crew of the Sleepy Hollow
Public Works Department or Department of Architecture, Land Use
Development, Buildings and Building Compliance and the Village Architect.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Includes all parcels of real property not owned by
any unit of government situated in the Village of Sleepy Hollow, whether
occupied or vacant, regardless of size, topography or location.[Added
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Every street, highway, public right-of-way to the full
width thereof, between property lines of property owned by persons other
than the Village, every public park owned by persons other than the Village,
every public park owned by the Village and all other property owned by
the Village. This shall include underdeveloped streets and public areas from
which no tax revenue is derived by the Village.
SPECIMEN AND/OR HISTORIC TREES — Any tree which by virtue of its
legend, history or municipal importance has been recognized, designated
and named a tree of significant Village importance by resolution of the
Village Board. Without limiting the generality hereof, the World War I
memorial oaks in front of Morse School along Beekman Avenue are typical
of such a designation.
TREE OFFICER — A person appointed by the Mayor, whose function is to
assess tree conditions and who has the authority to issue permits for tree
removal.[Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 385-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-3
1:545
§ 385-3. Tree Commission and Tree Officer. [Amended 1-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 385-4. Annual report of Tree Commission.
Annually, on or before March 1, the Tree Commission shall submit to the
Board of Trustees a report making its recommendations as to planting,
pruning, spraying, fertilizing and removal of trees on public property.
§ 385-5. Village Tree Fund.
There is hereby established a Village Tree Fund. The Tree Commission
may request appropriations for the Village Tree Fund by application to the
Village Budget Officer for inclusion in the Village's proposed budget. Upon
a finding by the Tree Commission that compliance by a person seeking a
tree permit with the requirements of this chapter as to planting of trees
A. Tree Commission.
(1) The primary responsibility of the Tree Commission is to ensure the
positive husbandry of trees located on public property within the
Village of Sleepy Hollow. The Commission's functions include, but
are not limited to:
(a) Overseeing the taking of an inventory of trees currently
located on public property.
(b) Developing a comprehensive plan for pruning and maintaining
trees located on public property.
(c) Developing a comprehensive plan for replacing and/or adding
trees to public property.
(2) The Tree Commission shall be composed of the following:
(a) The Department of Public Works General Foreman.
(b) The Building Inspector.
(c) Two residents of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
(d) Two members of the Environmental Advisory Committee.
(e) The Tree Officer.
B. Tree Officer. The Tree Officer shall be a person knowledgeable about
trees and training in the proper care and maintenance of trees.
Preference for appointment as a Tree Officer shall be given to certified
arborists.
C. Appointment to the Tree Commission. Resident members and members
of the Environmental Advisory Committee shall each be appointed for a
two-year term by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board of
Trustees.
§ 385-3 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 385-5
1:546
in replacement for those destroyed or for the purposes of screening is not
feasible, in whole or in part, on the property which is the subject of a
permit application, the Tree Commission may approve the payment by such
person of a sum or sums equivalent to the value of the trees destroyed or
the value of the trees required for such screening, as applicable, according
to generally accepted standards in landscaping/landscape architecture
profession (i.e., International Society of Arboriculture Guidelines), to be
paid to the Village Tree Fund. The Village Tree Fund shall be held for the
sole purpose of planting and maintaining of trees on public land in the
Village in accordance with this chapter. Disbursements of moneys in the
Village Tree Fund shall be as recommended by the Tree Commission and
approved by the Board of Trustees.
§ 385-6. Trees on public property.
§ 385-7. Trees on private property. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
A. No person shall destroy or injure any tree on public property or perform
any digging operation (by machine or otherwise) within the root system
of any such tree without the prior written approval of the Tree
Commission, which written approval may be made subject to such
conditions as the Tree Commission may deem appropriate to preserve
the health of any such tree or of any other trees standing in close
proximity thereto.
B. Any tree which is growing, in whole or in part, within the Village street
right-of-way or on Village property shall be under the care and
supervision of the Village. Such trees shall be cared for, pruned, fed and
maintained by the Village. For the purpose of this section, the street
rights-of-way shall be determined by reference to Table 1.48
A. A permit issued by the Tree Officer shall be required prior to the
removal of any tree located on private property, except for the
following:
(1) Any tree smaller than eight inches in diameter measured at the
tree's height of 4 1/2 feet.
(2) Any tree located within 10 feet of any front, side or back of a
privately owned building.
B. A permit shall be issued by the Tree Officer for any tree located on
private property upon the presentation by the property owner, or his
agent, of a report issued by a certified arborist that the tree is dead, or
in a condition so dangerous, diseased, or over-aged as to pose a threat
to the health, safety and welfare of the community.
48.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 385-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-7
1:547
§ 385-8. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall:
C. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the Tree
Officer may issue a permit for the removal of any tree located on private
property which does not meet the conditions described in Subsections A
and B hereof. In making a determination as to whether to issue a
permit, the Tree Officer, after consultation with a certified arborist if
necessary, shall take into consideration the following:
(1) The type of tree, and whether it is unique to the area.
(2) Whether the tree is a specimen tree.
(3) Neighborhood characteristics.
(4) The general welfare of the Village, especially the immediate
surrounding area, and the overall public interest.
(5) Location(s) considered for replacement tree(s).
D. Any application for removal of a tree pursuant to Subsection C herein
shall be on 10 days’ written notice to owners of all adjacent properties.
E. Any tree removed from private property which required the issuance of
a permit shall be replaced with two trees to be located either on the
same property or, if in the determination of the Tree Officer this is not
reasonable, in a location to be designated by the Tree Commission. The
property owner removing the tree may have the option of contributing
an amount equal to the cost of two trees to the Village Tree Fund.
F. In the event a tree is determined to pose an imminent and immediate
threat to the health, safety and welfare of the community, the Building
Inspector may order any tree removed immediately.
A. Without first securing a written permit from the Tree Commission,
cause any wire, insulator or any device for the holding of any wire or
cable to be attached to any tree in any street, park or public place or to
cause any wire or other conductor charged with electricity to come in
contact with any such tree, or place or maintain any pole or post in such
a manner as to interfere with any tree or shrub in any area of public
property;
B. Fasten or tie any animal to or attach any sign, bill, card, poster, notice,
advertisement or other attachment to any tree or shrub in any area or
on public property or allow any animal under such person's control to
injure such tree or shrub;
C. Place or maintain on the ground on any public property any stone, soil
or other substance in such a manner as to obstruct the free access of air
and/or water and nutrients to the root system of any tree, unless such
person first obtains a permit to do so from the Tree Commission; or
§ 385-7 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 385-8
1:548
§ 385-9. Maintenance on private property.
§ 385-10. Applications for permits.
D. Cause oil, gasoline, herbicide, paint, brine, hot water, steam or any
other substance deleterious to the tree's life to pass onto or into the soil
about the roots of any tree in any area of public property.
A. Trees standing on any private property adjacent to any public street or
other public property and having branches projecting into the public
street over a public sidewalk shall be kept pruned by the owner or
owners or occupants of the private property on which such trees are
growing so that their branches shall not be less than 15 vertical feet
above the sidewalk level. Newly planted trees may remain unpruned for
two years following planting, provided that they do not interfere with
persons using the sidewalk or obstruct the light of any streetlight or
traffic signal.
B. Hedges, bushes, shrubs, flowers or other growing plants shall be kept
pruned so as not to obscure traffic signs or the vision of motorists
approaching a road intersection. The owner or owners of property shall
keep all hedges, bushes, shrubs, flowers or other growing plants
trimmed so as not to impede pedestrian traffic on Village sidewalks.
C. Any tree or shrub which is growing on private property which is
impairing or in any way may impair the security or use of a public sewer
or other public place shall be considered a public nuisance and shall be
removed or otherwise dealt with by the owners or occupants of the
private property to eliminate the impairment to public safety use.
D. If any owner shall neglect or refuse to prune or remove any trees,
hedges, bushes, shrubs, flowers, or other growing plants after being
notified, in writing, by the Village that such pruning or removal is
required under Subsection A hereof, the Village shall have the right,
after 30 days' notice, to cause the pruning or removal to be done and to
assess the expense thereof against the land on which said trees,
hedges, bushes, flowers or other growing plants are located. The
Village shall have the right, after 30 days from the date of such written
notice, to cause the pruning or removal to be done and to assess the
expense thereof against the land on which said trees, hedges, bushes,
shrubs, flowers or other growing plants are located. This section shall
not preclude the imposition of a penalty as provided for in § 385-22. No
permit shall be necessary for actions taken pursuant to an order issued
§ 385-7 of this chapter. The owner of the land shall have the
responsibility for obtaining a permit under this section.
A. Content of application.
(1) Applications for permits shall be writing on a form prescribed by
the Tree Commission, available from the Village Clerk, and shall be
accompanied by plans showing: existing and proposed buildings, if
§ 385-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-10
1:549
§ 385-11. Tree Commission review of application.
any; trees to be destroyed, by type, sizes and locations; and in the
case where more than 10 trees are to be destroyed, existing and
proposed contours at two-foot intervals on maps or plans at a scale
no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet. The application shall set
forth the reasons for the destruction of the trees to be destroyed.
The Tree Commission may require additional information, such as
the design of walls, disposition and storm drainage and any other
information pertinent to the individual circumstances. In cases
where no construction is involved, the Tree Commission may, in its
discretion, waive any of the requirements of this section relating to
the contents of applications.
(2) The Planning Board must, as a condition of site plan approval,
require that landscaping, including the designation, planting and
initial care of trees for a site and the removal of trees from any site,
be considered on the written approval of the Tree Commission
before any certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Building
Inspector.
B. Property greater than 100 acres. In the case of any private property
having an area of more than 100 acres, the Tree Commission may issue
annual permits authorizing the owner thereof to undertake the usual
practice of such owner in thinning out overgrown areas and removal of
diseased, dead or over-aged trees. The application for such a permit
need only state that the permit is sought for the foregoing purposes. No
such permit shall be applicable to any area on which land clearing for
construction is in progress or is proposed. The Tree Commission shall
have the right to inspect operations pursuant to such permit and shall
revoke such permit if it finds such operations are inconsistent with this
chapter.
C. Fee. Each application for a permit under this section shall be
accompanied by a fee as set forth in the fee schedule included at the
end of Chapter 200, Fees. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. Within 30 days from the date an application for a permit is submitted
and received in its final form by the Tree Commission, the Tree
Commission shall approve or disapprove the application. The Tree
Commission shall approve or disapprove the application. The Tree
Commission shall convene a public meeting by due notice to its
members and shall advise the applicant of the date of such meeting.
Notice of such meeting shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village not less than seven days prior to the date of
such meeting.
B. Waiver. Upon receipt of an application for a permit for the removal of a
tree from private property, notwithstanding the provisions contained in
§ 385-20, the Tree Commission may, in its sole discretion, act as follows:
§ 385-10 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 385-11
1:550
§ 385-12. Permit decision.
§ 385-13. Notification.
Notice of each application for permit shall be sent by the Tree Commission
to each abutting owner of private property for which the permit and the
permit was sought, stating where the application for permit and the permit
may be examined. Such owners shall be given notice of the meeting referred
to in § 385-11 and shall have the right to be heard at such meeting, shall
have the right to be notified of the decision of the Tree Commission and
shall have the right of appeal as provided for by § 385-21 hereof.
(1) Upon review of a duly completed application for a permit for the
removal of not more than two trees, the Commission, with the
advice and consent of the Department of Architecture, Land Use
Development, Buildings and Building Compliance, may waive the
necessity of any notice, public or otherwise, and may approve or
deny an application for a permit.
(2) An informal meeting through telephonic communication, and a vote
similarly taken, is sufficient for the purposes of this section.
(3) The criteria for a permit pursuant to this section shall be the same
as § 385-12.
(4) Any applicant denied a permit pursuant to this procedure may,
within 20 days of its denial, request a public meeting and hearing
pursuant to this chapter.
A. The burden of proof shall be upon the person seeking a permit
(applicant) to demonstrate that each tree for which the permit is being
sought is on the property owned by the applicant.
B. The decision of the Tree Commission shall be based upon the following
criteria, as applicable:
(1) The condition of the tree to be destroyed with respect to disease,
age and hazard.
(2) The necessity of the destruction to accomplish the design or plans
of the applicant.
(3) The effect of the destruction on ecological systems.
(4) The effect of the destruction on the character of the site and
neighborhood.
(5) Good horticultural and vegetation management practice.
(6) The overall public interest.
§ 385-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-14
1:551
§ 385-14. Permit restrictions.
Any permit issued by the Tree Commission may be granted subject to
conditions consistent with the purposes of this chapter, including the
requirement of the planting of replacement trees of specified sizes, types
and at specified locations. No permit shall become effective until the day
after the end of the twenty-day appeal period set forth in § 385-21 of this
chapter, and, in the event an appeal is taken, such permit shall be stayed
until two business days after the determination of such appeal by the Board
of Trustees.49
§ 385-15. Obligations of permit holder.
The holder of a permit shall perform the work required in a permit in a
prompt and orderly way in accordance with accepted planting and tree
surgery practices, including backfilling all holes, replacement of trees
irrevocably damaged during construction by one or more trees and removal
by the Tree Commission. All trees within 30 feet of any excavation or
bulldozing for any structure shall be adequately guarded by a fence, frame
or otherwise during the construction, and all equipment, building material,
chemicals, dirt and other debris shall be kept at least four feet from each
tree. Any tree, including any replacement tree, which shall fail to survive
for a period of two years following completion of work on the premises
shall be replaced at no expense to the Village by the permit holder, or the
then-owner of the property if other than the permit holder, within 60 days
following written demand by the Tree Commission (or if the demand is made
between October 31 in any year and April 1 of the following year, within 60
days of such April 1).
§ 385-16. Performance and maintenance bonds; escrow accounts.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
In the event that the requirements imposed under § 385-14 or 385-15
shall involve any expenditure of over $10,000, as estimated by the Tree
Commission, the applicant for the permit shall furnish the Village with a
performance bond approved as to form by the Village Attorney in an amount
and sufficient to cover 90% of such estimated cost. The remaining 10% of
such estimated cost shall be in cash, which shall be deposited in a special
tree preservation escrow account to be established by the Village Treasurer.
Upon completion of all required planting and restoration to the satisfaction
of the Tree Commission, the performance bond shall be cancelled and
replaced by a maintenance bond approved as to form by the Village Attorney
in an amount and for a term to be fixed by the Tree Commission, but not
in excess of two years and not in an amount greater than the original
estimated cost. The ten-percent escrow cash deposit shall remain on deposit
with the Village Treasurer until the maintenance bond is cancelled.
49.Editor's Note: Original §§ 52A-7.6, Parking lots, and 52A-7.7, Inspector, of the 1965 Code,
which immediately followed this section, were repealed 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013.
§ 385-14 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 385-17
1:552
§ 385-17. Restoration work by Village; refusal or revocation of
permit.
§ 385-18. Certificate of occupancy and seasonal restrictions.
In any case where construction has been or is taking place on any parcel of
private property, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building
Inspector or other authority until the Tree Commission shall certify in
writing that no violation of this chapter exists and that all work required
by this chapter or any permit has been satisfactorily completed, except
that between October 31 in any year and April 1 of the succeeding year,
such certificate of occupancy may be issued upon the submission of an
agreement in writing by the person to whom the permit was issued,
requiring compliance on his or her part with all requirements hereof and
completion of required planting and restoration work to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Building Inspector or authority on or before May 1 of
the next year succeeding such October 31. Any performance bond and
escrow cash deposit for such property shall continue in effect until the
planting and restoration work thus deferred is satisfactorily completed.
Should the person to whom the permit was issued fail to satisfactorily
complete the planting and restoration work on or before such May 1, the
Tree Commission shall have the right to declare any performance bond
in default and to apply the proceeds thereof and the related escrow cash
deposit to the completion of the required work. Any deficiency, whether or
not a performance bond and escrow cash deposit has been furnished for
such property, shall become a lien upon the property.
A. In the event that the Tree Commission shall revoke any permit, the Tree
Commission shall have the right, if a performance bond has been
furnished pursuant to § 385-16, to declare the performance bond in
default and to apply the proceeds thereof and of the stated escrow cash
deposit to perform restoration work that is required. The acceptance of
a permit by an applicant shall constitute the applicant's agreement that
the Village may enter upon the property in question for planting and
restoration purposes. Should the cost of restoration exceed the amount
of the performance bond and stated escrow cash deposit, the balance
shall be a lien on the property or, if there shall not have been a
performance bond and escrow cash deposit for the property in
question, the costs of replanting and restoration shall be a lien on that
property.
B. The Tree Commission shall have the right to refuse to issue a permit for
the destruction of trees if it feels the best interests of the public are not
served by the proposed destruction. It may also revoke any permit if the
work is not proceeding according to the terms of the application or the
permit and in an orderly and diligent manner or if, in the judgment of
the Tree Commission, there was any misrepresentation in the
application for the permit.
§ 385-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-19
1:553
§ 385-19. Screening in areas exceeding five acres.
In addition to the plantings required by other provisions of this chapter,
the Tree Commission shall require, in the case of any permit application
relating to property exceeding five acres, the planting of trees of
appropriate type and caliper and in sufficient number effectively to screen
the property from all roads abutting said property, to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Tree Commission, unless the Tree Commission finds
that the existing trees are sufficient for the purposes. This section and its
requirements shall be subject to the requirements of § 385-16 with respect
to the posting of performance bonds and making escrow cash deposits.
§ 385-20. Emergency actions. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
In any case where destruction of any tree on private property is required
because of imminent and substantial risk or injury to persons or damage
to property, the owner of such property shall use his or her best efforts to
seek emergency on-site approval for such action by the Tree Officer or the
Building Inspector. If such officials are unavailable, the owner may proceed
and shall notify the Tree Officer of such action as soon thereafter as is
reasonably possible. Emergency on-site approval by the Tree Officer or the
Building Inspector may be granted without convening a meeting or giving
notice to owners of private property within 200 feet of the property for
which the approval is sought as otherwise required by § 385-13.
§ 385-21. Appeals. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 385-22. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tree Commission shall
have the right, within 20 days from the date of the decision of the Tree
Commission, to appeal to the Planning Board, which shall review the
decision.
B. Upon hearing an appeal, the Planning Board may uphold the decision,
revoke the permit, or amend the permit. Appeals may be made by
certified letter addressed to the Planning Board at Village Hall.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall commit
an offense, the fine for which shall not exceed $2,000 and/or
replacement of the tree(s). The destruction or injury of each tree shall
be deemed a separate offense notwithstanding any penalties which may
be imposed by the court. Further, any person violating any provision of
this chapter may also be subject to imprisonment not to exceed 15 days.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. In addition thereto, any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall be subject to a civil penalty enforceable and collectable by the
Village in the amount of $2,000 per day of violation per tree. Further,
§ 385-19 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 385-22
1:554
Chapter 400
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles, in-line skates and
skateboards — See Ch. 135.
Fees — See Ch. 200.
Noise — See Ch. 272.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 373.
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 405.
any person who violates this chapter may be required to replace each
tree destroyed.
§ 385-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-22
1:555

ARTICLE I
Words and Phrases Defined
[Adopted 8-18-1937 (Ch. 57, Art. I, of the 1965 Code)]
§ 400-1. Definitions.
Certain words in this article are defined for the purposes thereof as follows.
Words used in any tense include past, present and future; words used in
the singular include the plural and the plural the singular; and words used
in the masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter unless such
inclusion is clearly negated by the context.
HEAVY TRUCKS — Includes all vehicles having a registered capacity of
more than 10,000 pounds.
PERSON — Includes natural persons, firms, corporations and associations.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes streets, roads, avenues, sidewalks,
thoroughfares, highways, parks, parkways, alleys, squares, plazas and any
and all places not exclusively subject to private ownership, occupation or
control.
VEHICLE — Includes any device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway,
regardless of its means of propulsion, except a baby carriage and devices
used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
§ 400-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-1
1:557

ARTICLE II
One-Way Streets
[Adopted 8-18-1937 (Ch. 57, Art. II, of the 1965 Code)]
§ 400-2. One-way streets designated.
The following public streets are hereby made one-way streets, and no
person, firm or corporation shall cause, permit or allow his, her or its
automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle to proceed in any other
direction than that specified, whether said vehicle is backing or going
forward:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Andrews Lane [Added
8-24-1960]
North From Beekman Avenue to
Elm Street
Barnhart Avenue
[Added 9-9-1957]
South From southerly side of
Francis Street to northerly
side of Beekman Avenue
Bellwood Avenue
[Added 1-21-1952]
East From westerly extension of
the southerly line of
Pierson Avenue to
Broadway Avenue
Continental Street
[Added 11-20-1961]
West From Pleasant Street to
Kendall Avenue
Cortlandt Street [Added
1-21-1952; amended
10-15-1973;
6-18-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
North From Village line to
Beekman Avenue
Francis Street [Added
8-24-1960]
West From Andrews Lane to
Barnhart Avenue
Howard Street [Added
5-24-2016 by L.L. No.
5-2016]
East From Kendal Avenue to
Pocantico Street
Howard Street (east of
Pocantico Street)
[Added 8-24-1960]
East From Pocantico Street to
North Washington Street
Hudson Street [Added
9-9-1957]
South From Beekman Avenue to
Tarrytown-Sleepy Hollow
Village line
Kelbourne Avenue
(westerly end at
bifurcation) [Added
9-25-197850]
North and east At the birfurcation, the left
or southerly bifurcation
§ 400-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-2
1:559
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Kelbourne Avenue
(westerly end at
bifurcation) [Added
9-25-197851]
West and north At the bifurcation, the right
or northerly bifurcation
Kendall Avenue [Added
8-24-1960]
South From Elm Street to
Beekman Avenue
Kendall Avenue
Extension [Added
11-20-1961]
North From Elm Street to Kendall
Avenue (sometimes known
as "Howard Street")
Kendall Avenue
Extension [Added
11-20-1961]
South From Continental Street to
the south end of the
triangle on Kendall Avenue
North Washington
Street [Added
8-24-1960]
South From east end of Howard
Street to Beekman Avenue
Pierson Avenue [Added
1-21-1952]
West From Broadway Avenue to
Bellwood Avenue
Pine Street [Added
10-16-1961]
North From Bedford Road to New
Broadway
Teresa Street [Added
8-24-1960]
North From Beekman Avenue to
Elm Street
Valley Street [Added
1-21-1952]
South From westerly side of
Washington Street to
Village line
§ 400-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a
disorderly person and be punishable by a fine of not less than $2 nor more
than $10 for each and every offense.
§ 400-3.1. Temporary Mayoral authority. [Added 2-23-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
The provisions of this Article II are expressly subject to the provisions of
Article XXI of this chapter.
50.Editor's Note: This ordinance further provided that any person, firm or corporation
violating the provisions established for Kelbourne Avenue is subject to the penalties
provided for in § 1800(b) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
51.Editor's Note: This ordinance further provided that any person, firm or corporation
violating the provisions established for Kelbourne Avenue is subject to the penalties
provided for in § 1800(b) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
§ 400-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-3.1
1:560
ARTICLE III
Main Arteries; Stop and Yield Intersections; Right Turns
[Adopted 12-16-1957 (Ch. 57, Art. III, of the 1965 Code)]
§ 400-4. Main arteries; penalty.
A. The following streets are hereby designated as main arteries of travel,
and all vehicles approaching said main arteries of travel from the
following intersecting streets shall, before entering the main arteries,
come to a full stop, unless otherwise directed by a peace officer or
signal:
Main Artery Intersection Direction
Bedford Road Amos Street
Bedford Road Hudson Terrace
Bedford Road Pine Street
Bedford Road Sleepy Hollow Road
Bedford Road Webber Avenue
Beekman Avenue [Added
8-14-1967]
Barnhart Avenue South
Beekman Avenue [Added
8-14-1967]
Clinton Street North
Beekman Avenue Cortlandt Street North
Beekman Avenue [Added
8-14-1967]
Kendall Avenue South
Beekman Avenue [Added
8-14-1967]
Lawrence Avenue South
Beekman Avenue [Added
8-14-1967]
Pocantico Street South
Bellwood Avenue Devries Avenue East
Bellwood Avenue [Added
8-14-1967]
Devries Avenue West
Bellwood Avenue Farrington Avenue East or west
Bellwood Avenue [Added
8-14-1967]
Harwood Avenue East and west
Bellwood Avenue Highland Avenue East or west
Bellwood Avenue [Added
8-14-1967]
Hunter Avenue East
Bellwood Avenue Kelbourne Avenue East and west
Bellwood Avenue Merlin Avenue East or west
Bellwood Avenue Millard Avenue East or west
Bellwood Avenue Palmer Avenue East and west
§ 400-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-4
1:561
Main Artery Intersection Direction
Bellwood Avenue [Added
9-13-1971]
Pierson Avenue West
Bellwood Drive Devries Avenue Southwest
crossing
Broadway (Albany Post
Road — Route 9)
Bellwood Avenue North
Broadway (Albany Post
Road — Route 9)
Chestnut Street East
Broadway (Albany Post
Road — Route 9)
College Avenue East
Broadway (Albany Post
Road — Route 9)
Depeyster Street East
Broadway (Albany Post
Road — Route 9)
Devries Avenue East
Broadway (Albany Post
Road — Route 9)
Farrington Avenue East
Broadway (Albany Post
Road — Route 9)
Gordon Avenue South
Broadway (Albany Post
Road — Route 9)
Harwood Avenue East
Broadway (Albany Post
Road — Route 9)
Hemlock Drive South
Broadway (Albany Post
Road — Route 9)
Highland Avenue East
Broadway (Albany Post
Road — Route 9)
Hudson Terrace West
Broadway (Albany Post
Road — Route 9)
Kelburne Avenue East
Broadway (Albany Post
Road — Route 9)
Lawrence Avenue North
Broadway (Albany Post
Road — Route 9)
Merlin Avenue
Broadway (Albany Post
Road — Route 9)
Millard Avenue East
Broadway (Albany Post
Road — Route 9)
Palmer Avenue
Broadway (Albany Post
Road-Route 9)
Hemlock Drive North
Clinton Street Depeyster Street West
Cortlandt Street Chestnut Street West
§ 400-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-4
1:562
Main Artery Intersection Direction
Cortlandt Street [Added
8-14-1967]
Clinton Street East
Cortlandt Street College Avenue East or west
Cortlandt Street Depeyster Street East or west
Devries Avenue [Added
9-13-1971]
Munroe Avenue South
Elm Street Kendall Avenue North
Fremont Drive Hemlock Drive South end of
Fremont Drive
Fremont Road [Added
8-14-1967]
Hemlock Drive (near
South Gate)
East and west
Gordon Avenue Rice Avenue East or west
Harwood Avenue Munroe Avenue East and west
Harwood Avenue
(railroad bridge)
[Repealed 6-11-1979]
Harwood Avenue
[Repealed 6-11-1979]
Hemlock Drive [Added
8-14-1967]
Birch Close South
Hemlock Drive [Added
8-14-1967]
Evergreen Way East
Hemlock Drive Evergreen Way West
Hemlock Drive Fremont Road North
Hemlock Drive [Added
8-14-1967]
Fremont Road (left
fork-north end)
North
Hemlock Drive [Added
8-14-1967]
Fremont Road (west
end)
North
Hemlock Drive [Added
8-14-1967]
Fremont Road (near
South Gate)
North and south
Hemlock Drive Fremont Road South end of
Fremont Drive
Hemlock Drive Kingsland Road South
Hemlock Drive [Added
8-14-1967]
Lakeview Avenue East and west
Hemlock Drive Pokahoe Drive East
Hemlock Drive [Added
8-14-1967]
Terrace Close South
Hemlock Drive Webb Road South
§ 400-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-4
1:563
Main Artery Intersection Direction
Kelbourne Avenue Munroe Avenue North and south
Kelbourne Avenue
[Repealed 6-11-1979]
Munroe Avenue [Added
9-13-1971]
Devries Avenue West
Munroe Avenue Harwood Avenue East or west
Munroe Avenue [Added
8-14-1967]
Highland Avenue East and west
Munroe Avenue Kelbourne Avenue East and west
Munroe Avenue Merlin Avenue West
Munroe Avenue Millard Avenue East or west
Munroe Avenue Palmer Avenue East and west
New Broadway Gory Brook Road South
Palmer Avenue Bellwood Avenue North and south
Palmer Avenue Munroe Avenue North and south
Pocantico Street Elm Street East
Pocantico Street [Added
8-14-1967]
Howard Street East
Pokahoe Drive Hemlock Drive North or south
Pokahoe Drive Lakeview Road West
Riverside Drive Farrington Avenue West
Riverside Drive Harwood Avenue
(railroad bridge)
East
Riverside Drive Harwood Avenue West
Riverside Drive Hunter Avenue West
Riverside Drive (north
end of fork)
Kelbourne Avenue West
Riverside Drive (south
end of fork)
Kelbourne Avenue West
Riverside Drive [Added
8-14-1967]
Lake Shore Close West
Sleepy Hollow Road
[Added 8-14-1967]
Webber Avenue North
Valley [Added
8-14-1967]
Chestnut Street East and west
Valley Street College Avenue East or west
Valley Street Depeyster Street East and west
Valley Street Depeyster Street East or west
§ 400-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-4
1:564
§ 400-5. Stop and yield intersections. [Added 9-23-1974 by L.L. No.
2-1974]
Main Artery Intersection Direction
Washington Street College Avenue East and west
Washington Street Depeyster Street East and west
Washington Street Valley Street
B. Any person violating Subsection A hereof, as amended, shall be subject
to a y not to exceed $10 and, in addition, may be adjudged guilty of
disorderly conduct and be dealt with as a disorderly person. [Amended
8-14-1967]
A. Stop intersections designated.
Stop Sign On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Amos Street [Added
9-24-1998 by L.L. No.
8-1998]
North North Street
Anderson Avenue
[Added 5-16-1977]
South Gordon Avenue
Barnhart Avenue
[Added 7-19-1994 by
L.L. No. 9-1994]
North Francis Street
Beekman Avenue
[Added 9-24-1998 by
L.L. No. 6-1998]
East and west Kendall Avenue
Beekman Avenue
[Added 4-15-1997 by
L.L. No. 11-1997]
East and west Pocantico Street
Bellwood Avenue
[Added 6-11-1979]
North and south Harwood Avenue
Bellwood Avenue
[Added 6-11-1979]
North and south Millard Avenue
Chestnut Street [Added
7-9-1979 by L.L. No.
1-1979]
East Valley Street
Clinton Street [Added
9-7-1993 by L.L. No.
11-1993]
North and south Depeyster Street
Continental Street
[Added 5-24-2016 by
L.L. No. 6-2016]
West Pleasant Street
§ 400-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-5
1:565
Stop Sign On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Cortlandt Street [Added
2-18-1975 by L.L. No.
1-1975]
North College Avenue
Cortlandt Street [Added
12-3-1979 by L.L. No.
12-1979]
North Depeyster Street
Dell Street [Added
7-17-1978]
West Gordon Avenue
Depeyster Street
[Added 6-15-1993 by
L.L. No. 9-1993]
East and west Cedar Street
Farrington Avenue
[Added 6-9-2015 by
L.L. No. 5-2015]
All Bellwood Avenue
Farrington Avenue
[Added 6-9-2015 by
L.L. No. 5-2015]
All Munroe Avenue
Francis Street [Added
9-18-1990 by L.L. No.
10-1990]
West Barnhart Avenue
Gordon Avenue [Added
1-7-1997 by L.L. No.
2-1997]
East and west Holland Avenue
Gordon Avenue [Added
7-11-1977]
South Rice Avenue
Hemlock Drive [Added
2-19-1980 by L.L. No.
1-1980]
East Kingsland Road
Hemlock Drive [Added
2-19-1980 by L.L. No.
1-1980]
West Fremont Road
Howard Street [Added
5-18-1993 by L.L. No.
6-1993]
East North Washington
Street
Hunter Avenue [Added
6-11-1979; amended
6-9-2015 by L.L. No.
5-2015]
All Munroe Avenue
Lakeview Avenue
[Added 6-20-1989 by
L.L. No. 5-1989]
North Pokahoe Drive
Munroe Avenue North Hunter Avenue
§ 400-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-5
1:566
Stop Sign On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
New Broadway [Added
3-29-1999 by L.L. No.
5-1999; repealed
7-13-1999 by L.L. No.
7-1999]
New Broadway [Added
3-31-1999 by L.L. No.
4-1999]
North Spruce Street
North Street [Added
11-24-1986 by L.L.
No. 6-1986]
West Webber Avenue
North Washington
Street [Added
2-18-1975 by L.L. No.
1-1975]
Both Depeyster Street
Pine Close West Pine Street
Pine Street North Pine Close
Pocantico Street
[Added 3-4-1997 by
L.L. No. 9-1997]
North and south Elm Street
Pocantico Street
[Added 10-16-1990 by
L.L. No. 13-1990]
North and south Howard Street
Riverside Drive [Added
10-18-1988 by L.L.
No. 9-1988]
North and south Harwood Avenue
Riverside Drive [Added
6-11-1979]
South Hunter Avenue
Riverside Drive [Added
6-11-1979]
South South ramp of
Kelbourne Avenue
Sleepy Hollow Road
[Added 9-24-1998 by
L.L. No. 7-1998]
North Webber Avenue
Valley Street [Added
2-18-1975 by L.L. No.
1-1975]
South College Avenue
Valley Street [Added
12-21-1993 by L.L.
No. 18-1993]
South Depeyster Street
Webber Avenue [Added
7-20-1998 by L.L. No.
4-1998]
North Sleepy Hollow Road
§ 400-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-5
1:567
§ 400-6. Right turns on red prohibited. [Added 5-20-1997 by L.L.
No. 12-1997]
Stop Sign On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Webber Avenue [Added
11-17-1987 by L.L.
No. 14-1987]
North and south North Street
(1) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
Subsection A hereof is subject to the penalties provided for in
§ 1800(b) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. Yield intersections. [Added 6-11-1979]
Yield Sign On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Kelbourne Avenue Westerly Riverside Drive
Riverside Drive Easterly Palmer Avenue
A. Right turns on red lights are hereby prohibited at the following
intersections between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday:
Name of Street Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Beekman Avenue East North Washington
Street
North Washington
Street
North Beekman Avenue
North Washington
Street
South Beekman Avenue
Route 9 North Sleepy Hollow High
School entrance
B. Right turns on red lights are hereby prohibited at the following
intersections between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:30 p.m.:
Name of Street Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Route 9 South Pocantico Street
C. Right turns on red lights are hereby prohibited at the following
intersections:
Name of Street Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Hudson Terrace [Added
2-11-2014 by L.L. No.
1-2014]
West Route 9
Phelps Way [Added
2-11-2014 by L.L. No.
2-2014]
East Route 9
§ 400-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-6
1:568
Name of Street Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Route 448 West Route 9
D. Right turns on red lights are hereby prohibited at the following
intersection between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday: [Added 4-18-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
Name of Street Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Depeyster Street East Route 9
§ 400-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-6
1:569

ARTICLE IV
Restricted Parking
[Adopted 8-18-1937]
§ 400-7. Parking restricted in designated locations. [Amended
8-14-1961; 6-4-1962; 8-20-1962; 9-10-1962; 11-19-1962; 2-4-1963;
8-10-1964; 2-19-1974; 10-6-1975; 6-11-1979]
The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in any of the following locations
for a longer period than specified:
Name of Street Side Days Hours Location
Andrews Lane East Tuesday,
Thursday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
Beekman Avenue
[Added
6-9-2015 by
L.L. No.
4-2015]
North All week,
except
Sundays
8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m.
Restricted
metered parking
of 15 minutes at
one space
Beekman Avenue
[Added
11-24-2015 by
L.L. No.
8-2015]
South All 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m.
Restricted
metered parking
of 15 minutes at 1
space within 50
feet of either side
of 84 Beekman
Avenue
Beekman Avenue South Tuesday,
Thursday,
Saturday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
From the west end
of the NYCRR
Bridge to Hudson
Street
Clinton Street
[Added
9-17-1996 by
L.L. No.
9-1996]
North and
west
Tuesday,
Thursday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
From the
intersection of
Clinton Street and
Cortlandt Street
to the intersection
of Clinton Street
and Beekman
Avenue
Clinton Street
[Added
9-17-1996 by
L.L. No.
9-1996]
South and
west
Monday,
Wednesday,
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
From the
intersection of
Clinton Street and
Cortlandt Street
to the intersection
of Clinton Street
and Beekman
Avenue
§ 400-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-7
1:571
Name of Street Side Days Hours Location
College Avenue
[Added
2-10-2015 by
L.L. No.
2-2015]
North All 7:00 a.m.
to 9:00
a.m.
At a distance
commencing 78
feet from Route 9
and ending at a
distance of 118
feet from Route 9
College Avenue
[Added
11-24-2015 by
L.L. No.
7-2015]
North All 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m.
Restricted
metered parking
of 15 minutes at
two spaces within
15 feet of either
side of 95 College
Avenue
Cortlandt Street
[Added
10-21-1997 by
L.L. No.
14-1997;
amended
12-7-1999 by
L.L. No.
12-1999]
East Tuesday,
Thursday
7:00 a.m.
to 8:00
a.m.
From the
intersection of
Cedar Street and
Cortlandt Street
in a northerly
direction to
Beekman Avenue
Cortlandt Street
[Added
10-21-1997 by
L.L. No.
14-1997;
amended
12-7-1999 by
L.L. No.
12-1999]
East Tuesday,
Thursday
9:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
From the
intersection of
Cedar Street and
Cortlandt Street
in a southerly
direction to the
Village boundary
line
Cortlandt Street
[Added
10-21-1997 by
L.L. No.
14-1997;
amended
12-7-1999 by
L.L. No.
12-1999]
West Monday,
Wednesday,
Friday
7:00 a.m.
to 8:00
a.m.
From the
intersection of
Cedar Street and
Cortlandt Street
in a northerly
direction to
Beekman Avenue
§ 400-7 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-7
1:572
Name of Street Side Days Hours Location
Cortlandt Street
[Added
10-21-1997 by
L.L. No.
14-1997;
amended
12-7-1999 by
L.L. No.
12-1999]
West Monday,
Wednesday,
Friday
9:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
From the
intersection of
Cedar Street and
Cortlandt Street
in a southerly
direction to
Village boundary
line
Irving Place* West Tuesday,
Thursday,
Saturday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
From Elm Street
south to its
terminus
*NOTE: Diagonal parking only and a penalty of $5 for each offense.
Katrina Avenue North Monday,
Wednesday,
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
Entire length
Katrina Avenue South Tuesday,
Thursday,
Saturday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
Entire length
New Broadway
[Added
10-15-1979]
East Tuesday,
Thursday
8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Entire length
New Broadway
[Added
10-15-1979]
West Monday,
Wednesday,
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
Entire length
North
Washington
Street*
East Monday,
Thursday
8:00 a.m.
to 9:00
a.m.
From Beekman
Avenue north to
the end of North
Washington Street
North
Washington
Street*
West Tuesday,
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 9:00
a.m.
From Beekman
Avenue north to
the end of North
Washington Street
*NOTE: Times and days are effective from April 1 to October 31.
Old Broadway
[Added
10-3-2000 by
L.L. No.
6-2000]
East Tuesday and
Thursday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
Old Broadway
[Added
10-3-2000 by
L.L. No.
6-2000]
West Monday,
Wednesday,
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
§ 400-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-7
1:573
Name of Street Side Days Hours Location
Pocantico Street West 1 hour, all
week except
Saturday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
From Beekman
Avenue to Howard
Street
Spruce Street
[Added
1-7-1997 by
L.L. No.
1-1997]
North Monday,
Wednesday,
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
Spruce Street
[Added
1-7-1997 by
L.L. No.
1-1997]
South Tuesday,
Thursday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
Tappan Street
[Added
12-19-1989 by
L.L. No.
17-1989]
North Monday
through
Friday
8:30 a.m.
to 9:00
a.m.;
2:30 p.m.
to 3:30
p.m.
For a distance of
25 feet east from
the intersection of
Tappan Avenue
and Anderson
Avenue
Valley Street
[Added
10-21-1997 by
L.L. No.
14-1997;
amended
12-7-1999 by
L.L. No.
12-1999]
East Tuesday,
Thursday
7:00 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
From the
intersection of
College Avenue
and Valley Street
in a northerly
direction to
Chestnut Street
Valley Street
[Added
10-21-1997 by
L.L. No.
14-1997;
amended
12-7-1999 by
L.L. No.
12-1999]
East Tuesday,
Thursday
9:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
From the
intersection of
College Avenue
and Valley Street
in a southerly
direction to the
Village boundary
line
§ 400-7 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-7
1:574
Name of Street Side Days Hours Location
Valley Street
[Added
10-21-1997 by
L.L. No.
14-1997;
amended
12-7-1999 by
L.L. No.
12-1999]
West Monday,
Wednesday,
Friday
7:00 a.m.
to 7:30
a.m.
From the
intersection of
College Avenue
and Valley Street
in a northerly
direction to
Chestnut Street
Valley Street
[Added
10-21-1997 by
L.L. No.
14-1997;
amended
12-7-1999 by
L.L. No.
12-1999]
West Monday,
Wednesday,
Friday
9:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
From the
intersection of
College Avenue
and Valley Street
in a southerly
direction to the
Village boundary
line
Van Ripper
Avenue [Added
2-27-2001 by
L.L. No.
2-2001]
South Tuesday,
Thursday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
From the
intersection of
Gordon Avenue to
the intersection of
New Broadway
Van Ripper
Avenue [Added
2-27-2001 by
L.L. No.
2-2001]
North Monday,
Wednesday,
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
From the
intersection of
Gordon Avenue to
the intersection of
New Broadway
Washington
Street
East Tuesday,
Thursday,
Saturday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
From Beekman
Avenue to
Chestnut Street
Washington
Street
West Monday,
Wednesday,
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 12:00
noon
From Beekman
Avenue to
Chestnut Street
§ 400-8. Parking prohibited in designated locations.
The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in any of the following
locations:
§ 400-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-8
1:575
Street Side Section Prohibited
Andrews Lane [Added
11-10-1986 by L.L. No.
4-1986; repealed
10-24-2017 by L.L. No.
10-2017]
Andrews Lane [Added
12-4-1961; repealed
10-24-2017 by L.L. No.
10-2017]
Bedford Road [Adopted
11-18-1957]
North and south From North Broadway 100
feet east
Beekman Avenue North and south From Broadway west to west
end of park
Cedar Street West, southwest
and south
Entire length
Gesner Place [Adopted
10-7-1957]
East and west From Chestnut Street north
to the terminus of Gesner
Place
Gordon Avenue
[Adopted 9-11-1961]
West and south Entire length
Gory Brook Road
[Adopted 9-10-1962]
East and west From 425 feet north of Ridge
Street to the Sleepy Hollow
Village line
Hudson Terrace (eastwest
portion) [Adopted
2-4-1952]
North From Broadway east
Irving Place [Adopted
8-10-1964]
East From Elm Street south to the
terminus of Irving Place
Lawrence Avenue
[Adopted 6-12-1961]
East and west From Beekman Avenue 211
feet north
New Broadway [Added
11-24-2009 by L.L. No.
7-2009]
East For a distance of 80 feet from
the northerly curbline
connecting U.S. Route 9 and
New Broadway
North Broadway East From Bedford Road 25 feet
south of Hudson Terrace
North Broadway East From Beekman Avenue 25
feet south
North Broadway West From Beekman Avenue 50
feet north
§ 400-8 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-8
1:576
Street Side Section Prohibited
Pleasant Street
[Adopted 10-8-1956]
East From Continental Street
north to the terminus of
Pleasant Street
Pocantico Street
[Adopted 7-17-1961]
East From Beekman Avenue to
Howard Street
Pocantico Street
[Adopted 12-4-1961]
East From Howard Street to
Broadway (Route 9)
Spruce Street [Added
1-7-1997 by L.L. No.
1-1997]
North and south A setback of 15 feet from the
intersection of New
Broadway
Teresa Street [Adopted
8-10-1964]
East and west From Beekman Street 52 feet
north
Washington Street
[Adopted 2-1-1954]
East From Beekman Street 25 feet
south
§ 400-9. Parking prohibited in designated locations. [Added
7-16-1973]
A. No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his, her or its
automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle to park or remain
standing in the following areas in said Village:
Name of Street Side Location Restriction
Bedford Road
(Route 448)
[Added 12-7-1988
by L.L. No.
10-1988]
North From the
intersection of
Bedford Road and
Hudson Terrace,
running thence
easterly to the
intersection of
Bedford Road and
County House
Road
—
Bedford Road
(Route 448)
[Added
1-21-1974;
amended
12-7-1988 by L.L.
No. 10-1988]
North From its
intersection with
North Broadway
(Route 9) to
Hudson Terrace
Monday and
Thursday between
the hours of 10:00
a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
§ 400-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9
1:577
Name of Street Side Location Restriction
Bedford Road
(Route 448)
[Added
1-21-1974;
amended
12-7-1988 by L.L.
No. 10-1988]
South From its
intersection with
North Broadway
(Route 9) to
Hudson Terrace
Monday and
Thursday between
the hours of 10:00
a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
Beekman Avenue
[Added 8-16-1994
by L.L. No.
10-1994]
South Between the
westerly curbline
of Cortlandt
Street and a point
30 feet westerly
therefrom
—
Cedar Street
[Added 7-19-1994
by L.L. No.
8-1994]
North From the
intersection of
Cortlandt Street
and Cedar Street
for a distance of
80 feet
To restrict parking
to Fire Department
members only
during an
emergency, as
posted
Elm Street South Commencing 104
feet from its
intersection with
Pocantico Street
westerly for a
distance of 28
feet
—
Gordon Avenue
[Added 5-19-1987
by L.L. No.
4-1987]
North For a distance of
30 feet in an
easterly direction
from the
intersection of
Gordon Avenue
and Dell Street,
as posted
—
Gordon Avenue
[Added
7-12-1976;
amended
4-18-1977]
North
and east
From a point 50
feet south of the
intersection of
Gordon Avenue
and Rice Avenue
northerly to the
intersection of
Gordon Avenue
and Holland
Avenue
Tuesday and Friday,
from 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
§ 400-9 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-9
1:578
Name of Street Side Location Restriction
Gordon Avenue
[Added
7-12-1976;
amended
4-18-1977]
North
and east
Commencing at a
point 50 feet
south of the
intersection of
Gordon Avenue
and Rice Avenue
continuing
southerly along
Gordon Avenue to
its intersection
with North
Broadway
Tuesday and Friday,
from 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Holland Avenue South
and west
From its
intersection with
Van Tassel Avenue
north to the
intersection of
Holland Avenue
with Gordon
Avenue
—
Kendall Avenue at
the bend
[Amended
7-14-197552]
East For a distance of
40 feet as posted
—
North Washington
Street [Added
7-14-197553
East For a distance of
40 feet at its
intersection with
Howard Street, as
posted
—
Old Broadway
[Added 7-28-2015
by L.L. No.
6-2015]
West From its
southwest corner
at the intersection
with North
Broadway (Route
9) in a northerly
direction 80 feet
—
52.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for a fine of $2 for each offense.
53.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for a fine of $2 for each offense.
§ 400-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9
1:579
Name of Street Side Location Restriction
Pine Close [Added
5-19-1987 by L.L.
No. 5-1987]
South From a point 62
feet east of the
intersection of
Pine Close and
Pine Street
easterly to the
end of Pine Close,
all as duly posted
pursuant to local
law
—
Pine Street
[Amended
7-14-1975;54
5-14-1984 by L.L.
No. 2-1984]
East For a distance of
20 feet in a
southerly
direction, at its
intersection with
Pine Close
—
Pine Street
[Amended
7-14-1975;55
5-14-1984 by L.L.
No. 2-1984]
North For a distance of
20 feet in a
westerly
direction, at its
intersection with
Pine Close
—
Pine Street
[Amended
7-14-1975;56
5-14-1984 by L.L.
No. 2-1984]
South For a distance of
20 feet in an
easterly direction,
at its intersection
with Pine Close
—
Pine Street
[Amended
7-14-1975;57
5-14-1984 by L.L.
No. 2-1984]
South For the length of
the street in a
westerly
direction, at its
intersection with
Pine Close
—
Pocantico Street
[Added 1-11-1999
by L.L. No.
1-1999]
— In front of the
entrance to the
Van Tassel
Apartments
Handicapped
parking space is
hereby designated
directly to the south
of the said noparking
zone
54.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for a fine of $2 for each offense.
55.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for a fine of $2 for each offense.
56.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for a fine of $2 for each offense.
57.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for a fine of $2 for each offense.
§ 400-9 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-9
1:580
Name of Street Side Location Restriction
Pocantico Street
[Added
11-15-1982 by
L.L. No. 8-1982]
West For a distance of
46 feet in a
northerly distance
from the
intersection of
Pocantico Street
and Elm Street,
as posted
—
Rice Avenue
[Added 6-20-1989
by L.L. No.
6-1989]
North Between Gordon
Avenue and Van
Tassel Avenue
—
Rice Avenue
[Added 6-20-1989
by L.L. No.
6-1989]
South Between Gordon
Avenue and New
Broadway
—
Sleepy Hollow
Road [Added
7-31-2006 by L.L.
No. 1-2006]
East From the point of
the intersection
with Bedford
Road (Route 448)
to the point of the
intersection with
Webber Avenue
Sleepy Hollow
Road [Added
7-31-2006 by L.L.
No. 1-2006]
West From the point of
the intersection
with Bedford
Road (Route 448)
to the point of the
intersection with
Webber Avenue
No parking Monday,
Wednesday and
Friday between the
hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 12:00 noon
Sleepy Hollow
Road [Added
7-31-2006 by L.L.
No. 1-2006]
West From the point of
the intersection
with Bedford
Road (Route 448)
to the point of the
intersection with
Webber Avenue
No parking Tuesday
and Wednesday
between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and
3:00 p.m.
Van Tassel Avenue East From its
intersection with
Holland Avenue to
its end
—
§ 400-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9
1:581
§ 400-10. Restriction of west side parking on certain days.
[Amended 6-28-1956; 11-3-1975]
No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his, her or its
automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle to park or remain standing
on the west side of the following streets, in the Village of Sleepy Hollow,
on Monday, Wednesday and Friday of each and every week, between 8:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m., except in the case of those streets where parking is
restricted to one hour between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. Parking
on the west side of said streets on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday shall be
restricted to one hour between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
Name of Street Location Restrictions
Anderson Avenue
[Added 1-19-1989 by
L.L. No. 1-1989]
From its intersection with
Tappan Avenue to its
intersection with Gordon
Avenue
Tuesdays and
Fridays from
10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Andrews Lane From the intersection of
Andrews Lane and Beekman
Avenue, northerly to the
intersection of the aforesaid
Andrews Lane and Elm
Street
—
Barnhart Avenue From the intersection of
Barnhart Avenue and
Beekman Avenue, northerly
to its terminus at Barnhart
Park
—
Name of Street Side Location Restriction
Van Tassel Avenue West From its
intersection with
Holland Avenue
northerly to the
intersection of
Van Tassel Avenue
with Wirth Street
—
Wirth Street North From the
intersection of
Van Tassel Avenue
westerly to its
intersection with
Holland Avenue
—
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this article shall
be punishable by a fine of $5 for each and every offense.
§ 400-9 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-10
1:582
Name of Street Location Restrictions
Clinton Street
[Repealed 9-17-1996
by L.L. No. 9-1996]
Gesner Place [Repealed
10-7-1957]
Hudson Street
[Amended 6-11-1979]
Entire length Except on Tuesday
and Thursday,
from 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Hudson Terrace From the intersection of
Hudson Terrace and
Bedford Road, southerly to
the property of the
Tarrytown School Board
—
Irving Place [Repealed
2-19-1974]
Kendall Avenue From the intersection of
Kendall Avenue and
Beekman Avenue, northerly
to the intersection of the
aforesaid Kendall Avenue
and Continental Street
—
Lawrence Avenue
[Amended 7-28-2009
by L.L. No. 5-2009]
From the intersection of
Lawrence Avenue and North
Broadway to the
intersection of Lawrence
Avenue and Beekman
Avenue
Tuesdays from
10:00 a.m. to 12
noon and on the
east side on
Thursdays from
10:00 a.m. to 12
noon
New Broadway
[Amended 10-15-1979]
From the intersection of
New Broadway and North
Broadway, northerly to its
terminus at Douglas Park
Parking is
prohibited on
alternate sides
from 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.; except
Saturday and
Sunday when
parking is
permitted at all
times
North Broadway [Added
6-11-1979]
From Beekman Avenue
south to the Village line
From 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m. on
Tuesday, Thursday
and Saturday
§ 400-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-10
1:583
Name of Street Location Restrictions
Pleasant Street [Added
9-7-1993 by L.L. No.
12-1993]
Entire length From 10:00 a.m.
to 11:00 a.m.,
Tuesday and
Thursday
Pocantico Street From a point 600 feet from
the intersection of Pocantico
Street and Beekman
Avenue, northerly to the
intersection of the aforesaid
Pocantico Street and North
Broadway
—
Pocantico Street [Added
7-8-1974; amended
10-21-197458]
From its intersection with
Beekman Avenue northerly
to the intersection of the
aforesaid Pocantico Street
and North Broadway
Monday and
Thursday between
the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
River Street From the Tarrytown-Sleepy
Hollow Village line
northerly to Beekman
Avenue
—
Washington Street From the Tarrytown-Sleepy
Hollow Village line,
northerly to its terminus,
north of Howard Street
—
§ 400-11. Restriction of east side parking on certain days.
[Amended 6-28-1956; 11-3-1975]
A. No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his, her or its
automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle to park or remain
standing on the east side of the streets enumerated in § 400-10 thereof
on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday of each and every week between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., except in the case of those streets
where parking is restricted to one hour between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 9:00 a.m. Parking on the east side of said streets on Monday,
Wednesday and Friday shall be restricted to one hour between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
B. Other restrictions.
58.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for a penalty of $2 for each offense.
§ 400-10 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-11
1:584
§ 400-12. Restriction of north side parking on certain days.
[Amended 6-28-1956; 11-3-1975]
No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his, her or its
automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle to park or remain standing
on the north side of the following streets in the Village of Sleepy Hollow on
Monday, Wednesday and Friday of each and every week between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., except in the case of those streets or portions
thereof where parking is restricted to one hour between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 9:00 a.m. Parking on the north side of said streets on Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturday shall be restricted to one hour between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
Name of Street Location Restrictions
Cedar Street
[Added 6-11-1979]
From its intersection of
Depeyster Street south
to Cortlandt Street
No parking on the south
side, except on Tuesday
and Thursday, from 9:00
a.m. to 12:00 noon; and
no parking on the north
side on Tuesday and
Thursday, from 9:00 a.m.
to 12:00 noon
Chestnut Street
[Amended
11-3-1969]
From its intersection
with Valley Street west to
its intersection with
Cortlandt Street
Any time, except Tuesday
and Thursday between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon
Name of Street Side Location Days/Hours
Anderson Avenue
[Added 1-19-1989
by L.L. No. 1-1989]
East From its
intersection with
Tappan Avenue
to its intersection
with Gordon
Avenue
—
Continental Street
[Added 9-7-1993 by
L.L. No. 12-1993]
North Entire length Tuesday and
Thursday, from
10:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m.
Hudson Street
[Added 6-11-1979]
East South to the
Village line
Tuesday and
Thursday, from
9:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon
North Broadway
[Added 6-11-1979]
East From Beekman
Avenue south to
the Village line
Monday,
Wednesday and
Friday, from 7:00
a.m. to 8:00 a.m.
§ 400-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-12
1:585
Name of Street Location Restrictions
Chestnut Street
[Amended
11-3-1969]
From its intersection
with Valley Street west to
its intersection with
Cortlandt Street
Tuesday and Thursday
between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 12:00 noon
College Avenue From the intersection of
College Avenue and
Broadway west to the
intersection of College
Avenue and Cortlandt
Street
—
Continental Street From the intersection of
Continental Street and
Pocantico Street to its
terminus at Donahue
Field
—
Depeyster Street From the intersection of
Depeyster Street and
Broadway west to the
intersection of Depeyster
Street and Clinton Street
—
Elm Street From the intersection of
Elm Street and Pocantico
Street west to the
intersection of Elm
Street and Andrews Lane
—
Francis Street
[Amended
5-17-1971]
From the intersection of
Francis Street and
Andrews Lane west to
the intersection of
Francis Street and
Barnhart Avenue
Between the hours of 8:00
a.m. Monday to 8:00 a.m.
Tuesday; 8:00 a.m.
Wednesday to 8:00 a.m.
Thursday; and 8:00 a.m.
Friday to 8:00 a.m.
Saturday of each and
every week
Howard Street
[Amended
6-11-1979]
From its intersection
with Kendall Avenue
extension east to North
Washington Street
Parking is restricted on
the north side on Tuesday
and Thursday, from 9:00
a.m. to 12:00 noon; and
on the south side, parking
is prohibited, except on
Tuesday and Thursday
between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 12:00 noon
§ 400-12 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-12
1:586
Name of Street Location Restrictions
Hudson Terrace
[Amended
6-11-1979]
From the intersection of
Hudson Terrace and
North Broadway east to
the intersection of the
east-west portion of the
aforesaid street
No parking at any time,
except Tuesday and
Thursday, between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon, and, on the
south side of the
aforesaid street, parking
is restricted on Tuesday
and Thursday, between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon. On the northsouth
extension running
from Bedford Road south
to the property of the
Tarrytown School District,
there shall be no parking
at any time on the west
side, except Tuesday and
Thursday between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon.
§ 400-13. Restriction of south side parking on certain days.
[Amended 6-28-1956; 7-12-1965; 5-17-1971; 11-3-1975]
No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his, her or its
automobile, truck or other vehicle to park or remain standing on the south
side of the streets enumerated in § 400-12 thereof on Tuesday, Thursday
and Saturday of each and every week between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m., except in the case of those streets or portions thereof where
parking is restricted to one hour between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00
a.m. Parking on the south side of said streets, or portions thereof, on
Monday, Wednesday and Friday, shall be restricted to one hour between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
A. Effective September 1, 1965, and annually thereafter, parking of any
motor vehicle, motorcycle or other vehicle shall be permitted during
school hours between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through and
including Friday of each week, on Depeyster Street for a distance of
215 feet westerly from the southwesterly corner of the intersection of
Cortlandt Street and Depeyster Street as measured along the southerly
side of Depeyster Street. As amended aforesaid, the ordinance
restricting the parking of vehicles on certain days of the week on the
south side of Depeyster Street previously adopted on June 28, 1956,
shall continue in full force and effect.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his, her or its
automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle to park or remain
standing on the south side of Francis Street from the intersection of
§ 400-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-13
1:587
§ 400-14. Restricted parking on Cortlandt Street. [Amended
6-28-1956; 7-19-1994 by L.L. No. 8-1994; 6-18-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1996]
§ 400-15. Restricted parking on Valley Street. [Amended 6-28-1956]
No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his, her or its
automobile, truck or other vehicle to park or remain standing upon the
west side of Valley Street between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:30 a.m. on
Monday, Wednesday and Friday of each and every week, nor on the east
side of said street between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:30 a.m. on Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturday of each and every week.
§ 400-16. Restricted parking on Beekman Avenue. [Amended
6-28-1956; 6-11-1979; 2-21-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his, her or its vehicle
to park or remain standing on the north side of Beekman Avenue at the
intersection of North Broadway, westerly to River Street, between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Tuesday and Thursday of each and every week
nor on the south side of said street between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m. on Monday, Wednesday and Friday of each and every week.
§ 400-17. Two-hour parking. [Added 8-19-1938; amended 9-1-1955;
8-17-1981 by L.L. No. 6-1981; 12-13-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
Francis Street and Andrews Lane westerly to the intersection of Francis
Street and Barnhart Avenue in the Village of North Tarrytown between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. Tuesday to 8:00 a.m. Wednesday; 8:00 a.m.
Thursday to 8:00 a.m. Friday; and 8:00 a.m. Saturday to 8:00 a.m.
Monday of each and every week.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his, her or its
automobile, truck or other vehicle to park or remain standing upon the
west side of Cortlandt Street between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m. on Monday, Wednesday and Friday of each and every week, nor on
the east side of said street between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday of each and every week.
B. On the westerly side of Cortlandt Street, parking is restricted to one
space in front of the Rock of Salvation Church building located at 131
Cortlandt Street. [Amended 10-10-2017 by L.L. No. 8-2017]
C. On the easterly side of Cortlandt Street, parking is restricted to one
space in front of 168 Cortlandt Street, which shall be metered and
limited to 15 minutes per vehicle. [Added 10-10-2017 by L.L. No.
8-2017]
A. No automobile or other vehicle shall remain parked for a longer period
than two hours at one time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. on any day except Sunday on any of the following streets:
§ 400-13 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-17
1:588
§ 400-18. Restricted parking on North Broadway. [Added
10-18-1971; amended 2-4-1974]
§ 400-19. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-14-1986 by L.L. No.
2-1986]
Unless another penalty is provided, any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the terms in this article shall be punishable by a fine of $10.
Each day on which any vehicle is parked or left standing in violation of any
of the terms of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 400-20. Permit required for parking on Village-owned land; fee;
penalty. [Adopted 1-22-1962; amended 7-14-1975]
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle at any time within the bounds of
all that certain plot, piece or parcel of land owned by the Village of Sleepy
Hollow, New York, situated, lying and being in the Village of Sleepy Hollow,
said certain plot, piece or parcel of land being along the easterly side of
Valley Street in said Village, adjacent and contiguous to the southerly line
of premises owned by the Sleepy Hollow Housing Authority, and also being
adjacent and contiguous to the northerly line of premises now or formerly
owned by Cawood Motors, Inc., unless a parking permit for such vehicle
shall first have been issued to the owner thereof by the Village Treasurer
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow and payment made by such owner to said
Village Treasurer of the monthly rental charge of $5. Any person violating
Name of Street Side Location
Beekman
Avenue
Both Between Broadway and Kendall Avenue
Cortlandt Street Both From Beekman Avenue southerly to the
Sleepy Hollow Village line
Pocantico Street Both For a distance of 150 feet north of
Beekman Avenue
Valley Street Both From College Avenue southerly to the
Tarrytown- Sleepy Hollow Village line
Washington
Street
Both For a distance of 150 feet north of
Beekman Avenue
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed a disorderly person, and shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $5 for each and every offense.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his, her or its
automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle to park on either side of
North Broadway (Route 9) from the intersection of Beekman Avenue
and Hudson Terrace northerly to the intersection of Pocantico Street.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this section shall
be punishable by a fine of $5 for each and every offense.
§ 400-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-20
1:589
the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $2
nor more than $10 for each and every offense.
§ 400-21. Restricted parking for commercial vehicles. [Added
12-1-1987 by L.L. No. 15-1987]
§ 400-21.1. Temporary Mayoral authority. [Added 2-23-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
The provisions of this Article IV are expressly subject to the provisions of
Article XXI of this chapter.
A. The parking of commercial vehicles on Village streets for more than one
hour between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. is hereby forbidden.
B. The parking of commercial vehicles on Old Broadway is prohibited at all
times. [Added 7-28-2009 by L.L. No. 4-2009]
§ 400-20 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-21.1
1:590
ARTICLE V
Parking Prohibited
[Adopted 12-5-1960 (Ch. 57, Art. V, of the 1965 Code)]
§ 400-22. Parking prohibited at designated areas.59
A. No person shall park or stand any automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle
or other vehicle within the following limits at or near the intersection of
North Broadway (Route 9) and Beekman Avenue, Bedford Road and
New Broadway, all public streets in the Village of Sleepy Hollow, New
York:
Name of Street Side Location
Beekman Avenue
[Added 12-20-1965]
North For a distance of 17 feet six
inches westerly along the
northerly curbline of said
Beekman Avenue in front of the
post office building to the
westerly end of the driveway
entrance situate on the easterly
side of said post office building
Beekman Avenue South From the easterly boundary of
property of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow (Municipal Building)
located on the southerly side of
Beekman Avenue, easterly for a
distance of 50 feet
New Broadway East For a distance of 95 feet
northerly from the northeasterly
corner of the intersection of New
Broadway and Bedford Road
North Broadway
[Amended 7-14-1980
by L.L. No. 4-1980]
East For a distance of 100 feet
northerly from the northwesterly
corner of the intersection of New
Broadway and North Broadway
North Broadway
[Amended
7-17-1961;
7-14-1980 by L.L.
No. 4-1980]
East Between a point 100 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Hudson
Terrace and a point 200 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Hudson Terrace
North Broadway West For a distance of 50 feet
southerly from the southwesterly
corner of the intersection of
Beekman Avenue and North
Broadway
59.Editor's Note: These provisions relating to New York State highways were approved by the
New York State Traffic Commission 9-28-1961.
§ 400-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-22
1:591
Name of Street Side Location
North Broadway West For a distance of 215 feet
northerly from the northwesterly
corner of the intersection of
Beekman Avenue and North
Broadway (Route 9)
Route 9, in the Village
[Amended
7-17-1961]
West For a distance of 100 feet
southerly from the southerly
corner of the intersection of
Beekman Avenue and North
Broadway
B. No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his, her or its
automobile, truck or other vehicle to park or remain standing on the
following public streets in the Village of Sleepy Hollow:
Name of Street Side Location
Bedford Road [Added
7-14-1980 by L.L.
No. 4-1980]
North Between the easterly curbline of
North Broadway and a point 240
feet easterly therefrom
Bedford Road [Added
7-14-1980 by L.L.
No. 4-1980]
South Between the easterly curbline of
North Broadway and a point 280
feet easterly therefrom
Beekman Avenue
[Added 9-11-1978]
South For a distance of 16 feet at the
curbing in front of premises listed
as 36 Beekman Avenue
Beekman Avenue
[Added 7-14-1980 by
L.L. No. 4-1980]
South Between the westerly curbline of
North Broadway and a point 25
feet westerly therefrom
Birch Close [Adopted
8-13-1956]
— —
Continental Street
[Added 1-23-2007 by
L.L. No. 1-2007]
North For a distance of 130 feet
westerly from the northwesterly
corner of the intersection of
Pleasant Street and Continental
Street
Evergreen Way
[Adopted 8-13-1956]
— —
Fremont Road
[Adopted 8-13-1956]
— —
Hemlock Drive
[Adopted 8-13-1956]
— —
Hudson Terrace
[Added 7-14-1980 by
L.L. No. 4-1980]
South Between the easterly curbline of
North Broadway and a point 75
feet easterly therefrom
§ 400-22 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-22
1:592
Name of Street Side Location
Kingsland Road
[Adopted 8-13-1956]
— —
Lakeview Avenue
[Adopted 8-13-1956]
— —
Manor Close [Adopted
8-13-1956]
— —
Pokahoe Drive
[Adopted 8-13-1956]
— —
Terrace Close
[Adopted 8-13-1956]
— —
Webb Road [Adopted
8-13-1956]
— —
C. No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his or her or its
automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle to park or remain
standing at the following locations hereinafter designated as "loading
zones": from a point on the southeast corner of Cortlandt Street
easterly for a distance of 59 feet; and from a point on the southeast
corner of North Washington Street easterly for a distance of 59 feet;
from a point on the southeast corner of North Washington Street
easterly for a distance of 58 feet; and from a point 95 feet from the
northeast corner of Chestnut Street, that curb site on the southerly side
of Chestnut Street, 28 feet in distance. This space shall be used
exclusively for the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon, Monday through
Saturday. At all other times, regulations with respect to meter parking
shall prevail. [Added 7-14-1980 by L.L. No. 5-1980; amended
10-4-1982 by L.L. No. 5-1982]
D. Beekman Street. [Added 8-22-1983 by L.L. No. 3-1983]
(1) Parking shall be prohibited, except for loading and unloading, for
all vehicles on the northerly side of Beekman Avenue, commencing
at the northerly curb cut of the General Motors parking entrance
and proceeding in a westerly direction a distance of 80 feet. Such
area shall be marked with standard police signs and/or such other
markings deemed necessary and proper by the Chief of Police,
indicating that said area is a no-parking zone. Such signs or
markings shall indicate the hours of the day during which these
parking restrictions shall apply.
(2) Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this
subsection shall be punishable by a fine of $5 for each and every
offense. In addition, violators of this subsection shall be deemed to
be disorderly persons and shall be punishable as such.
E. Designated bus stops. [Added 12-27-1982 by L.L. No. 10-1982]
§ 400-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-22
1:593
(1) Location.
(a) Northbound.
Name of Street Location Side
Beekman Avenue East of Central Fire
Headquarters
South
Beekman Avenue West of North Washington
Street
South
Cortlandt Street North of College Avenue East
Cortlandt Street South of Beekman Avenue East
Route 9 North end of Headless
Horseman bridge
—
Route 9 Opposite Hemlock Drive,
south gate
—
Route 9 South of Cemetery driveway East
Route 9 South of Route 448 East
(b) Southbound.
Name of Street Location Side
Beekman
Avenue
West of Route 9 North
North
Washington
Street
South of Beekman Avenue West
Route 9 Harwood Avenue, triangle West
Route 9 South end of Headless
Horseman Bridge
West
Route 9 South of Hemlock Drive,
south gate
West
Valley Street
[Amended
6-13-1983]
Corner of the intersection of
College Avenue and Valley
Street
Northwest
(2) The foregoing bus stops shall consist of a curb length of 40 feet and
include a wing-style bus shelter with outside dimensions of three
feet by seven feet by eight feet.
(3) The projected hours of operation for bus lines utilizing these stops
will be as follows:
(a) Monday to Friday: 6:25 a.m. to 9:10 p.m.
(b) Saturday: 7:30 a.m. to 8:10 p.m.
(c) Sunday: no service.
§ 400-22 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-22
1:594
§ 400-23. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-14-1986 by L.L. No.
2-1986]
Unless another penalty is provided, any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the terms in this article shall be punishable by a fine of
$10. Each day on which any vehicle is parked or left standing in violation
of any of the terms of this article shall constitute a separate offense. In
addition, violators of this article shall be deemed disorderly persons and be
punishable as such, and a violation of this article constitutes a violation of
§ 1200(d) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York and will
subject the person or persons violating the same to the penalties provided
in § 1800(b) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
§ 400-24. Parking near fire hydrants; penalty. [Adopted 8-18-1937;
amended 10-14-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986]
No person shall park an automobile or motor vehicle or leave standing
any other vehicle within eight feet of the fire hydrant on any street within
the corporate limits of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, New York, nor shall
any person stop or allow any such automobile or motor vehicle or other
vehicle to stand or remain stationary within eight feet of any such fire
hydrant. Unless another penalty is provided, any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the terms in this section shall be punishable by a fine of $25.
Each day on which any vehicle is parked or left standing in violation of any
of the terms of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 400-25. Additional restrictions; penalty.
(4) The foregoing shall also apply to all drivers of vehicles, whether or
not they are the owners of the vehicles which they operate.
(5) A bus stop for the vehicles of the Westchester Coach Company, Inc.,
or any subsequent owner of its franchise, is hereby established
within the limits set forth in Subsection E. All northbound vehicles
of the said corporation shall make their Beekman Avenue-
Broadway stops at that location.
A. No driver or operator of any automobile or other vehicle shall park the
same upon any of the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Bellwood Avenue Both Entire length
Birch Close in Sleepy
Hollow Manor
Both Entire length
Devries Avenue Both Entire length
Farrington Avenue Both Entire length
Harwood Avenue Both Entire length
Highland Avenue Both Entire length
§ 400-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-25
1:595
§ 400-26. New Broadway; penalty. [Added 10-4-1965]
§ 400-27. Lake Shore Close; penalty. [Added 2-7-1966]
Name of Street Side Location
Hunter Avenue Both Entire length
Kelbourne Avenue Both Entire length
Merlin Avenue Both Entire length
Millard Avenue Both Entire length
Munroe Avenue Both Entire length
Palmer Avenue Both Entire length
Pierson Avenue Both Entire length
Riverside Avenue Both Entire length
Riverside Drive
extension
Both From the north end of
Riverside Drive to the
Westchester Lighting Company
Pole 557
B. No driver or operator of any automobile or other vehicle shall park the
same on any side of the triangle located at the junction of Valley Street,
Washington Street and Chestnut Street in this Village.
C. Unless another penalty is provided, any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the terms in this section shall be punishable by a fine of
$10. Each day on which any vehicle is parked or left standing in
violation of any of the terms of this section shall constitute a separate
offense. In addition, violators of this section shall be deemed disorderly
persons and be punishable as such, and a violation of this section
constitutes a violation of § 1200(d) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York and will subject the person or persons violating the
same to the penalties provided in § 1800(b) of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York. [Amended 10-14-1986 by L.L. No.
2-1986]
A. The parking or standing of motor vehicles is hereby prohibited on the
westerly side of New Broadway between the northerly curbline
connecting US 9 and New Broadway and a point 90 feet northerly
therefrom.
B. Unless another penalty is provided, any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the terms in Subsection A hereof shall be punishable by
a fine of $10. Each day on which any vehicle is parked or left standing in
violation of any of the terms of this section shall constitute a separate
offense. [Amended 10-14-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986]
A. No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his, her or its
automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle to park or remain
§ 400-25 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-27
1:596
§ 400-28. New Broadway and Gordon; penalty. [Added 7-10-1967]
§ 400-29. Howard Street and Kendall Avenue extension; penalty.
[Added 7-10-1967; amended 11-15-1971]
standing, at any time, on either side of Lake Shore Close, a public street
in the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
B. Unless another penalty is provided, any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the terms in Subsection A hereof shall be punishable by
a fine of $10. Each day on which any vehicle is parked or left standing in
violation of any of the terms of this section shall constitute a separate
offense. [Amended 10-14-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986]
A. No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his, her or its
automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle to park or remain
standing, at any time, at the following locations:
(1) On New Broadway for a distance of 20 feet southerly from the
southeasterly corner of the intersection of said New Broadway and
Pine Street, as measured along the easterly side of New Broadway.
(2) On New Broadway for a distance of 20 feet southerly from the
southwesterly corner of the intersection of said New Broadway and
Van Ripper Avenue, as measured along the westerly side of New
Broadway.
(3) On Gordon Avenue for a distance of 84 feet easterly from the
northeasterly corner of the intersection of said Gordon Avenue and
Route 9 (Headless Horseman Bridge) as measured along the
northerly side of Gordon Avenue.
B. Unless another penalty is provided, any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the terms in Subsection A hereof shall be punishable by
a fine of $10. Each day on which any vehicle is parked or left standing in
violation of any of the terms of this section shall constitute a separate
offense. [Amended 10-19-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986]
A. No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his, her or its
automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle to park or remain
standing, at any time:
(1) On the southerly side of Howard Street between Washington Street
and Pocantico Street.
(2) On the northerly side of Howard Street, which runs in an east-west
direction, from its intersection with the easterly side of Kendall
Avenue (sometimes known as "Howard Street") east for a distance
of 50 feet.
(3) On the westerly side of Kendall Avenue extension from its
intersection with the northerly side of Elm Street northerly to a
§ 400-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-29
1:597
§ 400-30. Riverside Drive. [Added 11-20-1967; amended 5-17-1971]
point on Kendall Avenue (sometimes known as "Howard Street") 18
feet southerly of the prolongation of the northerly side of Howard
Street (which runs in an east-west direction).
(4) On the easterly side of Kendall Avenue extension from its
intersection with the northerly side of Elm Street north for a
distance of 75 feet.
B. Unless another penalty is provided, any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the terms in Subsection A hereof shall be punishable by
a fine of $10. Each day on which any vehicle is parked or left standing in
violation of any of the terms of this section shall constitute a separate
offense. In addition, violators of this section shall be deemed disorderly
persons and be punishable as such, and a violation of this section
constitutes a violation of § 1200(d) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York and will subject the person or persons violating the
same to the penalties provided in § 1800(b) of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York. [Amended 10-14-1986 by L.L. No.
2-1986]
A. Riverside Drive, west side:
(1) No parking at any time for a distance of 365 feet north from the
northerly boundary of Palmer Avenue.
(2) No parking at any time from the point commencing 72 feet south of
the intersection of Riverside Drive and the southerly fork of
Kelbourne Avenue to the northerly end of the Sleepy Hollow
Sewage-Booster Station.
(3) It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the remaining portion of
the west side of Riverside Drive unless a parking permit for such
vehicle shall first have been issued to the owner thereof by the
Village Clerk of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
B. Riverside Drive, east side:
(1) No parking at any time from a point commencing 72 feet south of
the intersection of Riverside Drive and the south fork of Kelbourne
Avenue to the northerly end of the Sleepy Hollow Sewage-Booster
Station.
(2) It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the remaining portion of
the east side of Riverside Drive unless a parking permit for such
vehicle shall first have been issued to the owner thereof by the
Village Clerk of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
C. Unless another penalty is provided, any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the terms in Subsections A and B hereof shall be
punishable by a fine of $10. Each day on which any vehicle is parked or
§ 400-29 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-30
1:598
§ 400-31. General Motors Assembly Division Marsh Parking Lot: fire
zone lanes established; penalty. [Added 7-13-1970]
left standing in violation of any of the terms of this section shall
constitute a separate offense. In addition, violators of this section shall
be deemed disorderly persons and be punishable as such, and a
violation of this section constitutes a violation of § 1200(d) of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York and will subject
the person or persons violating the same to the penalties provided in
§ 1800(b) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
[Amended 10-14-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986]
A. Fire zones or lanes hereinafter described are hereby established for a
certain portion of the parking area of the General Motors Assembly
Division Marsh Parking Lot:
(1) A fire zone or lane 14 feet six inches in width running
approximately 1,050 feet parallel to the Penn Central Railroad
property situated 20 feet easterly from said railroad property line
and commencing at the southwesterly line of the Anchor Motor
Export storage lot and thence southerly to the end of the paved
portion of the General Motors Assembly Division, designated as the
"Marsh Parking Lot."
(2) A fire zone lane approximately 21 feet in width and running thence
in a westerly direction from the main entrance roadway of General
Motors Assembly Division Marsh Parking Lot for a distance of
approximately 270 feet to the building entrance escalator.
(3) A fire zone or lane in that area surrounding the building entrance
escalator structure and the natural gas reducing and meter station
for a distance of approximately 30 feet on the southerly side
thereof, and 40 feet on the northerly side thereof and to the fire
lane on the westerly side thereof.
B. Such areas shall thereupon be marked with standard police signs and/
or such other markings deemed necessary and proper by the Fire Chief,
indicating that each of said above-described areas is a restricted fire
zone or lane.
C. The parking or remaining standing or placing thereon, at any time, of
any automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle or any other physical
object or material within such restricted fire zone or lane is hereby
expressly prohibited.
D. Unless another penalty is provided, any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the terms in Subsection B hereof shall be punishable by
a fine of $10. Each day on which any vehicle is parked or left standing in
violation of any of the terms of this section shall constitute a separate
offense. In addition, violators of this section shall be deemed disorderly
persons and be punishable as such, and a violation of this section
§ 400-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-31
1:599
§ 400-32. Winfield L. Morse School Building: fire zone lanes
established; penalty. [Added 3-22-1971]
§ 400-33. Fire lanes; penalty. [Added 12-27-1982 by L.L. No. 9-1982]
constitutes a violation of § 1200(d) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York and will subject the person or persons violating the
same to the penalties provided in § 1800(b) of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York. [Amended 10-14-1986 by L.L. No.
2-1986]
A. The fire zone or lane hereinafter described is hereby established for a
certain portion of the courtyard adjacent to the Winfield L. Morse
School Building at Pocantico Street on the property of the Union Free
School District No. 1 of the Towns of Greenburgh and Mount Pleasant:
(1) A fire zone or lane 20 feet in width adjacent to and contiguous with
the southerly and easterly sides of said school building, and
running thence from Pocantico Street in an easterly and northerly
direction along said southerly and easterly sides of said school
building.
(2) Such area shall thereupon be marked with standard police signs
and/or such other markings deemed necessary and proper by the
Fire Chief indicating that said above-described area is a restricted
fire zone or lane.
B. The parking or remaining standing or placing thereon, at any time, of
any automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle or any other physical
object or material within such restricted fire zone or lane is hereby
expressly prohibited.
C. Unless another penalty is provided, any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the terms in Subsection B hereof shall be punishable by
a fine of $10. Each day on which any vehicle is parked or left standing in
violation of any of the terms of this section shall constitute a separate
offense. In addition, violators of this section shall be deemed disorderly
persons and be punishable as such, and a violation of this section
constitutes a violation of § 1200, Subdivision (d), of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York and will subject the person or
persons violating the same to the penalties provided in § 1800,
Subdivision (b), of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York.60 [Amended 10-14-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986]
A. Fire lanes established.
(1) The fire zone or lanes hereafter described are hereby established
for a certain portion of the parking area located in the Dell Street
circle area:
60.Editor's Note: Original § 57-20I of the 1965 Code, North Broadway; penalty, added
6-21-1971, as amended, which followed this subsection, was repealed 2-4-1974.
§ 400-31 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-33
1:600
(a) A fire lane located on the north side of the Dell Street circle
commencing at the edge of the driveway of that premises
designated as 49 Dell Street and running thence 26 feet into
the Dell Street circle, as posted.
(b) A fire zone located on the south side of the Dell Street circle
commencing at the southerly edge of said circle and running
thence 26 feet into said Dell Street circle, as posted.
(c) Such area shall thereupon be marked with standard police
signs and/or such other markings deemed necessary and
proper by the Fire Chief indicating that said above-described
area is a restricted fire zone or lane.
(2) A fire zone is created in the southernmost parking row of the
College Arms parking lot (100 College Avenue) adjacent to
Reverend Sykes Park. [Added 1-21-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997]
(3) A fire lane is created in the parking lot adjoining Saint Theresa's
Church which shall encompass the entire parking lot, with the
exception of designated parking stalls on the perimeter of said
parking lot. [Added 7-10-2001 by L.L. No. 6-2001]
(4) A fire lane is created in the driveway of 49 1/2 Clinton Street
starting at the curb cut on Clinton Street between 49 Clinton Street
and 51 Clinton Street and proceeding in a easterly direction for 65
feet to the front of the structure located on 49 1/2 Clinton Street.
[Added 5-14-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
(5) A fire lane is created in the driveway leading to 245 North
Broadway. [Added 8-20-2002 by L.L. No. 8-2002]
(6) A sixty-foot fire lane on the east side of Valley Street, more
specifically, in front of 124 Valley Street. [Added 2-23-2010 by
L.L. No. 1-2010]
B. The parking or remaining standing or placing thereon, at any time, of
any automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle or any other physical
object or material within such restricted fire zone or lane is hereby
expressly prohibited.
C. Unless another penalty is provided, any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the terms in Subsection B hereof shall be punishable by
a fine of $25. Each day on which any vehicle is parked or left standing in
violation of any of the terms of this section shall constitute a separate
offense. In addition, violators of this section shall be deemed disorderly
persons and be punishable as such, and a violation of this section
constitutes a violation of § 1200, Subdivision (d), of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York and will subject the person or
persons violating the same to the penalties provided in § 1800,
Subdivision (b), of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
[Amended 10-14-1986 by L.L. No. 2-1986]
§ 400-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-34
1:601
§ 400-34. Double parking; stopping, standing or parking prohibited
in specific places. [Added 8-7-1990 by L.L. No. 7-1990]
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or when in
compliance with law or directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on the roadway side of
any vehicle stopped, standing or parked at the edge of the curb of a street.
§ 400-35. Loading zones. [Added 9-14-1998 by L.L. No. 5-1998]
§ 400-35.1. Temporary Mayoral authority. [Added 2-23-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
The provisions of this Article V are expressly subject to the provisions of
Article XXI of this chapter.
A. A loading zone is hereby erected on the easterly side of Cortlandt Street
in front of premises located at 144 Cortlandt Street, to be in effect
Tuesday through Sunday from the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
B. A loading zone is hereby created on the easterly side of Cortlandt Street
in front of premises located at 172 Cortlandt Street; to be in effect from
2:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Sunday through Friday. [Added 11-2-1998 by
L.L. No. 9-1998]
C. A loading zone is hereby designated in front of 147 Cortlandt Street
(144 feet southerly from the southwest corner of Cortlandt Street and
Depeyster Street) between the hours of 3:00 a.m. until 5:00 a.m., seven
days per week; and parking meter regulations will remain in effect from
9:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. [Added
12-13-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
§ 400-34 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-35.1
1:602
ARTICLE VI
Overnight Parking
[Adopted 8-18-1937 (Ch. 57, Art. VI, of the 1965 Code)]
§ 400-36. Overnight parking prohibited.
No person shall park or permit his or her automobile, truck or other vehicle
to stand on any public street, avenue or roadway within the limits of this
Village between 12:00 midnight and dawn unless the same shall be lighted
with two white lights in front and one red in rear.
§ 400-37. Conditions for moving of vehicles.
The Superintendent of Highways of the Village of Sleepy Hollow is hereby
authorized and permitted to move any automobile, truck or other vehicle on
any of the streets or highways of this Village, at any time during the day
or night, when in his opinion the moving of said automobile, truck or other
vehicle is necessary in order to permit the proper removal or plowing of
snow, sleet or ice, or make repairs of any nature or description to the streets
or highways or the drains or sewers thereunder.
§ 400-38. Snow zones. [Added 10-23-1978; amended 10-15-1979;
12-15-1987 by L.L. No. 17-1987; 1-6-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
A. All vehicles shall be removed from the areas hereafter designated as
"snow zones" within two hours from the start of a snowfall from the first
day of November through the first day of April of the calendar year.
B. The Mayor or his designated representative shall determine when a
snowfall or snow removal operations require the parking prohibition in
Subsection A to be put into effect in any or all snow zones on the
following streets:
Name of Street Side Days
Anderson Avenue East Mon., Wed., Fri., Sun.
Anderson Avenue West Tues., Thurs., Sat.
Beekman Avenue, from River
Street to Broadway
North Tues., Thur., Sat.
Beekman Avenue, from River
Street to Broadway
South Mon., Wed., Fri., Sun.
Cortlandt Street, from the
Village line to Beekman
Avenue
East Tues., Thur., Sun.
Cortlandt Street, from the
Village line to Beekman
Avenue
West Mon., Wed., Fri., Sat.
Crane Avenue North —
Gory Brook Road West —
§ 400-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-38
1:603
§ 400-39. Vehicle to be moved only after diligent effort made to find
owner.
The moving of said automobile, truck or other vehicle is not permitted,
however, unless and until diligent effort shall have been made to locate the
owner thereof and a reasonable time allowed for the owner of said vehicle
to himself remove the same.
§ 400-40. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-14-1986 by L.L. No.
2-1986; 1-6-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
Unless another penalty is provided, any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the terms in § 400-36 hereof shall be punishable by a
minimum fine of $50.
Name of Street Side Days
Holland Avenue Outer —
Lawrence Avenue, from
Beekman Avenue to
Broadway
East Tues., Thur., Sun.
Lawrence Avenue, from
Beekman Avenue to
Broadway
West Mon., Wed., Fri., Sat.
Maple Street South —
North Washington Street,
from Beekman Avenue to
Village line
East Tues., Thur., Sun.
North Washington Street,
from Beekman Avenue to
Village line
West Mon., Wed., Fri., Sat.
New Broadway East Tues., Thur., Sun.
New Broadway West Mon., Wed., Fri., Sat.
Rice Avenue North —
Spruce Street North Mon., Wed., Fri., Sat.
Spruce Street South Tues., Thur., Sun.
Tappan Avenue North —
Valley Street, from Chestnut
Street to Village line
East Tues., Thur., Sun.
Valley Street, from Chestnut
Street to Village line
West Mon., Wed., Fri., Sat.
Van Ripper Avenue North —
§ 400-38 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-40.1
1:604
§ 400-40.1. Temporary Mayoral authority. [Added 2-23-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
The provisions of this Article VI are expressly subject to the provisions of
Article XXI of this chapter.
§ 400-40.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-40.1
1:605

ARTICLE VII
Off-Street Parking
[Adopted 4-15-1963 (Ch. 57, Art. VII, of the 1965 Code)]
§ 400-41. Parking spaces required.
The following parking spaces shall be provided and satisfactorily
maintained by the owner of the property for each building which, after the
date when this article becomes effective, is erected, enlarged or altered for
use for any of the following purposes:
§ 400-42. Parking space locations.
All parking spaces provided pursuant to this article shall be on the same lot
with the building, except that the Board of Appeals may permit the parking
spaces to be on a lot in the same ownership within 300 feet of the building
if it determines that it is impractical to provide parking on the same lot with
the building.
§ 400-43. Parking space dimensions.
A parking space shall be 300 square feet. Each parking space shall include
the individual car parking area, and necessary aisle space for parking areas,
but does not include space required for exit or entrance from parking area
to street.
A. Dwelling: at least one parking space for each dwelling unit in the
building or buildings.
B. Auditorium, Stadium, theater or other places of public assembly: at
least one parking space for each eight seats provided for its patrons,
based on maximum seating capacity.
C. Hotel: at least one parking space for each three guest sleeping rooms.
D. Restaurant or other eating place: at least one parking space for each
five seats, except when it is in a building which provides parking space,
in which case, the number of places already provided may be taken to
be available for the restaurant or other eating place.
E. Hospital, sanitarium or nursing home: at least one parking space for
each bed.
F. Retail use: at least one parking space for each 200 square feet of store
floor area.
G. Office use: at least one parking space for each 300 square feet of office
floor area.
H. Industrial or manufacturing establishments: at least one parking space
for each 400 square feet of gross floor area or for each two workers on
maximum shift.
§ 400-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-44
1:607
§ 400-44. Nonapplicability.
This article shall not apply to the Urban Renewal Project Area bounded by
Cortlandt Street, College Avenue, Valley Street and the Tarrytown-Sleepy
Hollow Village line.
§ 400-45. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-14-1986 by L.L. No.
2-1986]
Unless another penalty is provided, any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the terms in § 400-36 hereof shall be punishable by a fine
of $10. Each day on which any vehicle is parked or left standing in violation
of any of the terms of this article shall constitute a separate offense. In
addition, violators of this article shall be deemed disorderly persons and be
punishable as such, and a violation of this article constitutes a violation of
§ 1200(d) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York and will
subject the person or persons violating the same to the penalties provided
in § 1800(b) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
§ 400-44 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-45
1:608
ARTICLE VIII
Parking Meters
[Adopted 10-3-1962 (Ch. 57, Art. VIII, of the 1965 Code); amended
in its entirety 5-24-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
§ 400-46. Establishment of parking meter zones.
The Police Department of this Village is hereby authorized, subject to
approval of the Village Board of Trustees by resolution, to establish parking
meter zones at locations upon those streets or parts of streets where it
is determined upon the basis of a traffic investigation that the installation
of parking meters shall be necessary to aid in the regulation, control and
inspection of the parking of vehicles.
§ 400-47. Installation of meters.
The Police Department of the Village shall supervise the installation of
parking meters in the parking meter zones established as provided in this
article upon the curb immediately adjacent to each designated parking
space. Said meters shall be capable of being operated, either automatically
or mechanically, upon the payment of coins or bills of United States
currency, or via debit or credit card, depending upon the type of meter (the
"fee").
§ 400-48. Parking meter spaces.
The Police Department of the Village shall designate the parking space
to each parking meter for which such meter is to be used by signage
or appropriate markings on the curb and/or the pavement of the street.
Parking meter spaces so designated shall be of appropriate length and
width so as to be accessible from the traffic lanes of such street. No person
shall park a vehicle in any such designated parking meter space during
the restricted or regulated time applicable to the parking meter zone in
which such meter is located so that any part of such vehicle occupies more
than one such space or protrudes beyond the markings designating such
space, except that a vehicle which is of a size too large to be parked within
a single designated parking meter zone shall be permitted to occupy two
adjoining parking meter spaces when coins shall have been deposited in the
parking meter for each space so occupied as is required in this article for
the parking of other vehicles in such space.
A. Each parking meter shall be designed, constructed, installed and set so
the user of the meter shall be advised of the amount of time registered
by the fee paid as provided herein.
B. Each parking meter shall bear thereon the legend indicating the days
and hours when the requirement for fee payment therein shall apply,
the amount of the fee payment, and the limited period of time for which
parking is lawfully permitted in the parking meter zone in which such
meter is located.
§ 400-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-49
1:609
§ 400-49. Deposit of coins and time limits.
§ 400-50. Tampering with meter.
No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy
or impair the usefulness of any parking meter.
§ 400-51. Application of proceeds.
A. No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space for which a meter
has been designated during the restricted and regulated time
applicable to the parking meter zone in which such space is located
unless a payment made as provided in this article shall have been
deposited therein for an unexpired interval of time and said meter has
been placed in operation.
B. No person shall permit a vehicle within his control to be parked in any
space for which a meter has been designated during the restricted and
regulated time applicable to the parking meter zone in which such
space is located while the parking meter or the receipt from a munimeter
for such space indicates that the lawful parking time in such
space has expired. This provision shall not apply to the act of parking
for the necessary time which is required to deposit immediately
thereafter a payment in such meter.
C. No person shall park a vehicle in any such parking meter space for a
consecutive period of time longer than that limited period of time for
which parking is lawfully permitted in the parking meter zone in which
such parking meter is located, irrespective of the amount of payment
made in such meter.
D. The provisions of this section shall not relieve any person from the duty
to observe other and more-restrictive provisions of this chapter and in
the Vehicle and Traffic Law prohibiting or limiting the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or specified times.
A. The payments required to be made in parking meters as provided in this
article are levied and assessed as fees to cover the regulation and
control of parking upon public streets; the costs of parking meters;
their installation, inspection, supervision, operation, repair and
maintenance; control and use of parking spaces; regulating the parking
of vehicles in parking meter zones; and the costs of acquiring,
establishing, improving, maintaining and operating public off-street
parking facilities.
B. The payments made in parking meters shall be collected by a duly
authorized member of the Police Department of this Village so assigned
by the Chief of Police and shall be deposited by him in a special fund to
be known as the "Parking Meter Special and Trust Fund."
C. The Village Treasurer shall pay from such special fund the costs of
parking meters purchased by the Village and installed as provided in
§ 400-49 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-51
1:610
§ 400-52. Schedule of parking meter zones.61
§ 400-53. Penalties for offenses.
Unless otherwise provided by law, or by specific enactment, the penalty for
each violation of this article shall be a sum of money not exceeding $100.
In addition, unless otherwise provided by law, or by specific enactment, a
violation of this article shall constitute disorderly conduct, and the person
violating the same shall be a disorderly person.
§ 400-54. (Reserved)
this article and expenses incurred for their installation, inspection,
service, supervision, repair and maintenance; for making collections
from such parking meters; and for the enforcement of the provisions of
this article applicable to parking meter zones. The net proceeds of the
operation of parking meters in said special fund, after the payment of
such costs and expenses, shall be used for parking studies and for the
acquisition, establishment, improvement, maintenance and operation of
public off-street parking facilities as the Village Board of Trustees shall
from time to time direct.
A. A schedule of parking meter zones within the district or upon those
streets or parts of streets in which the parking of vehicles upon streets
or off-street parking lots shall be regulated by parking meters, the
hours of parking meter operation, the minimum billing increment, the
fee per billing increment and the maximum time period for use of a
parking meter shall be established.
B. Such schedule of parking meter zones may be amended from time to
time by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees.
61.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Parking Meter Zones is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 400-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-54
1:611

ARTICLE IX
Heavy Truck Traffic
[Adopted 10-13-1952 (Ch. 57, Art. IX, of the 1965 Code)]
§ 400-55. Heavy trucks excluded; penalty.
§ 400-56. Heavy trucks restricted; penalty. [Adopted 7-23-1956]
A. The following streets and highways within the Village of Sleepy Hollow
are hereby designated as streets from which heavy trucks shall be
excluded between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.:
Name of Street
Lawrence Avenue
Pocantico Street
B. The foregoing designation shall not be construed to prevent delivery of
merchandise or other property along such streets.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
HEAVY TRUCK — Any truck (except fire apparatus) having a total gross
weight of vehicle plus load in excess of five tons.
D. Penalties for offenses. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$10, and for the second offense by a fine of not less than $10 nor more
than $25, or by imprisonment of not less than two nor more than 15
days. The third or any subsequent offense within one year may be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $100 or by imprisonment not
exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The
registered owner of any such heavy truck, in addition to the chauffeur
or operator thereof, shall be considered as a person violating the
provisions of this section if the operator of such heavy truck in violation
hereof shall have been with the knowledge, actual or constructive, of
such registered owner.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his, her or its
truck, trailer or other commercial vehicle, if having a gross vehicle
weight in excess of five tons, to travel on any street in the Village of
Sleepy Hollow, except the following:
(1) Northbound: River Street, Beekman Avenue, North Broadway and/
or Bedford Road.
(2) Southbound: Bedford Road, North Broadway, Beekman Avenue,
Valley Street or River Street.
B. Truck permitted for deliveries. Travel upon any and all other streets in
the Village of Sleepy Hollow by trucks having a gross vehicle weight in
§ 400-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-56
1:613
§ 400-57. Dimensions and weights of vehicles. [Added 10-8-2002 by
L.L. No. 11-2002]
excess of five tons shall be permitted only while said vehicles are in the
process of making deliveries on said streets. In making such deliveries,
said vehicles shall use the shortest available route to and from the
trucking route ordained.
C. Penalties for offenses. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of
the provisions of §§ 400-55 and 400-56 hereof shall be deemed a
disorderly person and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $50 for the first offense and by a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $100 for each subsequent offense.
A. Dimensions and weights of vehicles.
(1) Except as expressly permitted by the United States or the New York
State Department of Transportation, no person shall operate or
move, or cause or knowingly permit to be operated or moved on
any public street in the Village of Sleepy Hollow, any vehicle or
combination of vehicles of a size or weight exceeding the
limitations provided for in this section.
(2) Vehicle width.
(a) The width of a vehicle, inclusive of load, shall be not more than
96 inches plus safety devices, on any Village highway in the
Village of Sleepy Hollow.
(b) The provisions of Subsection A(2)(a) of this subsection shall not
apply to omnibuses or buses used solely for the transportation
of children to and from school, but the width of such omnibuses
shall not exceed 98 inches.
(3) The height of a vehicle from under side of tire to top of vehicle,
inclusive of load, shall be not more than 13 1/2 feet. Any damage to
highways, bridges or highway structures resulting from the use of a
vehicle exceeding 13 feet in height where such excess height is the
proximate cause of the accident shall be compensated for by the
owner and operator of such vehicle.
(4) Vehicle length.
(a) The length of a single vehicle, inclusive of load and bumpers,
shall be not more than 35 feet unless otherwise provided in this
subsection.
(b) The length of a semitrailer or trailer shall not exceed 45 feet
except as provided in Subsection A(4)(d) of this subsection;
provided, however, that the length of any trailer or semitrailer
being operated in combination with another trailer or
semitrailer shall not exceed 28 1/2 feet.
§ 400-56 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-57
1:614
(c) The length of buses having a carrying capacity of more than
seven passengers shall not exceed 40 feet, except that the
length of articulated buses shall not exceed 62 feet.
(d) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to fire vehicles
or Village-owned vehicles.
(e) Any semitrailer with a length not to exceed 48 feet may be
operated on any Village highway, provided that the total length
of a combination of vehicles including such a semitrailer does
not exceed 55 feet.
(5) Length of combination of vehicles.
(a) The total length of a combination of vehicles, inclusive of load
and bumpers, shall not be more than 60 feet.
(b) The provisions of Subsection A(5)(a) of this subsection shall not
apply to:
[1] Vehicles of a corporation which is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Interstate Commerce Commission, the
Public Service Commission or other regulatory body and
which are used in the construction, reconstruction, repair
or maintenance of its property or facilities, provided that
any such vehicle complies with the safety requirements of
the laws and regulations of the United States and of New
York State pertaining to over-length vehicles;
[2] Vehicles hauling poles, girders, columns, or other similar
objects of excess length, provided that any such vehicle
complies with the safety requirements of the laws and
regulations of the United States and of New York State
pertaining to such over-length vehicles;
[3] Fire vehicles; and
[4] Any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is disabled
and unable to proceed under its own power and is being
towed for a distance not in excess of 10 miles for the
purpose of repairs or removal from the highway.
(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A(5)(a) of this
subsection, a bumper overhang of not more than a total of five
feet, either front or rear or divided between the front and rear
of a combination of vehicles used to transport other motor
vehicles, shall be permitted.
(6) In determining the number of wheels and axles on any vehicle or
combination of vehicles within the meaning of this section, only two
wheels shall be counted for each axle, and axles which are less than
46 inches apart, from center to center, shall be counted as one axle.
However, in the case of multiple tires or multiple wheels, the sum of
§ 400-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-57
1:615
the widths of all the tires on a wheel or combination of wheels shall
be taken in determining tire width.
(7) Subject to the provisions of §§ 400-56 and 400-57 governing
restrictions on heavy trucks, the weight per inch width of tire on
any one wheel of a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles
equipped with pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall be not more
than 800 pounds.
(8) Subject to the provisions of §§ 400-56 and 400-57 of this chapter
governing restrictions on heavy trucks, the weight on any one
wheel of a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles equipped with
pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall be not more than 11,200
pounds.
(9) Subject to the provisions of §§ 400-56 and 400-57 of this chapter
governing restrictions on heavy trucks, the weight on any one axle
of a single vehicle equipped with pneumatic tires, when loaded,
shall be not more than 22,400 pounds.
(10) Subject to the provisions of §§ 400-56 and 400-57 of this chapter
governing restrictions on the weight on any two consecutive axles
of a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles equipped with
pneumatic tires, when loaded, and when such axles are spaced less
than eight feet from center to center, shall be not more than the
maximum gross weight permitted by this chapter, except where
axles are spaced eight feet or greater, but less than 10 feet, the
weight on those two axles shall not exceed that permitted by
Subsection A(11)(b) of this section and, in addition, shall not
exceed 40,000 pounds; axles to be counted as provided in
Subsection A(6) of this section.
(11) Subject to the provisions of §§ 400-56 and 400-57 of this chapter
governing maximum vehicle gross weights, a single vehicle, or a
combination of vehicles having three axles or more equipped with
pneumatic tires, when loaded, may have a total weight on all axles
not to exceed the maximum gross weight permitted by this chapter,
plus 1,000 pounds for each foot and major fraction of a foot of the
distance from the center of the foremost axles to the center of the
rearmost axle. Axles are to be counted as provided in Subsection
A(6) of this section. In no case, however, shall the total weight
exceed 80,000 pounds. For any vehicles or combination of vehicles
having a total gross weight less than 71,000 pounds, the higher of
the following shall apply:
(a) The total weight on all axles shall not exceed the maximum
gross weight permitted by this chapter, plus 1,000 pounds for
each foot and major fraction of a foot of the distance from the
center of the foremost axle to the center of rearmost axle; or
§ 400-57 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-57
1:616
(b) The overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive
axles shall not exceed the weight produced by application of
the following formula:
W = 500 ((LxN)/(N - 1) + (12xn) + 36)
Where:
W = overall gross weight on any group of two or more
consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds
L = distance in feet from the center of the foremost axle to
the center of the rearmost axle of any group of two or
more consecutive axles
N = the number of axles in the group under consideration,
except that two consecutive sets of tandem axles may
carry a gross load not to exceed (the maximum gross
weight permitted by this chapter), providing the overall
distance between the first and last axles of such
consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or more.
For any vehicle or combination of vehicles having a total
gross weight of 71,000 pounds or greater, Subsection
A(11)(b) shall apply to determine maximum gross weight
which is permitted hereunder, subject to the provisions
of §§ 400-56 and 400-57 of this chapter governing
maximum vehicle gross weights.
(12)No vehicle shall be operated on the public streets of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow other than on pneumatic tires.
(13) For the purpose of this section, the width of pneumatic tires shall
be ascertained by measuring the greatest width of the tire casing
when tire is inflated.
(14)No person shall operate or move a vehicle or a combination of
vehicles over, on or through any bridge or structure on any highway
if the weight of such vehicle, or combination of vehicles, and load,
is greater than the posted capacity of the structure, or exceeds the
height of the posted clearance as shown by an official sign.
(15) If a vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in violation of
this section, an appearance ticket or summons may be issued to the
registrant of the vehicle, or, if a combination of vehicles, to the
registrant of the hauling vehicle, rather than the operator. In the
event the vehicle is operated by a person other than the registrant,
any appearance ticket or summons issued to the registrant shall be
served upon the operator, who shall be deemed the agent of the
registrant only for the purpose of receiving such appearance ticket
or summons. In addition, a notice containing all pertinent
information relating to the charge which is contained on the
summons or appearance ticket shall be mailed by or on behalf of
the person who issued the appearance ticket or summons to the
§ 400-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-57
1:617
registrant at the address given on the registration certificate for
the vehicle, or if no registration certificate is produced at the time
the appearance ticket or summons is issued to the address of the
registrant on file with the department within five days after the
date of issuance of the appearance ticket or summons, but at least
five days before the return date specified on the appearance ticket
or summons. Proof of mailing to the registrant under this section
shall be filed with the court in which the appearance ticket or
summons is returnable on or before the return date. The provisions
of this subsection shall not apply to owner-operators of any motor
vehicle or to any motor vehicle or trailer which is registered in the
name of a person whose principal business is the lease or rental
of motor vehicles or trailers unless the motor vehicle or trailer is
being operated by an employee of the registrant or for a community
of interest other than the lease or rental agreement between the
parties to the lease or rental agreement.
(16) In any case wherein the charge laid before the court alleges a
violation of this section, any plea of guilty thereafter entered in
satisfaction of such charge must include at least a plea of guilty to a
violation of one of the subsections of this section. No other
disposition by plea of guilty to any other charge in satisfaction of
such shall be authorized; provided, however, if the prosecuting
attorney, upon reviewing the available evidence, determines that
the charge of a violation of this section is not warranted, he may
consent, and the court may allow, a disposition by plea of guilty to
that or another charge in satisfaction of such charge; provided,
however, the court must impose at least the minimum fine as
authorized in this section for the offense.
B. Penalties for offenses.
(1) The violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by
a fine of not less than $200 nor more than $500, or by
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, for the first offense; by a fine of not less than 500
nor more than $1,000, or by imprisonment for not more than 60
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for the second or
subsequent offenses.
(2) A violation of the provisions of Subsection A(10) or (11) of this
section by any vehicle or combination of vehicles whose weight
exceeds the weight limitations as set forth in either of such
subsections shall be punishable by fines levied on the registered
owner of the vehicle or vehicles, whether at the time of the
violation the vehicle was in the charge of the registered owner or
his agent or lessee, in accordance with the following schedule:
§ 400-57 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-57
1:618
Excess Total Weight
(pounds)
Greater Than
Less Than or Equal
to Amount of Fine
0 2,000 $50
2,000 3,000 $75
3,000 4,000 $100
4,000 5,000 $200
5,000 6,000 $300
6,000 7,000 $400
7,000 8,000 $500
8,000 9,000 $600
9,000 10,000 $700
10,000 15,000 $1,200
15,000 20,000 $1,700
20,000 25,000 $2,200
25,000 30,000 $2,700
30,000 $0.60 for each pound in
excess of 30,000
(3) A violation of the provisions of Subsection A(8) and (9) of this
section by any vehicle or combination of vehicle whose weight
exceeds the weight limitation as set forth in such subsections or the
weight limitations specified by a permit issued by the United States
or New York State Department of Transportation shall be
punishable by fines levied on the registered owner of the vehicle or
vehicles, whether at the time of the violation the vehicle was in the
charge of the registered owner, or his agent, or lessee, in
accordance with the following schedule:
Percentage of Excess Weight
(percentage)
Greater Than Less Than or Equal
to
Amount of Fine
0 5.0 $100
5.0 10.0 $200
10.0 15.0 $350
15.0 20.0 $600
20.0 25.0 $1,000
25.0 30.0 $1,600
§ 400-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-57
1:619
§ 400-58. Heavy trucks restricted in Sleepy Hollow Manor; penalty.
[Adopted 8-18-1937; amended 5-22-1978]
§ 400-59. Unloading of auto-carrying trucks or trailers prohibited;
penalty. [Adopted 8-18-1937; amended 1-24-1983 by L.L. No.
1-1983]
Percentage of Excess Weight
(percentage)
Greater Than Less Than or Equal
to
Amount of Fine
30.0 $2,450
(4) In connection with the weighing of a vehicle or combination of
vehicles, if it is found that there is a violation of Subsection A(11)
and also of Subsection A(9) and (10), or both Subsection A(9) and
(10) of this section, there shall be a single fine imposed, and the
maximum amount of such fine shall not exceed the highest fine that
could be imposed under Subsection B(2) of this section or this
paragraph.
(5) The court may impose any sentence authorized by this chapter;
provided, however, any such sentence must include a fine as
provided in this section.
A. No person shall operate or drive a heavy truck or a sightseeing omnibus
on or through any of the streets of Sleepy Hollow Manor and that area
commonly known as "Webber Park" in the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
B. Any person violating this section shall be liable to a penalty not to
exceed $10, nor more than $25 for the second offense, or by
imprisonment for not less than two days nor more than 15 days. The
third or any subsequent offense within one year shall be a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction therefor, may be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $100 or imprisonment. It is further ordained that violation of
this section shall constitute disorderly conduct, and a person violating
the same shall be a disorderly person.
A. No person or corporation shall load or unload automobiles, trailers or
trucks upon any public street or sidewalk within the Village of Sleepy
Hollow, New York, except as follows:
(1) From a point beginning on the southeast corner of the intersection
of Chestnut Street and Broadway, running 100 feet in a southerly
direction. This zone shall be used for the unloading and loading of
vehicles exclusively during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday to Friday, with the exception of Saturday, Sunday and
holidays.
§ 400-57 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-59
1:620
§ 400-59.1. Temporary Mayoral authority. [Added 2-23-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
The provisions of this Article IX are expressly subject to the provisions of
Article XXI of this chapter.
B. Any person so doing shall be deemed a disorderly person and shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $25 for each offense.
§ 400-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-59.1
1:621

ARTICLE X
Speed Limits
[Adopted 8-18-1937 (Ch. 57, Art. X, of the 1965 Code); 3-24-1969;
5-13-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985; 8-7-1990 by L.L. No. 9-1990; 9-7-1993
by L.L. No. 13-1993; 11-16-1993 by L.L. No. 7-1994; 2-10-2009 by
L.L. No. 2-2009; 2-14-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017; 4-25-2017 by L.L. No.
3-2017]
§ 400-60. Maximum speed limits. [Amended 12-21-1964; 3-1-1965;
3-24-1969; 5-13-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985; 8-7-1990 by L.L. No.
9-1990; 9-7-1993 by L.L. No. 13-1993; 11-16-1993 by L.L. No.
7-1994; 2-10-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009; 2-14-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017;
4-25-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017]
Twenty-five miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed
at which vehicles may proceed within the corporate limits of this Village,
except on the following highways:
Name of
Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Route U.S. 9 40 Entire length except as otherwise set forth
hereinbelow
Route U.S. 9 30 Between Highland Avenue and Devries
Avenue
Route U.S. 9 35 Northbound from Highland Avenue to the
Mt. Pleasant Town Line
Route U.S. 9 30 Southbound from Highland Avenue to the
Tarrytown Village Line
Route. U.S. 9 35 Southbound from Mt. Pleasant Town Line to
Highland Avenue
Route U.S. 9 30 Northbound between Tarrytown Village
Line and Old Broadway
§ 400-61. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating this article shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$100 or by imprisonment for not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, for the conviction of a first offense; by a fine of not less than
$50 nor more than $250 or by imprisonment for not exceeding 90 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment, for the conviction of a second offense
committed within a period of 18 months; and by a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for not exceeding 180 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment, for the conviction of a third or subsequent
offense committed within a period of 18 months.
§ 400-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-62
1:623
§ 400-62. Convictions recorded on license.
All convictions pursuant to this article shall be noted by the Police Justice
on the reverse side of the license of the person convicted.
§ 400-62.1. Temporary Mayoral authority. [Added 2-23-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
The provisions of this Article X are expressly subject to the provisions of
Article XXI of this chapter.
§ 400-62 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-62.1
1:624
ARTICLE XI
Snow Removal
[Adopted 12-18-1961 (Ch. 57, Art. XI, of the 1965 Code)]
§ 400-63. Parking restrictions.
§ 400-64. Posting of suitable signs.
When a determination has been made as provided under § 400-63 hereof,
suitable signs shall be posted during such snowfall or snow-removal
operations.
§ 400-65. Penalties for offenses.
Unless otherwise provided by law or by specific enactment, the penalty for
each violation of this article shall be a sum of money not exceeding $100.
In addition, unless otherwise provided by law or by specific enactment, any
violation of this article shall constitute disorderly conduct, and the person
violating the same shall be a disorderly person.
A. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or portion
thereof in the Village of Sleepy Hollow whenever the Mayor shall
determine that a snowfall or that snow-removal operations require the
foregoing parking prohibition to be put into effect.
B. In the absence of the Mayor from the Village, the determination shall be
made by the following in the order named: the Acting Mayor, the
Chairman of the Street and Highway Committee of the Board of
Trustees and the Chief of Police.
§ 400-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-65
1:625

ARTICLE XII
Traffic Violations Bureau
[Adopted 2-3-1958 (Ch. 57, Art. XII, of the 1965 Code)]
§ 400-66. Establishment.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, pursuant to the
power vested in it by Article 14-B of the General Municipal Law of the
State of New York, creates and hereby authorizes the Police Justice of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow to establish a Traffic Violations Bureau to assist the
court in the disposition of offenses in relation to certain traffic violations as
hereinafter described.
§ 400-67. Supervision; hours of operation.
Such Traffic Violations Bureau shall be in charge of such person or persons
and shall be open at such hours and on such days as the Police Justice of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow may designate.
§ 400-68. Jurisdiction and procedure.
Such Traffic Violations Bureau is authorized to dispose of violations of
traffic laws, rules and regulations when such offenses shall not constitute
the traffic infraction known as "speeding" or a misdemeanor or felony, by
permitting a person charged with such an offense, within the limitations
herein stated, to answer, within a specified time, at the Traffic Violations
Bureau, either in person or by written power of attorney, by paying a
prescribed fine and, in writing, waiving a hearing in court, pleading guilty
to the charge and authorizing the person in charge of the Bureau to make
such plea and pay such a fine in court. Acceptance by the Traffic Violations
Bureau of the prescribed fine and power of attorney shall be deemed
complete satisfaction for the violation, and the violator shall be given a
receipt which so states.
§ 400-69. Failure to answer charges.
If a person charged with a traffic violation does not answer as hereinabove
prescribed, within the designated time, the Traffic Violations Bureau shall
cause a complaint to be entered against him forthwith and a warrant to be
issued for his arrest and appearance before the court.
§ 400-70. Repeat offenders. [Amended 10-14-1986 by L.L. No.
2-1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall have been, within the preceding
12 months, guilty of five or more parking violations or of three or more
violations other than parking violations shall not be permitted to appear and
answer to a subsequent violation at the Traffic Violations Bureau, but must
appear in court at a time specified by the Bureau.
§ 400-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-71
1:627
§ 400-71. Limitations on authority.
Said Traffic Violations Bureau may not and shall not in any way deprive a
person of the right to counsel or prevent any person from exercising his or
her right to appear in court to answer, to explain or to defend any charge of
a violation of any traffic law, rule and regulation.
§ 400-72. Ascertaining fines.
Said Police Justice of the Village of Sleepy Hollow shall designate, within
the provisions of existing laws and/or rules, the fines to be paid for offenses,
which may be satisfied at the Traffic Violations Bureau as hereinabove set
forth.
§ 400-73. Record of violations.
The Traffic Violations Bureau shall keep a record of all violations of which
each person has been guilty, whether such guilt was established in court or
in the Traffic Violations Bureau, and also a record of all fines collected and
the disposition thereof. Said Traffic Violations Bureau shall also perform
such other or additional duties and keep such other or additional records as
shall be prescribed by the Police Justice of the Village of Sleepy Hollow and/
or the Board of Trustees of said Village.
§ 400-71 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-73
1:628
ARTICLE XIII
Restricted Turns62
[Adopted 2-6-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996 (Ch. 57, Art. XIII, of the 1965
Code)]
§ 400-74. Prohibited turns.
Name of Street
Prohibited
Direction Turn Prohibited Onto
Devries Avenue Left Route 9 (North Broadway)
Merlin Avenue Left Route 9 (North Broadway)
Palmer Avenue [Added
2-20-1996 by L.L. No.
2-1996]
Left Route 9 (North Broadway)
Route 9 (North Broadway) Left Devries Avenue
Route 9 (North Broadway)
[Added 10-28-1997 by
L.L. No. 16-1997]
All North fork of Farrington
Avenue
Route 9 (North Broadway)
[Added 10-28-1997 by
L.L. No. 16-1997]
Right South fork of Farrington
Avenue
Route 9 (North Broadway) Left Merlin Avenue
Route 9 (North Broadway)
[Added 2-20-1996 by L.L.
No. 2-1996]
Left Palmer Avenue
§ 400-75. Penalties for offenses; statutory authority.
A. Unless other penalties are provided, any person, firm or corporation
violating any section of this article shall be fined in an amount not to
exceed $100 for the first offense; an amount not to exceed $250 for the
second offense; an amount not to exceed $500 for the third offense; and
an amount not to exceed $750 for any subsequent offense.
B. This article is hereby enacted pursuant to the provision of Chapter 1028
of the Laws of 1974 and the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law
of the State of New York.
62.Editor's Note: Former Art. XIII, Parking During School Hours, adopted 6-7-1965, as
amended, was repealed 5-3-1994 by L.L. No. 6-1994.
§ 400-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-75
1:629

ARTICLE XIV
Towing, Storage and Immobilization of Vehicles
[Adopted 12-6-1971; amended in its entirety 2-7-1989 by L.L. No.
2-1989 (Ch. 57, Art. XV, of the 1965 Code)]
§ 400-76. Towing by Village.
In addition to the penalties imposed by other sections of Chapter 400 of the
Code of the Village of Sleepy Hollow and other applicable laws, it shall be
lawful for the Village of Sleepy Hollow to tow or have towed any automobile,
truck, motorcycle or other vehicle which is found parked or standing on
any street within the Village or on the Village property in violation of any
other Village law or other applicable law and to assess the cost of towing
and storage of said automobile, trucks, motorcycle or other vehicle against
the registered owner of said vehicle. Rules and regulations governing the
enforcement and the administration of this article shall be determined by
the Police Commission from time to time.
§ 400-77. Circumstances for removal.
When any vehicle which has $100 or more in outstanding or unpaid parking
violations issued against it and which is found operating or parked on
any highway within this Village or any way publicly maintained when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of parking
or vehicular travel or on any property leased by or in the possession
and control of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, said vehicle may be removed
or caused to be removed by or under the direction of a member of the
Police Department by towing or otherwise, consistent with Subsection A
of this section. In addition to or in lieu of towing, any such vehicle may
be immobilized in such manner as to prevent its operation, except that no
such vehicle shall be immobilized by any means other than by the use of
a device or other mechanism which will cause no damage to such vehicle
unless it is moved while such device or mechanism is in place. In any
case involving immobilization of a vehicle pursuant to this subsection, such
member of the Police Department shall cause to be placed on such vehicle,
in a conspicuous manner, notice sufficient to warn any individual of the
effect that any attempt to move such vehicle might result in damage to such
vehicle.
§ 400-78. Fees for removal and storage of vehicle.
A. After removal of any vehicle as provided in this local law, the Chief of
Police may cause such vehicle to be stored in a suitable place at the
expense of the owner. Before the owner or person in charge of any
vehicle taken into custody or immobilized as provided in this section
shall be allowed to repossess or to secure the release of said vehicle,
the owner or his agent shall pay the following:
(1) An administrative fee to the Village of Sleepy Hollow in the sum of
$50.
§ 400-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-78
1:631
§ 400-79. Determination and notification of owner.
It shall be the duty of Police Department to ascertain, to the extent possible,
the owner of the vehicle or the person having the same in his charge and
to notify him of the immobilization, removal and disposition of such vehicle
and of the amount which will be required to redeem the same.
(2) All sums legally due the Village of Sleepy Hollow for parking
violations issued and outstanding against such vehicle. No vehicle
shall be released by an officer or employee of the Village until such
sums are paid in full.
(3) To the Village of Sleepy Hollow, the towing service and/or to the
person with whom the vehicle is stored, all expenses actually and
necessarily incurred in effecting such removal and storage.
Maximum removal and storage charges shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees. The schedule of
such charges shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
(4) A bond with a surety company authorized to do business in this
state in an amount sufficient to cover the above charges.
B. No such vehicle shall be released until the owner or his agent has
established his identity and right to possession and has signed a
property receipt therefor. Any person who, having had his vehicle
removed or immobilized, shall remove such vehicle without complying
with this section shall, in addition to the charges provided for in this
section, be liable for any damage done to the immobilization device or
mechanism and be subject to a fine of not more than $250.
§ 400-78 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-79
1:632
ARTICLE XV
Saturday Parking
[Adopted 6-10-1974; amended in its entirety 12-15-1975 (Ch. 57,
Art. XVI, of the 1965 Code)]
§ 400-80. Parking permitted on Saturday.
Parking is hereby permitted on Saturday on all Village streets where
alternate side of the street parking is now in effect, except Beekman
Avenue, Cortlandt Street, Valley Street, Francis Street, all Village streets
within the confines of Philipse Manor and Sleepy Hollow Manor areas and
all Village streets and portions thereof where parking meters are located.
§ 400-80.1. Temporary Mayoral authority. [Added 2-23-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
The provisions of this Article XV are expressly subject to the provisions of
Article XXI of this chapter.
§ 400-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-80.1
1:633

ARTICLE XVI
U-Turns
[Adopted 9-23-1974 by L.L. No. 1-1974 (Ch. 57, Art. XVII, of the
1965 Code)]
§ 400-81. Prohibition of U-turns.
The turning of vehicles so as to proceed in the opposite direction at any
intersection, or upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest
of a grade, where such vehicle is not visible by the operator of any vehicle
approaching from either direction within 500 feet, is hereby prohibited on
all Village streets.
§ 400-82. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of § 400-81
hereof is subject to the penalties provided for in § 1800(b) of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York.
§ 400-83. Statutory authority.
This article is hereby enacted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1028 of
the Laws of 1974 and the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the
State of New York.
§ 400-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-83
1:635

ARTICLE XVII
Parking Limited
[Adopted 10-23-1978 by L.L. No. 2-1978 (Ch. 57, Art. XVIII, of the
1965 Code)]
§ 400-84. Extended parking prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit his, her or its
automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle to park or remain standing
on any Village street for a period of more than 48 hours, exclusive of
holidays, in the same location.
§ 400-85. Towing of vehicle; notification of owner. [Added 1-6-1998
by L.L. No. 1-1998]
§ 400-85.1. Temporary Mayoral authority. [Added 2-23-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
The provisions of this Article XVII are expressly subject to the provisions of
Article XXI of this chapter.
A. Any automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle left parked or
standing in the same location for a period of more than 48 hours,
exclusive of holidays, may be towed at the direction of the Sleepy
Hollow Police Department. However, prior to the issuance of a directive
to tow by the Police Department, every reasonable effort must be made
to notify the owner of the automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle
that said vehicle is in violation of the Village ordinance herein and is
subject to being towed. No vehicle shall be towed within one hour of
notification of the owner.
B. If the Police Department is unable to locate the owner, after every
reasonable effort to do so has been made, the vehicle in violation may
be towed if said vehicle poses a threat to the public health or safety or
welfare in the determination of the Police Department.
§ 400-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-85.1
1:637

ARTICLE XVIII
Handicapped Parking
[Adopted 9-4-1979 by L.L. No. 7-1979 (Ch. 57, Art. XIX, of the 1965
Code)]
§ 400-86. Designation of parking areas.
It shall be the policy of the Village of Sleepy Hollow to establish from
time to time areas designated as parking for the vehicles of handicapped
individuals. "Handicapped" shall include and be limited to that category
of individuals as designated, defined and qualified under the laws of the
State of New York and the County of Westchester. Individuals possessing
a valid permit for handicapped parking pursuant to the laws of the State
of New York and the County of Westchester shall be permitted to park
in those areas designated by signs or otherwise as handicapped parking
reserved, except for the fact that the designated parking areas shall be
for the exclusive use of qualified handicapped drivers. All usual rules and
regulations of the General Code of the Village of Sleepy Hollow shall apply.
§ 400-87. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-6-1981 by L.L. No.
3-1981; 11-1-1982 by L.L. No. 7-1982; 10-14-1986 by L.L. No.
2-1986]
All vehicles parked in violation of this article or those vehicles that fail to
display the necessary handicapped permit shall be punishable by a fine of
$25. Each day on which any vehicle is parked or left standing in violation of
any of the terms of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 400-87.1. Temporary Mayoral authority. [Added 2-23-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
The provisions of this Article XVIII are expressly subject to the provisions of
Article XXI of this chapter.
§ 400-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-87.1
1:639

ARTICLE XIX
Beekman Avenue Municipal Parking Lot
[Adopted 7-10-2001 by L.L. No. 7-2001; amended in its entirety
2-12-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002 (Ch. 57, Art. XX, of the 1965 Code)]
§ 400-88. Permit parking.
A. Permit parking between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(1) Notwithstanding the parking meter regulations set forth in
§ 400-53 of this chapter, parking shall be permitted between the
hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in the Beekman Avenue Municipal
Parking Lot without the necessity of depositing coins into the
designated parking meter where a valid parking permit, as
authorized in this section, is lawfully displayed.
(2) No person may be entitled to such parking permit unless such
person:
(a) Is a resident of or is regularly employed in the Village of Sleepy
Hollow.
(b) Possesses a permit authorizing such parking, obtained from
the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
(c) Pays the appropriate fee as determined by the Village Board by
resolution and as set forth in the fee schedule of the Village
Code.
B. Permit parking between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(1) Notwithstanding the parking meter regulations set forth in
§ 400-53 of this chapter, parking shall be permitted between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. in the Beekman Avenue Municipal
Parking Lot in parking spaces numbered 28 through 49 without the
necessity of depositing coins into the designated parking meter
where a valid parking permit, as authorized in this section, is
lawfully displayed.
(2) The number of permits to park between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m. shall be limited to 21. The Board of Trustees may
increase or decrease the number of permits authorized pursuant to
this section by resolution.
(3) No person may be entitled to such parking permit unless such
person:
(a) Is a resident of or is regularly employed in the Village of Sleepy
Hollow.
(b) Possesses a permit authorizing such parking, obtained from
the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 400-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-88
1:641
§ 400-89. Penalties for offenses.
Unless otherwise provided by law, or by specific enactment, the penalty for
each violation of this article shall be a sum of money not exceeding $100.
In addition, unless otherwise provided by law or by specific enactment, a
violation of this article shall constitute disorderly conduct, and the person
violating the same shall be a disorderly person.
(c) Pays the appropriate fee as determined by the Village Board by
resolution and as set forth in the fee schedule of the Village
Code.
(4) This section shall automatically expire on February 12, 2004,
unless extended by the Board of Trustees by resolution after a
public hearing.
§ 400-88 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-89
1:642
ARTICLE XX
Fines
[Adopted 9-11-1978 (Ch. 19A of the 1965 Code)]
§ 400-90. Schedule of fines. [Amended 7-6-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981]
A. The Board of Trustees does hereby ordain and enact an amendment to
the Code of the Village of Sleepy Hollow increasing the fines contained
in the various sections as follows:
Subject Fine
Meters [Amended 7-16-1984 by L.L. No. 3-1984;
6-6-1989]
$10
Overtime $5
Loading zones [Amended 5-1-1990] $15
Fire zone [Amended 6-6-1989; 6-21-1994] $50
No-parking zone [Amended 6-6-1989] $20
More than 12 inches from curb [Amended
5-1-1990]
$10
Driveway [Amended 6-6-1989] $20
Snow, ice or emergency [Amended 6-21-1994] $40
On bridge [Amended 5-1-1990] $15
Trespassing [Amended 6-6-1989] $25
Handicapped [Added 6-6-1989; amended
6-21-1994]
$50
On sidewalk [Amended 6-6-1989] $25
Left side to curb $10
15 feet to hydrant [Amended 6-6-1989;
6-21-1994]
$50
Improper on hill $10
20 feet of crossing or intersection $10
Within intersection [Amended 6-6-1989] $20
Outside pavement markings $10
Alternate sides [Amended 6-6-1989] $15
No permit [Added 6-6-1989; amended 5-1-1990] $35
Overnight commercial parking [Added 6-6-1989;
amended 5-1-1990]
$25
Double parked [Added 6-6-1989; amended
5-1-1990]
$35
Abandoned vehicle [Added 6-6-1989] $25
§ 400-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-90
1:643
B. Schedule for late payment of parking tickets. [Added 6-6-1989;
amended 5-15-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990; 7-19-1994; 7-13-1999 by
L.L. No. 6-1999]
Original
Amount After 30 Days After 60 Days After 90 Days
$10 $20 $30 $40
$15 $25 $35 $45
$20 $30 $40 $50
$25 $35 $45 $55
$30 $40 $50 $60
$35 $45 $55 $65
$40 $50 $60 $70
$45 $55 $65 $75
$50 $60 $70 $80
$70 $80 $90 $100
Other Add $10 Add $20 Add $30
§ 400-90 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 400-90
1:644
ARTICLE XXI
Temporary Mayoral Authority
[Adopted 2-23-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
§ 400-91. Purview.
In order to address temporary conditions that may vary over a limited
period of time due to special activities such as particular construction
projects, special events and the like, the Mayor of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow shall have temporary authority in consultation with the Village Chief
of Police, the Village Director in charge of the Department of Architecture,
Land Use Development, Buildings and Building Compliance, and the Village
General Foreman of Public Works, to suspend impose, temporarily,
directional, parking and speed limitations on the following streets and over
the following periods of time:
A. Continental Street from Pocantico Street to its terminus: February 1,
2016, to January 31, 2018. [Amended 3-21-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
B. Beekman Avenue, from Clinton Street to Hudson Street: February 15,
2016, to February 15, 2018. [Added 2-23-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016;
amended 3-21-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
§ 400-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-91
1:645

ARTICLE XXII
Traffic-Calming Devices
[Adopted 6-27-2017 by L.L. No. 6-2017]
§ 400-92. Authority granted.
The Board of Trustees hereby adopts Local Law No. 6 of 2017 granting the
Village Board authority to install traffic-calming devices on Village roads.
§ 400-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-92
1:647
Chapter 405
VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 400. Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 405-1. General restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any of the following defined
recreational vehicles on any residential property or street within the Village
of Sleepy Hollow, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 405-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAMPER — A separate vehicle designed for human habitation and which
can be attached to or detached from a pickup truck.
CAMPER-TRAILER — A vehicular, portable dwelling structure designed
to be used for recreational purposes. This includes a travel trailer, so
identified by the manufacturer; a pickup camper; a folding tent trailer; and
a motorized camper where the camping portion is an integral part of the
self-propelled vehicle.
MOTOR HOME — A self-contained vehicle designated for human habitation,
with its own motive power and with a passageway from the body of the
home to the driver's and front passenger's seats.
TRAILER — A vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons
or property on its own and to be drawn by a vehicle with motive power. The
term "trailer" shall include but shall not be limited to horse trailers, boat
trailers and skimobile trailers.
§ 405-3. Parking in residential areas prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall park or store a boat, trailer, motor
home, camper-trailer, camper or recreational vehicle upon any roadway,
street or highway in any residential area within the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 405-4. Occupation of vehicles. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
It shall be unlawful to occupy any camper, camper-trailer, trailer,
recreational vehicle, motor home or any motor vehicle for living or sleeping
purposes or to cause any such vehicle to be connected to electric, water,
gas or sanitary sewer facilities anywhere within the Village, except in a
§ 400-92 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 405-4
1:648
duly established trailer park maintained in accordance with the laws of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 405-5. Storage of vehicles.
§ 405-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $250, 15 days'
imprisonment, or both, for each offense; and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 411
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 245.
Plumbers — See Ch. 304.
Sewers — See Ch. 330.
A. No boat, camper, camper-trailer, motor home, trailer or recreational
vehicle shall be stored in any front yard or in any side yard of any
premises within any residential zone within the Village of Sleepy Hollow
extending beyond the front building line of the premises; provided,
however, that said vehicles may also be stored within that area, within
the rear yard of premises, formed by the extension of the side building
line to the rear lot line, so long as the vehicle does not protrude into the
side yard requirements as set forth in any applicable law within the
Village.
B. In the event that an individual is unable to meet the requirements of
Subsection A of this section, he may apply to the Zoning Board of
Appeals for permission to store said vehicle in the side yard of the
premises. Upon a showing of such inability and the approval of a
majority of all present members of the Board, permission may be
granted to store said vehicle in the side yard of the premises.
§ 405-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-6
1:649

ARTICLE I
Water Emergencies
[Adopted 9-24-1956 (Ch. 59, Art. I, of the 1965 Code); amended in
its entirety 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 411-1. Declaration of water emergency.
Water emergencies may be declared by the General Foreman of the
Department of Public Works or his designee in the event of extreme
shortage of water supply.
§ 411-2. Restrictions on water use.
In the event the General Foreman declares a water emergency in
accordance with § 411-1, the municipal water supply of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow may not be used, at any time, for any of the following purposes:
A. Washing of vehicles.
(1) Washing of automobiles, trucks or other vehicles in any manner,
including, but not exclusively, commercial, as well as private
washing. The only exception to this rule shall be the cleaning of
windows and other glass which is required for the safe or efficient
operation of said automobiles, trucks or other vehicles.
(2) Automatic car washing shall be permitted, provided that at least
50% of the water is reused by means of a pump recirculating
system so that Village water is used only for the final rinse.
Garages, gas service stations and other similar establishments
which furnish car washing as part of their regular service and do
not employ automatic car-washing equipment with appurtenances
as hereinabove described may only use a bucket of water for this
purpose. Under no conditions may Village water be used by means
of a hose for car washing.
B. Sprinkling, watering or other irrigating of soil and other surfaces,
including, but not exclusively, the sprinkling or watering of lawns,
gardens, golf courses, sidewalks, shrubbery and other objects of a
similar nature.
C. The use or operation of swimming pools and other objects used for the
purpose of swimming, wading or bathing, except bath tubs and
showers. This provision shall not apply to those pools designated and
used exclusively for medical purposes.
D. The constant or excessive use of showers, bath tubs or similar
apparatus.
E. The use of automatic plumbing flush fixtures using constant or fixed
periodic flow. Buildings and institutions having such apparatus shall
designate a custodian or other employee to flush said apparatus only
when necessary.
§ 411-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-2
1:651
§ 411-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $250, 15 days'
imprisonment, or both, for each and every offense. The General Foreman
is hereby empowered to discontinue service to any person convicted of a
violation of this article.
F. Cleaning or washing the exterior of buildings.
G. Bleeding of pipes to control water pressure or prevent freezing.
H. Testing of tanks or other receptacles to determine watertightness.
§ 411-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 411-3
1:652
ARTICLE II
Cross-Connection Control
[Adopted 6-15-1993 by L.L. No. 10-1993 (Ch. 59, Art. II, of the 1965
Code)]
§ 411-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to safeguard potable water supplies from
potential contamination by preventing backflow from a water user's system
into the public water system and to comply with the requirements of the
New York State Sanitary Code, Part 5, Section 5-1.31.
§ 411-5. Check valves and backflow prevention devices required.
§ 411-6. Compliance required.
Any preexisting systems that do not include cross-connection control
devices shall be upgraded so as to comply with the current requirements
of the New York State Department of Health and the Westchester County
Department of Health within 60 days following the service of notice by
certified mail to install check valves or backflow prevention devices.
§ 411-7. Testing; costs.
The testing of cross-connection control devices shall be performed on an
annual basis by the owner of any system requiring same, and the cost
of such testing shall be borne by the owner of the system. The testing
procedures shall conform to the requirements of the New York State
Department of Health and the Westchester County Department of Health.
A. Check valves or backflow prevention devices conforming to the most
current requirements of the New York State Department of Health and
the Westchester County Department of Health shall be installed by the
owner of those systems pursuant to the rules of those departments in
force at the time of the installation.
B. Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued by the Building Inspector
for new or modified, renovated or rehabilitated structures with
hazardous systems without a letter from the Plumbing Inspector or his/
her designee stating that check valves or backflow prevention devices
have been installed.
C. The cost to install check valves or backflow prevention devices shall be
borne by the owner of the property.
D. The Village's Water Department shall make a determination as to
whether or not a property owner requires a check valve or backflow
prevention device and the type of device required (i.e., double check
valve, reduced pressure zone backflow preventer, etc.) in accordance
with the New York State and Westchester County Departments of
Health. [Amended 7-15-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003]
§ 411-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-8
1:653
§ 411-8. Fees. [Added 11-15-1994 by L.L. No. 15-1994; 1-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
All initial applications to the Village of Sleepy Hollow for cross-connection
devices must be accompanied by payment of a fee as set forth in the fee
schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees, to cover administrative
costs.
§ 411-9. Manual to be prepared.
The Plumbing Inspector or his/her designee shall develop a manual which
shall provide the cross-connection program requirements for the Village of
Sleepy Hollow. The Plumbing Inspector shall incorporate the requirements
of the New York State Department of Health and the Westchester County
Department of Health.
§ 411-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 12-21-1993 by L.L. No.
16-1993]
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $250, 15
days' imprisonment, or both, for each and every offense. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. In addition to any other penalty provided for herein or by any other
chapter or provision of law, any person, firm or corporation who or
which is not in compliance with all of the provisions of the New York
State Department of Health (NYSDOH), the Westchester County
Department of Health (WCDOH) and the provisions of the Code of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow that regulate the requirements for the
installation and maintenance of backflow devices shall be subject to the
following penalties: [Added 7-20-2004 by L.L. No. 5-2004]
(1) Failure to install a backflow device when notified: a fine of $500,
together with termination of water service.
(2) Failure to submit an application for a backflow device: a fine of
$500, together with termination of water service.
(3) Failure to submit a Form DOH 1013, or such similar form as shall
be required from time to time, after initial installation: a fine of
$100.
(4) Failure to submit annual testing Form DOH 1013, or such similar
form as shall be required from time to time: a fine of $200 after 30
days past the expiration of the report of the previous year; a fine of
$500 after 60 days past the expiration of the report of the previous
year; a fine of $1,000 after 90 days past the expiration of the report
of the previous year, together with termination of service.
C. The person, firm or corporation billed for water service shall be the
party responsible for the submission of Form DOH 1013. Without
§ 411-8 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 411-10
1:654
waiver of any responsibility by those parties, the Village of Sleepy
Hollow shall send a reminder notice to all persons, firms or
corporations once per year that annual testing is required for backflow
devices. At all times, it shall be the sole responsibility of the person,
firm or corporation to comply with the filing of Form DOH 1013 within
the time periods computed by their expiration dates. [Added
7-20-2004 by L.L. No. 5-2004]
§ 411-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-10
1:655

ARTICLE III
Administration of Water Supply System
[Adopted 1-8-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002 (Ch. 59, Art. III, of the 1965
Code)]
§ 411-11. Findings and purpose.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Sleepy Hollow has determined that
it is necessary to establish clear and concise regulations for the proper
administration of the water supply system of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
This article is intended to adopt uniform policies and procedures for the
administration of that system.
§ 411-12. Applicability.
These regulations supersede all previous rules, regulations and laws for the
governing and administration of the water supply system of the Village.
§ 411-13. Rates.
The Village Board may from time to time adopt rates and fees by resolution
after public hearing.
§ 411-14. Water meters.
§ 411-15. Meter reading; billing; payment; late payments and
penalties.
A. Water meters shall be installed by the Village of Sleepy Hollow for all
water users. All water meters installed shall be and shall remain the
property of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
B. The Village of Sleepy Hollow shall be responsible for the maintenance,
repair and replacement of all water meters installed pursuant to the
law. It is the property owner's responsibility to notify the Department of
Public Works immediately if a problem develops with a water meter.
C. In the event of negligent, reckless or intentional conduct by the
property owner causing damage to the water meter, it shall be the
property owner's responsibility to pay for the cost of repairing or
replacing the water meter.
D. Village employees shall have the right to enter upon the property of
each resident of the Village where a meter is located at reasonable
times, on reasonable notice to the property owner and any occupant of
the property, for the purpose of inspecting, repairing, maintaining and/
or replacing the water meter.
A. Meter readings. The water meters will be read quarterly to measure the
volume of water used. Water users will then be billed for the water
actually used at the water rates established pursuant to the law. Water
§ 411-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-15
1:657
§ 411-16. Termination of service. [Amended 7-15-2003 by L.L. No.
8-2003; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 411-17. Restoration of service. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
When service has been terminated per § 411-16A, service will not be
restored until all bills and penalties and service charges are paid in full.
bills become due on or about December 31, March 31, June 30 and
September 30 of each year, with the bill representing actual usage.
B. Payment of bills. All water bills are due and payable when prepared and
mailed. All service fees and charges incurred pursuant to this chapter
shall be added to, and be included in the water bill. All bills are payable
without penalty up to and including the 30th day after the date of the
bill. Payments must be received at the Village Water Department. Any
payment received after the 30th day from the date of the bill shall be
assessed a penalty of 5%. An additional 10% penalty will be added to
any water bill remaining unpaid after 60 days. Thereafter additional
penalties of 2% per month will be assessed until paid. The date of the
check or envelope postmark does not enter into the criteria of
determination of penalty imposition. If the 30th of the billing month
falls on a weekend (when the Village Water Department is closed),
payment without penalty shall be extended to the next business day.
Failure to pay a water bill within 60 days of rendering the bill shall be
cause for termination of service. [Amended 7-15-2003 by L.L. No.
7-2003]
C. If such water bill and/or fees and/or charges are not paid within 60 days
from issuance, the water bill, charge and/or fee may be assessed
against the property and become a lien thereon and shall remain in full
force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs
of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been made.
[Added 7-15-2003 by L.L. No. 7-2003]
A. Water service will be terminated for nonpayment of water bills or for
violation of these regulations. A service charge as set forth in the fee
schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees, will be imposed for
termination of service. This service charge shall be added to the water
bill.
B. Property owners may request that service be shut off. A fee as set forth
in the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees, shall
apply, unless the shutoff is to make repairs or maintain the Village
water system. Where a property owner requests that service be shut off
and it takes Water Department employees more than two hours to
complete the shut-off process, the property owner shall be responsible
to pay an additional fee. The applicable service charge(s) shall be added
to the water bill.
§ 411-15 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 411-17
1:658
This includes an additional fee for service restoration as set forth in the fee
schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
§ 411-18. Transfer of property ownership.
§ 411-19. Maintenance responsibilities.
§ 411-20. Restrictions on use.
During cases of drought, flood, or any general emergency, the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Sleepy Hollow may make such rules and
regulations pertaining to the use and consumption of water as are in the
public interest. Said rules and regulations shall be posted in at least three
public places in the Village, and after such posting any violation of any such
rules and regulations shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $50 for
each separate offense.
§ 411-21. Penalties for offenses.
A. It is the responsibility of the current property owner to notify the
Village Water Department of the impending date of transfer and request
a meter reading for final billing.
B. The Village Water Department shall, upon notice of the impending
transfer of property, make arrangements for reading the meter. Upon
meter reading, a final bill will be prepared and mailed to the owner.
Final bills are due at the Village Water Department within five days of
mailing. Upon receipt of payment, water records will be changed to
reflect the new owner.
A. The Village has the responsibility for maintenance of water mains.
B. The property owner has the responsibility of maintaining the lines from
the fitting on the tap from the main. The Village may notify a property
owner to make certain repairs on the owner's property if the failure to
repair would affect the water system. The failure to timely make such
repairs shall be grounds for termination of service.
A. The opening of a water hydrant by an unauthorized person or evidence
that attempts have been made to bypass a meter or in any manner
obtain water from the district without proper payment will result in
prosecution under the penal laws of New York State.
B. Any violation of these regulations may result in the termination of water
service to the violator. All violations of these regulations shall be
brought to the attention of the Village Board for disposition as to the
penalties outlined herein.
C. A person found to be in violation of these regulations shall be guilty of a
violation and subject to a fine not to exceed $250, 15 days'
imprisonment, or both, per offense. Each weekly continued violation
§ 411-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-21
1:659
shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
D. Where appropriate, the Village may seek injunctive relief in a court of
competent jurisdiction for enforcement of any provision of these
regulations.
§ 411-21 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 411-21
1:660
Chapter 414
WATERFRONT CONSISTENCY REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Excavation, filling and topsoil removal — See
Ch. 190.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 220.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 358.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 418.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 425.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 414-1. Title.
This chapter will be known as the "Village of Sleepy Hollow Waterfront
Consistency Review Law."
§ 414-2. Authority and purpose.
A. This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Municipal Home Rule
Law and the Waterfront Revitalization of Coastal Areas and Inland
Waterways Act of the State of New York (Article 42 of the Executive
Law63).
B. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a framework for agencies of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow to consider the policies and purposes
contained in the Local Waterfront Revitalization Program when
reviewing applications for action or direct agency action located in the
coastal area; and to assure that such actions and direct actions are
consistent with said policies and purposes.
C. It is the intention of the Village of Sleepy Hollow that the preservation,
enhancement and utilization of the natural and man-made resources of
the unique coastal area of the Village take place in a coordinated and
comprehensive manner to ensure a proper balance between natural
resources and the need to accommodate population growth and
economic development. Accordingly, this chapter is intended to achieve
such a balance, permitting the beneficial use of coastal resources while
preventing loss of living estuarine resources and wildlife; diminution of
open space areas or public access to the waterfront; erosion of
shoreline; impairment to scenic beauty; losses due to flooding, erosion
and sedimentation; or permanent adverse changes to ecological
systems.
D. The substantive provisions of this chapter shall only apply while there is
in existence a Village Local Waterfront Revitalization Program which
63.Editor's Note: See Executive Law § 910 et seq.
§ 411-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-2
1:661
§ 414-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIONS —
AGENCY — Any board, agency, department, office, other body or officer of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
COASTAL AREA — That portion of New York State coastal waters and
adjacent shorelands as defined in Article 42 of the Executive Law which is
located within the boundaries of the Village of Sleepy Hollow as shown on
the coastal area map on file in the office of the Secretary of State and as
delineated in the Village of Sleepy Hollow Local Waterfront Revitalization
Program.
COASTAL ASSESSMENT FORM (CAF) — The form used by an agency
to assist it in determining the consistency of an action with the Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program.
CONSISTENT — That the action will fully comply with the LWRP policy
standard and conditions and, whenever practicable, will advance one or
more of them.
has been adopted in accordance with Article 42 of the Executive Law of
the State of New York.
Type I or unlisted actions as defined in SEQRA regulations (6 NYCRR
617.2) which are undertaken by an agency and which include:
Projects or physical activities, such as construction or other
activities that may affect the environment by changing the use,
appearance or condition of any natural resource or structure that:
(a) Are directly undertaken by an agency; or
(b) Involve funding by an agency; or
Require one or more new or modified approvals from an
agency or agencies;
(c)
(1)
Agency planning and policy-making activities that may affect the
environment and commit the agency to a definite course of future
decisions;
(2)
Adoption of agency rules, regulations and procedures, including
local laws, codes, ordinances, executive orders and resolution that
may affect the environment; and
(3)
(4) Any combinations of the above.
A.
This chapter does not apply to Type II, excluded or exempt actions as
defined in the SEQRA regulations, 6 NYCRR Part 617.
B.
§ 414-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 414-3
1:662
DIRECT ACTION — An action planned and proposed for implementation
by an agency, such as but not limited to a capital project, rule making,
procedure making and policy making.
LOCAL WATERFRONT REVITALIZATION PROGRAM (LWRP) — The Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, approved
by the Secretary of State pursuant to the Waterfront Revitalization and
Coastal Resources Act (Executive Law Article 42), a copy of which is on file
in the Office of the Clerk of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
WATERFRONT ADVISORY COMMITTEE or COMMITTEE — The Waterfront
Advisory Committee of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, as created by this
chapter.
§ 414-4. Waterfront Advisory Committee.
A. The Committee is authorized to review and make recommendations to
appropriate agencies regarding the consistency of proposed actions
with the Sleepy Hollow Local Waterfront Revitalization Program policy
standards and conditions.
B. The Committee will provide general oversight for the administration of
the Village's LWRP and technical assistance in the form of advice. Such
Committee will function as the Village entity that is primarily
responsible, in an advisory capacity, for implementing the policies,
purposes and projects contained within the Village's LWRP. The
Committee will also function as the Village agency that makes
recommendations for consistency of actions with the Village's LWRP as
prescribed by this chapter.
C. The Committee shall consist of seven members, who shall serve without
compensation. All members of the Committee shall be residents of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow and shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
approval of the majority of the Trustees present and voting, for terms of
three years, except that of the members first appointed, one shall hold
office for a term of one year, two for terms of two years, two for terms of
three years, and two for terms of four years from and after their
appointments. Members of the Committee shall continue to hold office
until their successors have been appointed and qualified. The Mayor
shall appoint from among the members of the Committee a Chair and
Acting Chair. The Village Clerk or Deputy Clerk shall act as the Clerk of
the Committee. If a vacancy on the Committee shall occur otherwise
than by unexpired term, it shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired
term. The Board of Trustees shall have power to remove any members
of the Committee for cause and after a public hearing. Members of the
Committee shall be required to recuse themselves from voting on any
project in which their own financial interests are directly involved.
D. Meetings of the Committee shall be open to the public and shall be held
at the call of the Chair and at such times as the Committee may
determine. Four members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business. Action of the Committee may be taken
§ 414-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-4
1:663
§ 414-5. Review of actions.
by a vote of the majority of the members present and voting. The
Committee shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating that fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and
other official actions. The Committee shall have power from time to
time to adopt, amend and repeal rules and regulations, not inconsistent
with law or the provisions of this chapter, governing its procedure and
the transaction of its business and for the purpose of carrying into
effect the standards outlined herein. Every rule or regulation, every
amendment or repeal thereof and every order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Committee shall immediately be filed in the office
of the Village Clerk and shall be a public record. The Committee shall
have the power to employ consultants and to pay for their services and
such other expenses that may be necessary and proper, not exceeding
in all the appropriations that may be provided for such purposes by the
Board of Trustees.
A. Whenever a proposed action is located in the Village's coastal area, an
agency shall, prior to approving, funding or undertaking the action,
make a determination that it is consistent with the LWRP policy
standards and conditions set forth in Subsection G herein.
B. Whenever an agency receives an application for approval or funding of
an action or as early as possible in the agency's formulation of a direct
action to be located in the coastal area, the applicant, or in the case of a
direct action, the agency, shall prepare a coastal assessment form
(CAF) to assist in the consistency review of the proposed action.
C. The agency shall refer a copy of the completed CAF to the Committee
within 10 days of its submission and, prior to making its determination,
shall consider the recommendation of the Committee with reference to
the consistency of the proposed action.
D. After referral from an agency, the Committee shall consider whether
the proposed action is consistent with the LWRP policy standards and
condition set forth in Subsection G herein. The Committee shall require
the applicant to submit all completed applications, CAFs and any other
information deemed to be necessary to its consistency
recommendation.
E. Recommendation. [Amended 10-18-2002 by L.L. No. 14-2002]
(1) Consistency reviews for environmental impact statements. In the
event the agency is coordinating the review of an environmental
impact statement (EIS), the agency shall refer a copy of the draft
EIS to the Committee for its review. Before the end of the required
comment period on the draft EIS, the Committee shall provide to
the agency, in writing, a preliminary consistency review, which
shall indicate to the agency whether, in the opinion of the
§ 414-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 414-5
1:664
Committee, the proposed action is consistent with or inconsistent
with one or more of the LWRP policy standards or conditions.
The preliminary consistency review shall detail the basis for the
Committee's opinion. The Committee may also provide to the
agency any suggestions concerning the modifications of the
proposed action to make it consistent with LWRP policy standards
and conditions or to better advance them. Upon acceptance of the
final EIS by the agency, the agency shall refer the final EIS to
the Committee for a final consistency review. The final consistency
review shall be filed with the agency, in writing, prior to the
adoption of an environmental findings statement concluding the
environmental review process. The final consistency review shall
indicate to the agency whether, in the opinion of the Committee,
the proposed action is consistent with or inconsistent with one or
more of the LWRP policy standards or conditions. The preliminary
consistency review shall detail the basis for the Committee's
opinion. The Committee may also provide to the agency any
suggestions concerning the modification of the proposed action to
make it consistent with LWRP policy standards and conditions or to
greater advance them.
(2) Consistency review for actions not requiring an environmental
impact statement. For actions not requiring an environmental
impact statement, the Committee shall render its written
recommendation to the agency within the time period requested by
the agency unless such time period is extended by mutual
agreement of the Committee and the applicant or, in the case of
direct action, the agency. The recommendation shall indicate
whether, in the opinion of the Committee, the proposed action is
consistent with or inconsistent with one or more of the LWRP policy
standards or conditions and shall elaborate in writing the basis for
this opinion. The Committee shall, along with its consistency
recommendation, make any suggestions to the agency concerning
modifications of the proposed action to make it consistent with
LWRP policy standards and conditions or to greater advance them.
F. The agency shall make the determination of consistency based on the
CAF, the Committee recommendation and such other information as is
deemed to be necessary in its determination. The agency shall issue its
determination following receipt of the Committee's recommendation
and submission by the applicant of any additional required information,
and prior to its decision on the merits of the proposed action. The
agency shall have the authority, in its findings of consistency, to impose
practicable and reasonable conditions on an action to ensure that it is
carried out in accordance with this chapter. In the event that the
Committee's recommendation is not forthcoming within the specified
time, the referring agency shall make its decision without the benefit of
the Committee's recommendation. [Amended 1-18-2002 by L.L. No.
14-2002]
§ 414-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-5
1:665
G. Actions to be undertaken within the Sleepy Hollow coastal area shall be
evaluated for consistency in accordance with the following LWRP policy
standards and conditions, which are derived from and further explained
and described in Section III of the Village of Sleepy Hollow LWRP, a
copy of which is on file in the Village Clerk's office and available for
inspection during normal business hours. Agencies which undertake
direct actions shall also consult with Section IV of the LWRP in making
their consistency determination. The action shall be consistent with the
policy to:
(1) Revitalize the deteriorated and underutilized waterfront area
(Policies 1, 1A, 1B, 1C, 1E, 1F, 1G, 1H, 1J and 1K).
(2) Retain and promote commercial and recreational water-dependent
use (Policies 2 and 2A).
(3) Strengthen the economic base of Sleepy Hollow smaller harbor
areas by encouraging traditional uses and activities (Policy 4).
(4) Ensure that development occurs where adequate public
infrastructure is available to reduce health and pollution hazards
(Policies 5, 5A and 5B).
(5) Expedite local permit procedures and use performance standards
for development within the waterfront area (Policy 6).
(6) Protect significant and locally important fish and wildlife habitats
from human disruption and chemical contamination (Policies 7, 7A,
7B, 7C, 8, 8A and 8B).
(7) Encourage and expand commercial fishing facilities to promote
commercial and recreational fishing opportunities (Policies 9 and
10).
(8) Minimize flooding and erosion hazards through nonstructural
means, carefully selected, long-term structural measures and
appropriate siting of structures (Policies 11, 13, 13A, 13B, 14, 15,
16, 16A, 16B, 17 and 17A).
(9) Safeguard economic, social and environmental interests in the
coastal area when major actions are undertaken (Policies 18, 18A,
18B and 18C).
(10) Maintain and improve public access to the shoreline and the waterrelated
recreational facilities while protecting the environment
(Policies 1, 1A, 1B, 1D, 1E 1F, 1H, 2, 2A, 4, 9, 19, 19A, 19B, 19C,
19D, 19E, 19F, 20, 20A, 20B, 21, 21A, 21B, 21C, 22 and 22A).
(11) Protect and restore historic and archeological resources (Policies
23, 23A, 23B and 23C).
(12) Protect and upgrade scenic resources (Policies 25, 25A and 25B).
§ 414-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 414-5
1:666
(13) Site and construct energy facilities in a manner which will be
compatible with the environment and contingent upon the need for
a waterfront or water location (Policies 27, 30, 31, 33, 35, 35A, 35B,
35C, 35D, 35E, 36, 37, 38, 39, 39A, 40, 40A, 41A, 42, 43 and 44).
(14) Protect surface water and groundwaters from direct and indirect
discharge of pollutants and from overuse (Policies 30, 31, 33, 35,
35A, 35B, 35C, 35D, 35E, 36, 37, 38, 39A, 40, 40A, 41, 42, 43 and
44).
(15) Perform dredging and dredge spoil in a manner protective of
natural resources (Policies 15, 35, 35A, 35B, 35C, 35D and 35E).
(16) Handle and dispose of solid and hazardous wastes and effluents in
a manner which will not adversely affect the environment nor
expand existing landfills (Policies 34, 34A, 35, 35A, 35B, 35C, 35D,
35E, 36, 39 and 39A).
(17) Protect air quality (Policies 41, 41A, 42 and 43).
(18) Protect freshwater wetlands (Policy 44).
H. Written findings.
(1) If the agency determines that the action would not be consistent
with one or more of the LWRP policy standards and conditions,
such action shall not be undertaken unless the agency makes a
written finding with respect to the proposed action that:
(a) No reasonable alternatives exist which would permit the action
to be undertaken in a manner which will not substantially
hinder the achievement of such LWRP policy standards and
conditions;
(b) The action would be undertaken in a manner which will
minimize all adverse effects on such LWRP policy standards
and conditions;
(c) The action will advance one or more of the other LWRP policy
standards and conditions; and
(d) The action will result in an overriding Village, regional or
statewide public benefit.
(2) Such a finding shall constitute a determination that the action is
consistent with the LWRP policy standards and conditions.
I. Each agency shall maintain a file for each action made the subject of a
consistency determination, including any recommendations received
from the Committee. Such files shall be made available for public
inspection upon request.
§ 414-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-6
1:667
§ 414-6. Enforcement.
The Village Building Inspector shall be responsible for enforcing this
chapter. No work or activity on a project in the coastal area which is
subject to review under this chapter shall be commenced or undertaken
until the Village Building Inspector has been presented with a written
determination from an agency that the action is consistent with the Village's
LWRP policy standards and conditions. In the event that an activity is not
being performed in accordance with this chapter or any conditions imposed
thereunder, the Village Building Inspector shall issue a stop-work order
and all work shall immediately cease. No further work or activity shall be
undertaken on the project so long as a stop-work order is in effect.
§ 414-7. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 418
WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 220.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 353.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 358.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 425.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 418-1. Findings.
A. A person who violates any of the provisions of or who fails to comply
with any conditions imposed by this chapter shall have committed a
violation, punishable by a fine not exceeding $500, 15 days'
imprisonment, or both, for a conviction of a first offense; and
punishable by a fine of $1,000, 15 days' imprisonment, or both, for a
conviction of a second or subsequent offenses. For the purpose of
conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers, each week of
continuing violation shall constitute a separate additional offense.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. The Village Attorney is authorized and directed to institute any and all
actions and proceedings necessary to enforce this chapter. Upon the
approval of the Board of Trustees any civil penalty shall be in addition
to and not in lieu of any criminal prosecution and penalty. The Village
may also enforce this chapter by injunction or other civil proceeding.
A. In their natural state, wetland and watercourse complexes serve
multiple functions, including:
§ 414-6 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 418-1
1:668
§ 418-2. Intent.
It is the intent of the Village of Sleepy Hollow that activities in and around
wetland/watercourse complexes conform to all applicable building codes,
sediment control regulations and other regulations and that such activities
(1) Protecting water resources by providing sources of surface water,
recharging groundwater and aquifers, serving as chemical and
biological oxidation basins and/or functioning as settling basins for
naturally occurring sedimentation.
(2) Controlling flooding and stormwater runoff by storing or regulating
natural flows.
(3) Providing unique nesting, migratory and wintering habitats for
diverse wildlife species, including many on the New York State and
federal endangered species lists.
(4) Supporting unique vegetative associations specifically adapted for
survival in low-oxygen environments and/or brackish or salt water.
(5) Providing areas of unusually high plant productivity which support
significant wildlife diversity and abundance.
(6) Providing breeding and spawning grounds, nursery habitat and
food for various species of fish.
(7) Serving as nutrient traps for nitrogen and phosphorus and filters
for surface water pollutants.
(8) Helping to maintain biospheric stability by supporting particularly
efficient photosynthesizers capable of producing significant
amounts of oxygen and supporting bacteria which process excess
nitrates and nitrogenous pollutants and return them to the
atmosphere as inert nitrogen gas.
(9) Providing open space and visual relief from intense development in
urbanized and growing areas.
(10) Serving as outdoor laboratories and living classrooms for the study
and appreciation of natural history, ecology and biology.
B. Considerable acreage of these important natural resources has been
lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building,
polluting and other acts inconsistent with the natural uses of such
areas. Remaining wetlands are in jeopardy of being lost, despoiled or
impaired by such acts, contrary to the public safety and welfare.
C. It is therefore the policy of the Village of Sleepy Hollow to protect its
citizens, including generations yet unborn, by preventing the
despoliation and destruction of wetlands while taking into account
varying ecological, economic, recreational and aesthetic values.
Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland areas.
§ 418-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-2
1:669
not threaten public safety or the natural environment or cause nuisances
by:
§ 418-3. Applicability; boundaries.
A. Impeding flood flows, reducing flood storage areas or destroying storm
barriers, thereby resulting in increased flood heights, frequencies or
velocities on other lands.
B. Increasing water pollution through location of domestic waste disposal
systems in wet soils; inappropriate siting of stormwater control
facilities; unauthorized application of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides
and algicides; disposal of solid wastes at inappropriate sites; creation of
unstabilized fills; or the destruction of wetland soils and vegetation
serving pollution and sediment control functions.
C. Increasing erosion.
D. Decreasing breeding, nesting and feeding areas for many species of
waterfowl and shorebirds, including those rare and endangered.
E. Interfering with the exchange of nutrients needed by fish and other
forms of wildlife.
F. Decreasing habitat for fish and other forms of wildlife.
G. Adversely altering the recharge or discharge functions of wetlands and
watercourses, thereby impacting groundwater or surface water
supplies.
H. Significantly altering the wetland/watercourse hydroperiod and
thereby causing either short- or long-term changes in vegetational
composition, soils characteristics, nutrient recycling or water
chemistry.
I. Destroying sites needed for education and scientific research, such as
outdoor biophysical laboratories, living classrooms and training areas.
J. Interfering with public rights in navigable waters and the recreation
opportunities provided by wetlands/watercourses for fishing, boating,
hiking, bird-watching, photography, camping and other passive uses.
K. Destroying or damaging aesthetic and property values, including
significant public viewsheds.
A. Wetlands and wetland buffers; new projects. This chapter shall apply to
all lands defined as wetlands and wetland buffers, watercourses and
watercourse buffers in § 418-5 and to any proposed regulated activity
as defined in § 418-8 not physically completed as of the effective date of
this chapter. As used in this subsection, the term "physically completed"
shall mean the actual completion of construction activities related to a
regulated activity, including filling, erection of structures or other
improvement or development activities.
§ 418-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 418-3
1:670
§ 418-4. Nonconforming activities.
A regulated activity that was approved prior to passage of this chapter and
to which significant economic resources have been committed pursuant to
such approval but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter may be continued, subject to the following:
§ 418-5. Definitions.
Words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted as defined below
and, where ambiguity exists, words or phrases shall be interpreted so as
to give this chapter its most reasonable application in carrying out the
regulatory goals stated in § 418-1:
ADJACENT AREA — See "wetland/watercourse buffer."
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an individual farmer or other
landowner in grazing and watering livestock that directly produce
agricultural products; making reasonable use of water resources for
agricultural purposes; harvesting the natural products of wetlands,
B. Rules for establishing and interpreting wetland/watercourse
boundaries. The boundaries of a wetland/watercourse ordinarily shall
be determined by field investigation and flagging, with a subsequent
survey by a licensed land surveyor, unless the last is waived by the
Sleepy Hollow Planning Board. The Sleepy Hollow Planning Board may
consult and/or may require the applicant to consult with biologists,
hydrologists, soil scientists, ecologists/botanists or other experts as
necessary to make this determination pursuant to the definition criteria
contained in § 418-5. [Amended 8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
C. Grandfathered projects. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
any land use, improvement or development physically completed prior
to the effective date of this chapter. As used in this subsection, the term
"physically completed" shall mean the actual completion of
construction activities related to a regulated activity, including filling,
erecting structures or other improvement or development activities.
A. All such activities shall continue to be governed by the present laws of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
B. No such activity shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in
such a way that increases its nonconformity without a permit.
C. If a nonconforming activity is discontinued for 12 consecutive months,
any resumption of the activity shall conform to this chapter.
D. If any nonconforming use or activity is destroyed by human activities or
an act of God, it shall not be resumed except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
E. Activities or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming activities.
§ 418-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-5
1:671
excluding peat mining and timber harvesting; and filling or selective cutting
of trees. "Agricultural activity" does not mean the clear-cutting of trees;
filling or deposition of spoil; mining; grazing of horses for nonagricultural
purposes; nor draining for growing agricultural products or for other
purposes.[Amended 8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
APPLICANT — A person who files an application for a permit under this
chapter and who is either the owner of the land on which the proposed
regulated activity would be located, a contract vendee, a lessee of the land,
the person who would actually control and direct the proposed activity or
the authorized agent of such person.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The municipal or administrative board or public
official or municipal employee empowered to grant or deny permits under
this chapter, to require the posting of bonds as necessary and to revoke or
suspend a permit where lack of compliance with the permit is established.
The "approval authority" for the Village of Sleepy Hollow is the Planning
Board.
AQUICULTURE — Cultivating and harvesting products, including fish and
vegetation, that are produced naturally in freshwater wetlands/
watercourses and installing cribs, racks and other in-water structures for
cultivating these products, but does not include filling, dredging, peat
mining, clear-cutting or the construction of any buildings or any waterregulating
structures such as dams.
BOUNDARY OF A WETLAND — The outer limit of the soils and/or
vegetation as defined under "wetland/freshwater wetland."
CLEAR-CUTTING — Any cutting of more than 30% of trees four inches or
more in diameter at breast height (4.5 feet) over any ten-year cutting cycle,
as determined on the basis of wetland area per lot or group of lots under
single ownership, including any cutting of trees which results in the total
removal of one or more naturally occurring species, whether or not the cut
meets or exceeds the threshold of 30%.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the Department of Environmental
Conservation of the State of New York.
DAMS AND WATER CONTROL MEASURES — Barriers used or intended to
or which, even though not intended, in fact do obstruct the flow of water or
raise, lower or maintain the level of water.
DATE OF RECEIPT OF APPLICATION BY ENVIRONMENTAL
CONSERVATION COMMISSION — An application shall be deemed
"received" by the Environmental Conservation Commission on the date
of the first regular meeting following the filing of the application and
supporting plans pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
DEPOSIT — To fill, grade, discharge, emit, dump or place any material, or
the act thereof.
DISCHARGE — The emission of any water, substance or material into
a wetland or wetland buffer, whether or not such substance causes
pollution.64
§ 418-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 418-5
1:672
DRAIN — To deplete or empty of water by drawing off by degrees or in
increments.
DREDGE — To excavate or remove sediment, soil, mud, sand, shells, gravel
or other aggregate.
ECOLOGIST/BOTANIST — A person having special knowledge of the
physical, chemical and biological sciences related to the physiology,
identification and distribution of native plants and vegetative associations
in wetland and upland systems and of methods to describe, classify and
delineate vegetative species and associations. This person must possess a
minimum of two years' experience in classifying and mapping upland and
wetland vegetation and at least a bachelor's degree with 30 semester hours
(credits) or equivalent in biology, physical science and chemistry, with a
minimum of eight semester hours (credits) in botany. Individuals who do not
meet the above minimum qualifications but who possess at least 10 years'
experience identifying and mapping native vegetation are qualified if they
have completed at least 12 semester hours (credits) in botany.
EXCAVATE — To dig out and remove any material from a wetland/
watercourse or wetland/watercourse buffer.65
FILL — See "deposit."
FRESHWATER WETLANDS MAP — The final freshwater wetlands map for
Westchester County promulgated by the Commissioner of the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation pursuant to § 24-0301,
Subdivision 5, of the New York State Freshwater Wetlands Act, or such
map as has been amended or adjusted, and on which are indicated the
approximate locations of the actual boundaries of wetlands regulated
pursuant to Article 24 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
GRADING — To adjust the degree of inclination of the natural contours of
the land, including leveling, smoothing and other modification of the natural
land surface.66
HYDRIC SOIL — A soil that is saturated, flooded or ponded long enough
during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper
part, as further defined under "wetland."
HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION — Macrophytic plant life growing in water or
on a substrate that is at least periodically sufficient in oxygen as a result of
excessive water content, and as further defined under "wetland."67
MATERIAL — Liquid, soil or gaseous substances, including but not limited
to soil, silt, gravel, rock, clay, peat, mud, debris and refuse; any organic or
64.Editor's Note: The definition of "dominant(s) or dominance," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991.
65.Editor's Note: The definitions of "facultative species" and "ferrous iron," which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991.
66.Editor's Note: The definitions of "growing season" and "histosols/organic soils," which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991.
67.Editor's Note: The definition of "long duration," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991.
§ 418-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-5
1:673
inorganic compound, chemical agent or matter; sewage sludge or effluent;
or industrial or municipal solid waste.
MICROSITE — A small site supporting facultative or obligate vegetation
anomalous within the context of the larger vegetative unit. Microsites may
be drier or wetter than surrounding areas as a result of altered drainage,
incidental topographic variation or a related characteristic.68
MITIGATION PLAN — The plan prepared by the applicant pursuant to
§ 418-13 when the applicant has demonstrated that either losses or impacts
to the wetland or wetland buffer are necessary and unavoidable, as defined
in § 418-12D, and have been minimized to the maximum extent practicable.
MUNICIPALITY — The Village of Sleepy Hollow.69
PERMIT — That form of written municipal approval required by this chapter
for the conduct of a regulated activity within a wetland/watercourse or
buffer.
PERSON — See "applicant."
POLLUTION — Any harmful thermal effect of the contamination or
rendering unclean or impure of any wetland or waters by reason of erosion
or by any waste or other materials discharged or deposited therein.
PROJECT — Any proposed or ongoing action which may result in direct or
indirect physical or chemical impact on a wetland/watercourse, including
but not limited to any regulated activity.
REMOVE — To dig, dredge, suck, bulldoze, dragline, blast or otherwise
excavate or grade, or the act thereof.
RENDERING UNCLEAN OR IMPURE — Any alteration of physical, chemical
or biological properties of any wetland or waters, including but not limited
to change in odor, color, turbidity or taste.
SELECTIVE CUTTING — Any cutting of trees within the boundaries of a
wetland or wetland buffer that is not "clear-cutting," as defined in this
section.
SOIL SCIENTIST — A person having special knowledge of the physical,
chemical and biological sciences applicable to the genesis and morphology
of soils as natural bodies and of the methods to describe, classify and map
soil units. This person must possess a minimum of two years' experience in
classifying and mapping soils or comparable field experience or a master's
degree in soil science, and a bachelor's degree with 30 semester hours
(credits) or equivalent in biology, physical science and earth science, with a
minimum of eight semester hours (credits) in soil science. Individuals who
do not meet the above minimum qualifications but who possess at least 10
years' experience in mapping soils are qualified if they have completed at
least 12 semester hours (credits) in soil science.
68.Editor's Note: The definition of "mineral soil," which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed 8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991.
69.Editor's Note: The definitions of "Munsell soil color charts" and "obligate upland species,"
which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991.
§ 418-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 418-5
1:674
STATE ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW ACT (SEQRA) — The law
pursuant to Article 8 of the New York Environmental Conservation Law,
providing for environmental quality review of actions which may have a
significant effect on the environment.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on or in the ground or attachment to something having location
on the ground, including but not limited to buildings, tennis courts and
swimming pools.
SUBDIVISION — Any division of land into two or more lots, parcels or
sites, whether adjoining or not, for the purpose of sale, lease, license or
any form of separate ownership or occupancy, including any grading, road
construction, installation of utilities or other modifications or any other land
use and development preparatory or incidental to any such division by any
person or by any other person controlled by, under common control with
or controlling such person or by any group of persons acting in concert
as part of a common scheme or plan. Subdivision of land shall include
any map, plat or other plan of division of land, whether or not previously
filed. Subdivision of land shall not include the lease of land for open space
recreational use and shall not include the division of land by bona fide gift,
devise or inheritance. "Subdivision" shall include the creation of units in
the condominium form of ownership and the creation of leaseholds in a
cooperative.70
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial or permanent or intermittent
public or private water body or water segment, such as ponds, lakes,
reservoirs, rivers, streams, brooks or waterways, that are contained within,
flow through or border on the municipality.71
WETLAND/FRESHWATER WETLAND — Any area which meets one or more
of the following criteria:
Lands and waters of the state that meet the definition provided in
§ 24-0107, Subdivision 1, of the New York State Freshwater Wetlands
Act (Article 24 and Title 23 of Article 71 of the Environmental
Conservation Law) and have an area of at least 12.4 acres or, if smaller,
have unusual local importance, as determined by the Commissioner
pursuant to § 24-0301, Subdivision 1, of the Act. The approximate
boundaries of such lands and waters are indicated on the official
freshwater wetlands map promulgated by the Commissioner pursuant
to § 24-0301, Subdivision 5, of the Act, or such a map that has been
amended or adjusted pursuant to § 24-0301, Subdivision 6, of the Act.
A.
All areas that comprise hydric soils and are inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a
prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation, as defined by the Federal
B.
70.Editor's Note: The definition of "very long duration," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991.
71.Editor's Note: The definition of "water table," which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed 8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991.
§ 418-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-5
1:675
WETLAND/WATERCOURSE BUFFER — A specified area surrounding a
wetland or watercourse that is intended to provide some degree of
protection to the wetland or watercourse from human activity and other
encroachment associated with development. The wetland/watercourse
buffer shall be subject to the regulations for wetlands as defined in this
chapter and shall be determined to be the area extending 100 feet
horizontally away from and paralleling the wetland boundary or
watercourse edge, or greater than 100 feet where designated by either
the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Conservation or the
local approval authority.[Amended 8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
§ 418-6. Permit required.
No regulated activity shall be conducted in a wetland/watercourse or
wetland/watercourse buffer without a written permit from the Sleepy
Hollow Planning Board and full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. All activities that are not permitted as-ofright
or by permit shall be prohibited.
§ 418-7. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted as-of-right within a wetland/
watercourse or wetland/watercourse buffer to the extent that they are
not prohibited by any other local law and to the extent that they do not
constitute a pollution or erosion hazard or interfere with proper drainage,
and provided that they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or
dredging except as authorized by permit:
Interagency Committee for Wetland Delineation, 1989, Federal Manual
for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, United States
Army Corps of Engineers, United States Environmental Protection
Agency, United States Fish and Wildlife Service and United States
Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service,
Washington, D.C., Cooperative Technical Publication.72 [Amended
8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
A. Normal ground maintenance, including mowing, trimming of vegetation
and removal of dead or diseased vegetation around a residence.
B. Selective cutting as defined in § 418-5.
C. Repair of walkways and walls.
D. Decorative landscaping and planting in wetland/watercourse buffers,
excluding those activities regulated in § 418-8K and L.
E. Public health activities, orders and regulations of the Westchester
County Department of Health and/or the New York State Department of
Health for emergencies only.
72.Editor's Note: The definitions of "wetland hydrology" and "wetland plants of the State of
New York," which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 8-20-1991 by L.L.
No. 7-1991.
§ 418-5 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 418-7
1:676
§ 418-8. Regulated activities.
Regulated activities include all activities within a wetland/watercourse or
buffer other than those specified in § 418-7 and may be permitted upon
written application to the Sleepy Hollow Planning Board. Regulated
activities include but are not limited to:
§ 418-9. Permit procedures.
F. Disposition or removal of natural products of wetlands/watercourses in
the process of recreational or commercial fishing, shellfishing,
aquiculture, hunting or trapping, but excluding excavation and removal
of peat or timber, except as provided in Subsection B.
G. Agricultural activities as defined in § 418-5.
A. Placement or construction of any structure.
B. Any form of draining, dredging, excavation or removal of material,
either directly or indirectly.
C. Any form of dumping, filling or depositing of material, either directly or
indirectly.
D. Installation of any service lines or cable conduits.
E. Introduction of any form of pollution, including but not limited to the
installation of a septic tank, the running of a sewer outfall or the
discharging of sewage treatment effluent or other liquid wastes into or
so as to drain into a wetland.
F. Alteration or modification of natural features and contours.
G. Alteration or modification of natural drainage patterns.
H. Construction of dams, docks or other water control devices, pilings or
bridges, whether or not they change the natural drainage
characteristics.
I. Installation of any pipes or wells.
J. Clear-cutting of any area of trees.
K. Removal or cutting of any vegetation except as permitted in § 481-7B.
L. Deposition or introduction of organic or inorganic chemicals, including
pesticides and fertilizers.
M. Grazing of one or more horses or other animals, and any agricultural
activity which involves draining or excavation of a wetland, except as
permitted in § 481-7G.
N. Any other activity that may impair the natural function(s) of a wetland
as described in § 481-1 of this chapter.
§ 418-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-9
1:677
A. No regulated activity shall be conducted without the issuance of a
written permit from the Sleepy Hollow Planning Board. Application for
a permit shall be made in duplicate to the Sleepy Hollow Planning
Board on forms furnished by the Village Clerk.
B. The Planning Board shall establish a mailing list of all interested
persons and agencies who wish to be notified of such applications.
Upon receipt of the completed application, the Planning Board shall
notify the individuals and agencies, including federal, state and local
agencies having jurisdiction over or an interest in the subject matter, to
provide such individuals and agencies with an opportunity to comment.
C. An application shall not be deemed complete until and unless an
applicant has complied fully with the procedures of the State
Environmental Quality Review Act (Article 8 of the State Environmental
Conservation Law). The action of the Planning Board upon any
application for a permit under this chapter shall in all cases, except the
case of the construction of a single residence upon a residential lot, be
deemed a Type 1 action, as that term is defined in the regulations
promulgated by the New York State Department of Environmental
Quality Review Act. In the case of an application for a permit with
respect to such single residence, the Planning Board shall classify said
action as provided in said regulations.
D. All permits shall expire on completion of the acts specified and, unless
otherwise indicated, shall be valid for a period of one year from the date
of issue. An extension of an original permit may be granted upon
written request of the Planning Board by the original permit holder or
his/her legal agent at least 90 days prior to the expiration date of the
original permit. The Planning Board may require new hearings if, in its
judgment, the original intent of the permit is altered or extended by the
renewal or if the applicant has failed to abide by the terms of the
original permit in any way. The request for renewal of a permit shall
follow the same form and procedure as the original application, except
that the Planning Board shall have the option of not holding a hearing if
the original intent of the permit is altered or extended in any significant
way.
E. Within five days of its receipt of a completed application for a permit,
the Planning Board shall provide the applicant with a notice of
application, which the applicant shall publish at his or her own expense
at least once in each of at least two newspapers having a general
circulation in Sleepy Hollow. Said notice of application shall be in a
form prescribed by the Planning Board. The notice shall:
(1) Specify that persons wishing to object to the application should file
a notice of objection by a specified date, together with a statement
of the grounds of objection to the application, with the Planning
Board.
§ 418-9 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 418-9
1:678
§ 418-10. Applications.
(2) Specify that the application, including all documents and maps
therewith, is available for public inspection at the office of the
Village Clerk.
A. Any application for a permit which shall be filed with the Planning
Board shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the owner.
(2) The street address and Tax Map designation of the property.
(3) A statement of authority from the owner for any agent making
application.
(4) A statement of the proposed work and purpose thereof and an
explanation why the proposed activity cannot be located at another
site, including an explanation of how the proposed activity is
dependent on wetlands or water-related resources.
(5) A list of the names of the owners of record of lands adjacent to the
wetland/watercourse or wetland/watercourse buffer in which the
project is to be undertaken and the names of known claimants of
water rights of whom the applicant has notice which relate to any
land within or within 100 feet of the boundary of the property on
which the proposed regulated activity will be located.
(6) Complete plans and estimates for the proposed site improvements,
which shall be certified by an engineer, architect, land surveyor or
landscape architect licensed in the State of New York, drawn to a
scale no less detailed than one inch equals 30 feet, and showing the
following:
(a) The location of all wetlands/watercourses as determined by a
qualified ecologist/botanist, soil scientist and/or other qualified
expert no earlier than 12 months prior to the date of filing the
application. [Amended 8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
(b) A description of the vegetative cover of the regulated area,
including dominant species.
(c) A description of the soil types on site.
(d) The location of the construction area or area proposed to be
disturbed and its relation to property lines, roads and buildings
within 250 feet and watercourses within 100 feet.
(e) The exact locations and specifications for all proposed
draining, fill, grading, dredging and vegetation removal,
including the amount computed from cross-sections, and the
procedures to be used.
§ 418-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-10
1:679
(f) The location of any well(s) and depth(s) thereof and any
disposal system within 50 feet of area(s) to be disturbed.
(g) Existing and adjusted contours at two-foot intervals in the
proposed disturbed area and to a distance of 50 feet beyond,
and elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of
the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet.
(h) Details of any drainage system proposed, both for the conduct
of work and after completion thereof, including locations of any
point discharges, artificial inlets or other human-made
conveyances which would discharge into the wetland/
watercourse or wetland/watercourse buffer, and measures
proposed to control erosion both during and after the work.
(i) Where creation of a lake or pond is proposed, details of the
construction of any dams, embankments, outlets or other
water control devices and analysis of the wetland/watercourse
hydrologic system, including seasonal water fluctuation,
inflow/outflow calculations and subsurface soil, geology and
groundwater conditions.
(j) Where creation of a detention basin is proposed, with or
without excavation, details of the construction of any dams,
berms, embankments, outlets or other water control devices
and an analysis of the wetland/watercourse hydrologic system,
including seasonal water fluctuation, inflow/outflow
calculations and subsurface soil, geology and groundwater
conditions.
(k) A completed environmental assessment form as required by
the New York State Environmental Quality Review Act.
(7) Copies of all applicable county, state or federal permits or permit
applications that are required for such work.
B. In the case of applications for projects which propose encroachment
into the wetland/watercourse buffer only or where the total amount of
disturbed area is less than 1/4 acre or whose total cost does not exceed
$5,000, the Planning Board may waive the requirements outlined in
Subsection A(6), but shall require an application containing the
information outlined in Subsection A(1) through (6)(c) and Subsection
A(7), as well as a plan clearly showing the scope and details of the
project.
C. The Planning Board may require additional information as needed, such
as the study of flood, erosion or other hazards at the site and the effect
of any protective measures that might be taken to reduce such hazards,
and other information deemed necessary to evaluate the proposed use
in terms of the goals and standards of this chapter.
§ 418-10 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 418-10
1:680
§ 418-11. Public hearings.
§ 418-12. Standards for permit decisions.
D. An application fee shall be charged according to the fee schedule
included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees, and shall be presented at the
time the application is filed. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
E. All information relating to a permit application, including but not
limited to the application itself, additional required materials or
information, notices, record of hearings, written comments and
findings, shall be maintained on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
F. The Planning Board, its agents or employees may enter upon any lands
or waters for good cause shown for the purpose of undertaking any
investigation, examination, survey or other activity for the purposes of
this chapter.
A. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the application at
such time as it deems appropriate in order to give the public at least 15
days' notice thereof. It shall publish notice thereof in each of at least
two newspapers having a general circulation in Sleepy Hollow and give
at least 15 days' notice to each of the persons named in the application
pursuant to § 418-10A(5) of the information required therein. Insofar as
possible, any public hearing on the application shall be integrated with
any public hearing required or otherwise held pursuant to any other
law, including the State Environmental Quality Review Act. Any hearing
may be held by the Planning Board or by a hearing officer designated by
the Board.
B. All hearings shall be open to the public, and a full and complete record
of each hearing shall be made. The record of any hearing shall become
part of the permanent record of a permit application as specified in
§ 418-10E.
C. Any party may present evidence and testimony at the hearing. At the
hearing, the applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that the
proposed activity will be in accord with the goals and policies of this
chapter and the standards set forth below.
A. In granting, denying or conditioning any permit, the Planning Board
shall evaluate wetland/watercourse functions and the role of the
wetland/watercourse in the hydrologic and ecological systems and shall
determine the impact of the proposed activity upon health and safety,
rare and endangered species, water quality and additional wetland/
watercourse functions listed in § 418-1 of this chapter. In this
determination, it shall consider the following factors and shall issue
written findings with respect to:
§ 418-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-12
1:681
(1) The impact of the proposed activity and existing and reasonably
anticipated similar activities upon neighboring land uses and
wetland/watercourse functions as set forth in § 418-1 of this
chapter, including but not limited to the:
(a) Infilling of a wetland/watercourse or other modification of
natural topographic contours.
(b) Disturbance or destruction of natural flora and fauna.
(c) Influx of sediments or other materials causing increased water
turbidity and/or substrate aggradation.
(d) Removal or disturbance of wetland/watercourse soils.
(e) Reductions in wetland/watercourse water supply.
(f) Interference with wetland/watercourse circulation.
(g) Damaging reduction or increase in wetland/watercourse
nutrients.
(h) Influx of toxic chemicals and/or heavy metals.
(i) Damaging thermal changes in the wetland/watercourse water
supply.
(j) Destruction of natural aesthetic values.
(2) Any existing wetland/watercourse impact and the cumulative effect
of reasonably anticipated future wetland/watercourse activities in
the wetland/watercourse subject to the application.
(3) The impact of the proposed activity and reasonably anticipated
similar activities upon flood flows, flood storage, storm barriers and
water quality.
(4) The safety of the proposed activity from flooding, erosion,
hurricane winds, soil limitations and other hazards and possible
losses to the applicant and subsequent purchasers of the land.
(5) The adequacy of water supply and waste disposal for the proposed
use.
(6) Consistency with federal, state, county and local comprehensive
land use plans and regulations.
(7) The availability of preferable alternative locations on the subject
parcel or, in the case of an activity which cannot be undertaken on
the property without disturbance to a wetland/watercourse, the
availability of other reasonable locations for the activity that could
be obtained, used, expanded or managed at any time during the
proposed activity's planning history, whether or not such locations
§ 418-12 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 418-12
1:682
are now under the ownership or control of the applicant.
[Amended 8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
B. The Planning Board shall deny a permit if:
(1) The proposed activity may threaten public health and safety, result
in fraud, cause nuisances, impair public rights to the enjoyment
and use of public waters, threaten a rare or endangered species,
violate pollution control standards or violate other federal, state or
local regulations;
(2) It finds that the detriment to the public, measured by the factors
listed in this section, that would occur on issuance of the permit
outweighs the nonmonetary public benefits associated with the
activity; or
(3) Both the affected landowner and the local government have been
notified by a duly filed notice, in writing, that the state of any
agency or political subdivision of the state is in the process of
acquiring any freshwater wetland or watercourse by negotiation or
condemnation, with the following provisions:
(a) The written notice must include an indication that the
acquisition process has commenced, such as that an appraisal
of the property has been prepared or is in the process of being
prepared.
(b) If the landowner receives no offer for the property within one
year of the permit denial, this ban to the permit lapses. If its
negotiations with the applicant are broken off, the state or an
agency or political subdivision must, within six months of the
end of negotiation, either issue its findings and determination
to acquire the property pursuant to § 204 of the Eminent
Domain Procedure Law or issue a determination to acquire the
property without public hearing pursuant to § 206 of the
Eminent Domain Procedure Law, or this ban to permit lapses.
C. Preference will be given to activities that must have a shoreline or
wetland/watercourse location in order to function and that will have as
little impact as possible upon the wetland/watercourse buffer. In
general, permission will not be granted for dredging or ditching solely
for the purpose of draining wetlands, controlling mosquitoes,
lagooning, constructing factories, providing spoil and dump sites or
building roadways that may be located elsewhere. The regulated
activity must, to the extent feasible, be confined to the portion of a lot
outside of a wetland/watercourse buffer. All reasonable measures must
be taken to minimize impact upon the wetland or watercourse.
D. The Planning Board shall require preparation of a mitigation plan by
the applicant pursuant to § 418-13 when the applicant has
demonstrated that either losses or impacts to the wetland/watercourse
buffer are necessary and unavoidable and have been minimized to the
§ 418-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-12
1:683
§ 418-13. Mitigation plan; requirements.
maximum extent practicable. For the purposes of this chapter, wetland/
watercourse impacts are necessary and unavoidable only if all of the
following criteria are satisfied:
(1) The proposed activity is compatible with the public health and
welfare;
(2) There is no feasible on-site alternative to the proposed activity,
including reduction in density, change in use, revision of road and
lot layout and/or related site planning considerations that could
accomplish the applicant's objectives; and
(3) There is no feasible alternative to the proposed activity on any
other site that could be obtained, used, expanded or managed at
any time during the proposed activity's planning history that is not
a wetland/watercourse or wetland/watercourse buffer. [Amended
8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
E. Waiver. If the area of a wetland/watercourse for which there has been
an application for a permit is 1/10 of an acre or less, the Planning Board
shall be empowered, upon such conditions as it may deem appropriate,
to waive any of the provisions of §§ 418-12 and 418-13 of this chapter in
issuing such permit. [Added 8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
A. Mitigation measures. [Amended 8-20-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
(1) After it has been determined by the Planning Board pursuant to
§ 418-12D that losses of wetlands/watercourses or buffers are
necessary and unavoidable and have been minimized to the
maximum extent practicable, the applicant shall develop a
mitigation plan which shall specify mitigation measures that
provide for mitigation as follows:
(a) For losses to wetlands: replacement wetlands or enhancement
or restoration of existing wetlands that re-create as nearly as
possible the original wetlands in terms of type, functions and
geographic location and setting and that are larger than, by a
ratio of two to one (2:1), the original wetlands, provided that
the ecological impacts associated with the mitigation are not
greater than those associated with the proposed activity.
(b) For losses to watercourses: replacement, enhancement or
restoration of the watercourse that re-creates as nearly as
possible the disturbed or lost portion of the original
watercourse in terms of type, function and geographic location
and setting, by a ratio of one to one (1:1), for the disturbed or
lost portion of the watercourse, or the preparation of other
mitigation plans acceptable to the approving authority that
serve to replace or enhance the functions of the watercourse
affected by the proposed activity.
§ 418-12 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 418-13
1:684
(c) For losses to wetland buffers: enhancement of existing wetland
buffers or enhancement or restoration of existing wetlands, by
a ratio of two to one (2:1), for the area disturbed by the
proposed activity that replaces or enhances the functions of
the wetland or wetland buffer.
(2) For the purposes of mitigation, losses of wetland/watercourse
buffers will be viewed as losses of wetlands. On-site mitigation shall
be the preferred approach; off-site mitigation shall be permitted
only in cases where an on-site alternative is not possible.
B. Mitigation plans developed to compensate for the loss of wetlands or
wetland buffers shall include the following baseline data:
(1) Hydrologic data.
(a) Small projects (losses of two acres): land use history,
macrotopography, general surficial geology and stream-flow
measurements, groundwater levels and groundwater quality.
(b) Moderate projects (losses of two to 10 acres): data required for
small projects, plus microtopography, bedrock geology,
surficial geology, stream-flow velocity measurements, if
appropriate, soil pore water storage (organic soils) and direct
precipitation measurements.
(c) Large projects (losses of 10 acres): data required for small and
moderate projects, plus water balance analysis (one-year
study), groundwater storage, groundwater flow rates and soil
pore water level and flow (organic soils).
(2) Soils.
(a) Small projects: soil profile descriptions, general soil survey
data, bulk density, porosity, hydraulic conductivity, pH,
conductivity, cation exchange capacity, redox potential, total
phosphorus, total nitrogen, nitrate nitrogen and organic
carbon.
(b) Moderate projects: data required for small projects, plus fiber
content (organic soils), phosphorous retention, pore water
analysis (seasonally), alkalinity, exchangeable acidity,
seedbank capacity and soil organisms.
(c) Large projects: data required for small and moderate projects,
plus clay mineralogy, microbial assessment (seasonally), heavy
metals content, pesticides residues, gas/toxin analysis
(seasonally), peat features and soil temperature regime.
(3) Vegetation.
(a) Small projects: areal wetland extent and qualitative
measurement of percent plant cover, plant species list,
§ 418-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-13
1:685
§ 418-14. Permit conditions.
vegetation cover type, relative stem density, animal species
list, slope, microtopography, plant vigor, surface water
connections, habitat structure, vegetation/open water ratio
and surrounding terrestrial cover type.
(b) Moderate projects: data for small projects, plus comprehensive
animal species list, potential phosphorous uptake and potential
nitrogen uptake.
(c) Large projects: data for small and moderate projects, plus
quantitative measurement of stem density, evapotranspiration
data and net primary productivity.
(4) A monitoring schedule for a specified period of time as agreed to by
the Environmental Conservation Commission.
C. The Planning Board shall monitor or shall cause to have monitored
projects according to the specifications set forth in the permit to
determine whether the elements of the mitigation plan and permit
conditions have been met and whether the wetland acreage created
replaces the wetland acreage lost. To this end, the Planning Board may
contract with an academic institution, an independent research group
or other qualified professionals at the expense of the applicant or may
use its own staff expertise. The requirements for monitoring shall be
specified in the mitigation plan and shall include but not be limited to:
(1) The time period over which compliance monitoring shall occur.
(2) Field measurements to verify the size and location of the impacted
wetland area and the restored/replacement wetland area.
(3) The date of completion of the restoration/replacement.
(4) Field verification of the vegetative, hydrologic and soils criteria as
specified in the mitigation plan and permit.
D. Any mitigation plan prepared pursuant to this section and accepted by
the Planning Board shall become part of the permit for the application.
A. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be issued with
conditions. Such conditions may be attached as the Planning Board
deems necessary, pursuant to § 418-12D, to assure the preservation and
protection of affected wetlands/watercourses and to assure compliance
with the policy and the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of
the Planning Board rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this
chapter.
B. Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be in written form
and shall contain the following conditions:
§ 418-13 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 418-14
1:686
(1) Work conducted under a permit shall be open to inspection at any
time, including weekends and holidays, by the Planning Board and
Village Engineer or their designated representative(s).
(2) The permit shall expire on a specified date.
(3) The permit holder shall notify the Planning Board of the date on
which the work is to begin at least five days in advance of such
date.
(4) The Planning Board permit shall be prominently displayed at the
project site during the undertaking of the activities authorized by
the permit.
C. The Planning Board shall set forth, in writing, in the file it maintains
regarding a permit application, its findings and reasons for all
conditions attached to any permit. Such conditions may include but
shall not be limited to:
(1) Limitations on minimum lot size for any activity.
(2) Limitation on the total portion of any lot or the portion of the
wetland on the lot that may be graded, filled or otherwise modified.
(3) Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
(4) Imposition of operation controls, sureties and deed restrictions
concerning future use and subdivision of lands, such as
preservation of undeveloped areas in open space use and
limitations of vegetation removal.
(5) Dedication of easements to protect wetlands/watercourses.
(6) Erosion control measures.
(7) Setbacks for structures, fill, deposit of spoil and other activities
from the wetland.
(8) Modifications in project design to ensure continued water supply to
the wetlands/watercourses and circulation of waters.
(9) Replanting of wetland/watercourse vegetation and construction of
new wetland/watercourse areas to replace damaged or destroyed
areas.
D. The Planning Board shall include in the file it maintains regarding a
permit application a copy of any mitigation plan prepared pursuant to
§ 418-13D, all comments received pursuant to § 418-9E, and a record of
any hearing held pursuant to § 418-11.
E. The Planning Board shall cause notice of its denial, issuance or
conditional issuance of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper
having a broad circulation in the area wherein the wetland lies.
§ 418-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-14
1:687
§ 418-15. Performance bond.
§ 418-16. Compliance required.
No permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall remove an applicant's
obligation to comply in all respects with the applicable provisions of any
other federal, state or local law or regulation, including but not limited to
the acquisition of any other required permit or approval.
§ 418-17. Suspension or revocation of permits.
The Planning Board may:
F. In the event that the court finds the action of the Planning Board
constitutes a taking without compensation and the land so regulated
merits protection under this chapter, the court may, at the election of
the Planning Board, either set aside the order or require the Planning
Board of the Village of Sleepy Hollow to request that the Village Board
of Trustees proceed under the condemnation law to acquire the
wetlands/watercourses or such less-than-fee rights therein as have
been taken.
A. The Planning Board may require that, prior to commencement of work
under any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the applicant or
permittee shall post a bond in an amount and with surety and
conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions and
limitations set forth in the permit. The particular amount and the
conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this
chapter. The bond shall remain in effect until the Planning Board or its
designated agent certifies that the work has been completed in
compliance with the terms of the permit and the bond is released by the
Planning Board or a substitute bond is provided. In the event of a
breach of any condition of any such bond, the Planning Board may
institute an action in the courts upon such bond and prosecute the same
to judgment and execution.
B. The Planning Board shall set forth, in writing, in the file it keeps
regarding a permit application, its findings and reasons for imposing a
bond pursuant to this section.
A. Suspend or revoke a permit in the form of a stop-work order if it finds
that the applicant or permittee has not complied with any or all of the
terms of such permit, has exceeded the authority granted in the permit
or has failed to undertake the project in the manner set forth in the
approved application.
B. Consult or contract with expert persons or agencies in reviewing a
permit application.
C. Hold hearings and subpoena witnesses in the exercise of its powers,
functions and duties provided for by this chapter.
§ 418-14 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 418-18
1:688
§ 418-18. Penalties for offenses.
§ 418-19. Enforcement.
The Village is specifically empowered to seek injunctive relief restraining
any violation or threatened violation of any provision of this chapter and/or
compelling the restoration of the affected wetland or wetland buffer to its
condition prior to the violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 418-20. Review.
A. Administrative sanctions. Any person who undertakes any wetland or
watercourse activity without a permit issued hereunder or who violates,
disobeys or disregards any provision of this chapter, including any
provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter or any rule or
regulation adopted by the Planning Board pursuant to this chapter,
shall be liable to the Village for a civil penalty of not more than $5,000
for every such violation. Each consecutive day of the violation will be
considered a separate offense. Such civil penalty may be recovered in
an action brought by the Village at the request and in the name of the
Planning Board in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such civil
penalty may be released or compromised by the Planning Board and
any action commenced to recover the same may be settled and
discontinued by the Planning Board. In addition, the Planning Board
shall have power, following a hearing, to direct the violator to restore
the affected wetland/watercourse to its condition prior to the violation,
insofar as that is possible, within a reasonable time and under the
supervision of the Planning Board or its designee. Any such order of the
Planning Board shall be enforceable in an action brought in any court of
competent jurisdiction. Any civil penalty or order issued by the
Planning Board pursuant to this subsection shall be reviewable in a
proceeding pursuant to Article 78 of the State Civil Practice Law and
Rules.
B. Criminal sanctions. Any person who knowingly or willfully violates an
order, permit, rule or regulation of the Planning Board regulating
wetlands/watercourses and buffers pursuant to this chapter shall, in
addition, for the first offense, be guilty of a violation punishable by a
fine of not less than $500 and not more than $1,000; for a second and
each subsequent offense, he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,000 or a
term of imprisonment of not less than 15 days or more than six months,
or both. In addition to these punishments, any offender may be ordered
by the court to restore the affected wetland/watercourse to its condition
prior to the offense, insofar as that is possible. The court shall specify a
reasonable time for the completion of such restoration, which shall be
effected under the supervision of the Planning Board. Each offense shall
be a separate and distinct offense, and in the case of continuing offense,
each day of continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 418-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-20
1:689
§ 418-21. Amendments.
§ 418-22. Assessment.
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider wetland/watercourse
regulations in determining the fair market value of land. Any owner of
an undeveloped wetland/watercourse who has dedicated an easement or
entered into a perpetual conservation restriction with the Planning Board
or a nonprofit organization to permanently control some or all regulated
activities in the wetland/watercourse shall be assessed consistent with
those restrictions. Such landowner shall also be exempted from special
assessment on the controlled wetland to defray the cost of municipal
improvements such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains.
A. Review. Any decision or order of the Planning Board or any officer or
employee thereof made pursuant to or within the scope of this chapter
may be reviewed at the request of any person affected thereby,
including but not limited to any owner of the affected wetland/
watercourse or wetland/watercourse buffer and any resident or citizen
of the Village, by the Board of Trustees, provided that such review is
commenced by the filing with the Village of a notice of review within 30
days after service of such order or notice or such decision given, as the
case may be.
B. Judicial review. Any determination, decision or order of the Planning
Board may be judicially reviewed pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules in the Supreme Court for the County of
Westchester within 30 days after the date of the filing of the
determination, decision or order of such Board with the Clerk of the
Village.
A. This chapter may from time to time be amended in accordance with the
procedures and requirements of the general statutes and as new
information concerning soils, hydrology, flooding or botanical species
peculiar to wetlands becomes available.
B. Any person may submit, in writing, in a form prescribed by the Planning
Board, a request for a change in the regulations. The request shall be
considered at a public hearing held in accordance with the provisions of
the general statutes not less than 90 days after receipt of the written
request.
§ 418-20 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 418-22
1:690
Part III: Land Use Legislation
Chapter 425
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Architecture, Land Use
Development, Buildings and Building
Compliance — See Ch. 11.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 358.
Waterfront consistency review — See Ch. 414.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 418-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-22
1:691

ARTICLE I
Title and Introduction
§ 425-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Subdivision Regulations of the Village
of Sleepy Hollow."
§ 425-2. General policy.
The Planning Board declares as its general policy to consider land
subdivision as a part of the plan for the orderly, efficient and economical
development of the Village. Lands to be subdivided shall be of a character
such that they provide adequate facilities for the housing, transportation,
distribution, comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare of the citizens
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow. Adequate provision shall be made for
public water and sewage systems for drainage and for other needed
improvements, as determined by the approving agency. Proposed streets
and parks shall conform to the Official Map of the Village and shall be
properly related to proposals shown on the Comprehensive Development
Plan of the Village, as adopted and from time to time amended.
§ 425-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-2
1:693

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 425-3. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms as used herein
are defined as follows:
COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A composite of the
mapped and written proposals recommending the future development
of the Village, prepared and adopted by the Planning Board pursuant
to § 7-722 of the Village Law, together with any amendments thereto.
Such a plan may also be referred to as the "Master Plan."
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL — The official action taken on a preliminary
plat by the Planning Board at a regular meeting, which determines
that the plat submitted is in proper form and meets the established
standards adopted for design, layout and development of the
subdivision. Conditional approval does not constitute approval of a final
plat, but indicates that the layout as approved may serve as a guide in
the preparation of a final plat.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation
of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the
flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
EASEMENT — Authorization by a property owner for use of a
designated portion of his or her property by another for a specific
purpose.
LOT — A parcel of land, separated from other parcels by description,
as on a subdivision plat or a surveyor's map, or by metes and bounds
for purpose of sale, lease or separate use. Such parcel may or may not
conform to the requirements of a lot under zoning regulations.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with § 7-724 of the
Village Law, and any amendments to the map adopted by the Village or
additions thereto resulting from the approval of subdivision plats by the
Village and the subsequent filing of such approved plats. Such a map
shall be deemed to be conclusive with respect to the location and width
of streets, public parks, and drainage rights-of-way shown thereon.
OFFICIAL SUBMISSION DATE — The date of the meeting of the
Planning Board at which a final plat, including all required surveys,
plans and data set forth in Article IV of this chapter, is submitted.
PERFORMANCE BOND — Any security which may be accepted in
lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the
Planning Board approves a plat. Such security may include
performance bonds issued by a bonding or surety company, escrow
agreements, and other similar collateral or surety agreements
acceptable to the Board of Trustees and approved by the Village
Attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution.
§ 425-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-3
1:695
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow, established pursuant to § 7-718 of the Village Law, which shall
consist of seven members. The terms of members shall be so fixed that
at least one will expire at the end of each official year. Any officials of
the Village of Sleepy Hollow on the Planning Board shall not, by reason
of membership thereon, forfeit their right to exercise the powers,
perform the duties or receive the compensation of the municipal office
held by them during such membership. Any member of the Board may
be removed by the Mayor for cause after a public hearing.
PLAT — A map of a subdivision, further identified as:
RESUBDIVISION — Any change of existing property lines or of
property lines shown on a plat filed in the office of the County Clerk.
STREET — A public way for vehicular traffic, which may be designated
as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, alley or otherwise
and which includes an existing state, county or municipal roadway, and
suitably improved to the satisfaction of the Village; or a way designated
on a subdivision plat filed prior to the adoption of this chapter; further
classified as:
SKETCH PLAT — A rough diagram of a subdivision drawn with
sufficient accuracy to be used for discussion purposes prior to the
submission of any application.
(1)
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A plat indicating the proposed layout of
a subdivision, which meet the requirements of Article IV of this
chapter, and which is submitted with an application for review and
conditional approval by the Planning Board.
(2)
FINAL PLAT — A plat showing the final design of a subdivision,
prepared in accordance with Article IV of this chapter, which is
submitted to the Planning Board for final approval and which, if
approved, is filed with the county property recording officer.
(3)
(1) ARTERIAL STREET — One used primarily for through traffic.
COLLECTOR STREET — One which carries traffic from local
streets to the major system of arterial streets and which includes
the principal entrance streets to a residential development and the
streets for circulation within such development.
(2)
CONTROLLED ACCESS STREET — A divided arterial street
without right of access from abutting properties.
(3)
CUL-DE-SAC — A local street open at one end only and with special
provision for turning around.
(4)
LOCAL STREET — One used primarily for access to abutting
properties.
(5)
§ 425-3 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-3
1:696
STREET PAVEMENT — The exposed or wearing surface of a roadway
used by vehicular traffic.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire width of a street between
property lines measured at right angles to the center line of the street.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into two or more
lots, parcels or other units for the purpose of transfer of ownership
or of building development, whether immediately or in the future. The
term shall also be construed to include resubdivision of land for which
a plat has been filed. The term shall not be construed to include lot line
adjustments of three feet or less.[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
VILLAGE BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the Incorporated Village
of Sleepy Hollow.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow, Chapter 450, Zoning, adopted pursuant to § 7-700 of the Village
Law, together with any and all amendments thereto.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A minor street parallel and
adjacent to an arterial street and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
(6)
B. Word usage. The word "shall," as employed in this chapter, indicates a
mandatory action by applicants or parties at interest. The word "will"
indicates a statutory or self-imposed mandate upon the Planning Board.
§ 425-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-3
1:697

ARTICLE III
Procedure
§ 425-4. Approval required.
The owner, or the owner's duly authorized agent, of any land proposed to
be subdivided shall apply for and secure approval of such subdivision prior
to entering into any contract for the sale of any portion of the land thereof,
and prior to applying for any permit for construction on any part thereof
or title to any part thereof is transferred, in accordance with the following
procedures.
§ 425-5. Sketch plat. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 425-6. Preliminary plat.
A. Submission.
(1) Before filing an application for approval of a preliminary plat, the
owner, or an appropriate representative thereof, shall submit
sketch plats and data as specified in § 425-9 to the Department of
Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings and Building
Compliance (hereinafter the "Department") for informal review by
the Department in conjunction with other appropriate Village
agencies and applicable Village consultants.
(2) Such submission shall not require a formal application, nor
payment of any fee, nor the filing of any plat with the Planning
Board, but is intended to provide for an exchange of information,
including any requirement of the Village as expressed in this
chapter, in the Comprehensive Development Plan, the Official Map,
the Local Waterfront Revitalization Program, the Village Code,
Zoning Code and elsewhere.
B. Action by the Department. The Department shall advise the applicant in
writing within 15 days after the Department has consulted with other
applicable Village agencies and completed its review of the informal
submission of sketch plats and accompanying data that the plans and
data as submitted or modified do or do not meet the objectives of this
chapter, the Comprehensive Development Plan, the Official Map, the
Local Waterfront Revitalization Program, the Village Code, Zoning Code
and elsewhere, as well as any proposed addition or modification, if any,
which should be made if an application for subdivision approval is to be
submitted.
(1) When such finding is negative, the reasons for such negative
finding shall be specified.
(2) When such finding is positive, the applicant may then submit a
preliminary plat to the Department, as specified in §§ 425-6 and
425-10, for consideration by the Planning Board.
§ 425-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-6
1:699
A. Application requirement.
(1) Application shall be made on forms provided by the Department.
(a) The application shall include:
[1] A cover letter to the Planning Board, including a brief
summary of the proposed action in letter form, indicating
scope of project, purpose and plans for development;
[2] A completed application form;
[3] A completed fee agreement form;
[4] An application fee;
[5] An initial escrow deposit;
[6] A completed subdivision checklist;
[7] A completed short environmental assessment form (EAF)
or full EAF, as appropriate;
[8] A completed coastal assessment form; and
[9] A preliminary plat that conforms to the specifications
outlined in § 425-10 unless certain specifications are
waived by the Planning Board.
(b) The application shall be accompanied by 11 copies of the
preliminary plat and supplementary materials as specified in
§ 425-10.
(c) The application shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter, the Zoning Law and any other applicable section of
the Village Code and with the provisions of Article 7 of the
Village Law.
(2) The application shall be filed with the Department.
(3) The application must be accompanied by an application fee, with
the amount to be established and determined by the Board of
Trustees from time to time and set forth in the Fee Schedule
included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees. If an applicant
subsequently elects not to apply for approval of a final plat, the
applicant may request and shall receive back 1/2 of the total fee
paid.
(4) The application shall be filed not less than 10 business days prior to
a regular meeting of the Planning Board.
(5) If the application is deemed complete by the Department, the
applicant shall attend the next regular meeting of the Planning
Board to discuss the preliminary plat and the application in
general.
§ 425-6 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-6
1:700
B. Action by Planning Board.
(1) Upon receiving a complete application for approval of a preliminary
plat, the Department shall cause the item to be entered on the
agenda of the next regular meeting of the Planning Board and shall
distribute a copy of the application with the date of such meeting to
each of the county and Village agencies with an official interest in
the matter, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Building Inspector (in all cases).
(b) Village Engineer (in all cases).
(c) Consultants to the Planning Board.
(d) Village Attorney.
(e) Superintendent of Village Water Department.
(f) Clerk of the adjoining municipality (if the subdivision involves
land within 500 feet of the municipal boundary).
(g) Westchester County Department of Health (if not proposed to
be connected to public sewer and/or water supply systems).
(h) Westchester County Department of Planning (if any street in
the proposed subdivision will connect directly into a state or
county highway).
(i) New York State Department of Transportation.
(j) Clerk of the school district in which the property is located.
(k) Other applicable local, state and federal agencies.
(2) The Planning Board will commence its review of a preliminary plat
immediately upon receipt of a completely documented application
and will hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat within 62
days of the receipt of a complete application and preliminary plat.
Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village at least seven days prior to the date of the
hearing. Copies of the notice shall be posted in at least three
prominent places in the Village at least five days prior to the date of
the hearing. In addition to the distribution of written notice of any
hearing on an application sent by use of the United States Postal
Service, and in addition to the posting of the written notice in a
public place in Village Hall, a prominent sign shall be posted two
weeks prior to the hearing at the edge of the property wherever it
abuts a public street, in a clear and visible location, giving notice of
the public hearing and its subject, and any continuation and its
subject, and the location of the hearing and its time and date. This
shall be performed by the applicant and an affidavit of posting
submitted to the Department the Friday before the meeting at
§ 425-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-6
1:701
§ 425-7. Final plat.
which it is to be heard. The applicant shall maintain the sign until
the public hearing is closed.
(3) The Planning Board will render its report within 62 days after the
close of the public hearing. The Planning Board will carefully study
the practicability of the proposed subdivision layout, taking into
consideration the requirements of the Village and the best use of
the land being subdivided.
(a) Particular attention will be given to the arrangement, location
and width of streets and to their relation to the terrain, to
drainage and sewage disposal, to the size and arrangement of
lots, to the future development of adjoining lands as yet not
subdivided, and to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance,
Official Map, the Comprehensive Development Plan of the
Village, and other applicable Village, state or federal laws and
documents.
(b) The Planning Board will also take into consideration any
comments from the public and any comments and
recommendations received from any interested federal, state,
county or Village agencies with an official interest in the
matter.
(4) After discussion of the preliminary plat, the Planning Board will
advise the applicant, in writing, of any specific changes it will
require in the plat and the character and extent of any required
improvements or reservations which it will require as a
prerequisite to approval of the final plat.
(5) When agreement has been reached between the applicant and the
Planning Board as to any changes or other requirements, the
Planning Board will advise the applicant in writing that his
application has received conditional approval and may be
considered as the basis for the submission of a final plat. Such
conditional approval of a preliminary plat by the Planning Board
shall be valid for six months, unless further extended by the Board.
If a final plat is not presented for consideration by the Planning
Board within that time, as may be extended, the preliminary plat
must be resubmitted for consideration by the Planning Board.
A. Action by subdivider prior to submission.
(1) Improvements.
(a) The subdivider, prior to submitting a final plat, shall have
installed the improvements required under Article VI as may
have been stipulated or modified as part of the conditional
approval by the Planning Board.
§ 425-6 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-7
1:702
(b) In lieu of actual installation, the subdivider may post
performance guarantees adequate to assure the installation of
such improvements.
(2) Endorsements.
(a) Prior to submission of a final plat, the subdivider shall obtain
endorsement on the plat indicating that it meets the standards
of other jurisdictions having a statutory interest in the
proposed subdivision, including but not limited to the
following:
[1] Westchester County Department of Health.
[2] Westchester County Department of Public Works.
[3] New York State Department of Transportation.
B. Application. Within six months of receiving conditional approval of a
preliminary plat, an applicant may submit for approval of a final plat.
(1) Application shall be made on forms provided by the Department at
the time of conditional approval of the preliminary plat.
(a) The application shall include the entire subdivision or a section
thereof which derives access from a street on the Official Map,
which street is improved to Village standards or for which
street bond covering such improvement is held by the Village.
(b) The application shall be accompanied by three copies of the
subdivision plat and the construction detail sheets, as
described in § 425-11 of this chapter.
(c) The application shall comply in all respects with the
preliminary plat as conditionally approved and, if applicable,
as per § 425-6B(4).
(2) The application shall be filed with the Department no less than 10
business days prior to a regular meeting of the Planning Board.
C. Action by Planning Board.
(1) Official submission date. The final subdivision plat shall be
considered officially submitted only at the regular meeting of the
Planning Board following completion.
(2) As provided for in Village Law, if the officially submitted final plat is
in substantial agreement with a preliminary plat, the Planning
Board shall by resolution conditionally approve with or without
modification or conditions, disapprove or grant approval with
conditions within 62 days of receipt of the officially submitted final
plat by the Department.
§ 425-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-7
1:703
(3) When a final plat is submitted which the Planning Board deems not
to be in substantial agreement with the conditionally approved
preliminary plat, a public hearing must be held within 62 days of
the receipt of the officially submitted final plat by the Department,
with the hearing advertised at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village at least five days before such hearing and
in any additional manner deemed appropriate by the Planning
Board. A public hearing on a final plat shall be closed by the
Planning Board within 120 days after it has been opened. The
Planning Board shall make its decision on the final plat within 62
days after the date of the public hearing.
(4) If it is determined at any point in the subdivision approval process
that the application requires additional environmental review
under the State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA), the
Planning Board and the Village as a whole will follow regulations as
provided in New York State Village Law regarding subdivision
review.
(5) Resolution to be adopted.
(a) The Planning Board, after careful scrutiny, will by resolution
approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or
disapprove a final plat.
(b) In cases of disapproval, the resolution will include the grounds
for such action.
(c) Notwithstanding any report from other jurisdictions with an
official interest in the matter, whether of approval, approval
with stipulations, or disapproval, the Planning Board may by
majority vote approve a final plat subject to stated conditions
when the application of such report will act to deprive the
owner of the reasonable use of his property.
(6) Required signatures.
(a) Upon approval of a final plat, the date and the signatures of the
Chairperson and Secretary of the Planning Board shall be
affixed to the certificate prescribed in § 425-11A(3)(n).
(b) A final plat shall not be signed until the applicant has complied
with all the stipulations, if any, of the resolution approving such
plat with stated conditions.
D. Filing of approved final plat. An approved final plat shall be filed by the
applicant in the office of the County Clerk within 90 days of the date of
Planning Board signature.
§ 425-7 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-8
1:704
§ 425-8. Resubdivision.
The same procedure, rules and regulations shall apply for a resubdivision
as for a subdivision.
§ 425-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-8
1:705

ARTICLE IV
Data to be Submitted
§ 425-9. Sketch plat. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 425-10. Preliminary plat.
Information to be shown.
A. A sketch plat shall be based on Tax Map information or some other
similarly accurate base, at a scale (preferably not less than 400 feet to
the inch) to enable the entire tract to be shown on one sheet.
B. Information to be shown.
(1) The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to
the entire tract.
(2) All existing structures and wooded areas within the portion to be
subdivided and within 200 feet thereof.
(3) The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
(4) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
(5) All streets or roads proposed, mapped or built, and streams within
500 feet of the proposed subdivision.
(6) The proposed pattern of any street layouts within the subdivided
plat.
A. The preliminary plat shall include a plat of the property to be
subdivided, at a scale of not less than one inch to 100 feet, containing at
least the following material:
(1) The date;
(2) The scale;
(3) The name, address, signature and seal of surveyor/engineer/
architect;
(4) The name and address of the owner of record;
(5) The name of all owners of record of adjacent properties;
(6) The location of all existing structures and other man-made features
of the site, as well as those on adjacent properties, including
existing utility lines (e.g., gas and electric);
(7) The location and design of proposed water supply, sewage disposal
and stormwater drainage systems, including the locations, sizes,
§ 425-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-10
1:707
invert and rim elevations to the existing water supply, sewage
disposal and stormwater drainage system;
(8) An existing and proposed topography map of the subdivision,
extending at least 20 feet beyond the site boundaries, with contour
intervals not greater than five feet and referenced to USGS or other
approved bench mark and scale;
(9) The nature and location of all other existing site features, including
wetlands, watercourses, wooded areas and rock outcrops. If
disturbance in the area proposed to be subdivided encroaches on a
wetland, watercourse and/or wetland buffer, a separate permit for
said encroachment must be obtained from the Planning Board as
per Chapter 418, Wetlands and Watercourses, of the Village Code;
(10) The plan shall clearly indicate which site features are existing and
proposed and which will be removed;
(11) The owner's endorsement;
(12) The locations of the nearest fire hydrants;
(13) The widths of streets and avenues encompassing the site;
(14) An area map showing all streets and property within 1,000 feet of
the applicant's property at a scale of one inch to 400 feet. All
property owned by the applicant shall be clearly identified;
(15) Flow and pressure requirements for the fire sprinkler system and
backflow preventer; and
(16) The Planning Board Chairperson's endorsement as per Article IV
[§ 425-11A(3)(n)].
B. Supplementary data shall be made available at the request of the
Planning Board to indicate how the applicant proposes to provide the
following improvements, including but not limited to:
(1) Water supply.
(2) Fire protection.
(3) Disposal of sanitary waste.
(4) Stormwater drainage.
(5) Street trees.
(6) Streetlighting fixtures.
(7) Street signs.
(8) Sidewalks.
(9) Electricity, gas, telephone, and/or other public utilities.
§ 425-10 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-10
1:708
§ 425-11. Final plat.
Required submission.
(10) Energy Code compliance. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
(11) Emergency response. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(12) Supplemental parking.
C. A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the
requirements of Chapter 358, Stormwater Management and Erosion
and Sediment Control, and Chapter 450, Zoning, Article XVI, shall be
required for preliminary subdivision plat approval. The SWPPP shall
meet the performance and design criteria and standards in Chapter
450, Zoning, Article XVI, Stormwater Control. The approved
preliminary subdivision plat shall be consistent with the provisions of
Local Law No. 2-2005. [Added 1-25-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
D. The Planning Board can require submission in electronic format.
A. A final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn with black waterproof ink
on linen tracing cloth or equally durable translucent substance.
(1) Scale.
(a) In areas zoned for lots of minimum size of 20,000 square feet
or more, maps and profiles shall be at a scale of one inch
equals 100 feet.
(b) In areas zoned for lots less than 20,000 square feet, maps and
profiles shall be at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet.
(2) Sheet sizes.
(a) Maps shall be on uniform size sheets, not larger than 36 inches
by 48 inches.
(b) Whenever any project is of such size that more than one sheet
is required, an index map on the same size sheet shall
accompany these sheets.
(3) Information to be shown on plat.
(a) Proposed subdivision name or identifying title, which shall not
duplicate or too closely approximate that of any other
development in the Village.
(b) Date, approximate true North point, and scale.
(c) Name, address and signature of owner, subdivider, licensed
professional engineer and land surveyor.
§ 425-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-11
1:709
(d) Names of owners of record of abutting properties or
developments.
(e) Location, names and widths of existing streets, highways and
easements, building lines, parks and other public properties.
(f) Locations and widths of all streets and sidewalks, together
with names of streets and location, dimensions and status of all
easements proposed by the subdivider.
(g) Lot areas in square feet.
(h) Lot lines with accurate dimensions and bearings of angles.
(i) Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing and
length of all lines, and to reproduce such lines upon the
ground.
(j) Radii of all curves and lengths of arcs.
(k) Location, material and approximate size of all monuments.
(l) The accurate outline of all property which is offered or to be
offered for dedication for public use, with the purpose
indicated thereon, and of all property that is proposed to be
reserved by deed covenant for the common use of the property
owners of the subdivision.
(m) The plat shall be endorsed with the necessary agreements in
connection with required easements or releases. Offers of
cession to the Village shall be presented prior to plat approval.
Formal offers of cession to the Village of all streets and parks
not marked on the plat with notation to the effect that such
cession will not be offered shall be filed with the Planning
Board prior to plat approval.
(n) Every final plat submitted to the Planning Board for approval
shall carry the following endorsement. In the absence of the
Chairman or the Secretary, the Acting Chairman or Acting
Secretary, respectively, may sign the endorsement.
§ 425-11 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-11
1:710
Approved by resolution of the Planning Board of the Village
of Sleepy Hollow, New York, on the _____ day of __________,
20__, upon due compliance with Sections 451 and 452 of the
Westchester County Administrative Code,73 and subject to all
requirements and conditions of said resolution. Any change,
erasure, modification, or revision of this plat, as approved,
shall void this approval. Signed this _____ day of __________,
20__, by
Chairman
Secretary
B. Construction detail sheets shall be submitted as required and shall be
prepared in the same manner as the final plat.
(1) Scale shall be appropriate for the data shown.
(2) Sheet sizes shall match those of the final plat with which submitted.
(3) The following information shall be shown, except that, where
specific requirements have been waived by the Planning Board,
such applicable specifications may be omitted.
(a) Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along the
center lines of all streets. Where a proposed street intersects
an existing street or streets, the elevation along the center line
of the existing street or streets, with 100 feet of the
intersection, shall be shown. All elevations must be referred to
established United States government or approved local bench
marks where they exist within 1/2 mile of the boundary of the
subdivision.
(b) The Planning Board may require, where steep slopes exist, that
present elevations of all proposed streets shall be shown every
100 feet at five points on a line at right angles to the center line
of the street, and said elevation points shall be at the center
line of the street, each property line, and at points 30 feet
inside each property line.
(c) Plans and profiles showing the location and a typical section of
street pavements, including curbs and gutters, sidewalks,
manholes and catch basins; the locations of street trees,
streetlighting standards and street signs; the location, size and
invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers,
stormwater drains, and fire hydrants; and the exact location
and size of all water, gas or other underground utilities or
structures.
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 277, Boards and Commissions, Secs. 277.61 and 277.71, of the
Westchester County Code.
§ 425-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-11
1:711
(d) All plans shall conform to the Village minimum road
specifications and shall be subject to the approval of the
Village Engineer or other appropriate Village representative.
C. Supplementary material to be submitted.
(1) Tax certificate. Applicant shall furnish an affidavit indicating that
all taxes on the property being subdivided are paid in full to the
date of submission.
(2) Improvements. Applicant shall furnish an affidavit indicating that
the installation or construction of improvements as required by the
Planning Board on granting of conditional approval of the
preliminary plat has been completed in satisfactory manner or,
alternatively, that he has filed a performance guarantee acceptable
to the Village Board in an amount estimated by the Planning Board
as sufficient to ensure the installation or construction of such
required improvements.
(3) A stormwater pollution prevention plan consistent with the
requirements of Chapter 358, Stormwater Management and
Erosion and Sediment Control, and Chapter 450, Zoning, Article
XVI, and with the terms of preliminary plat approval shall be
required for final subdivision plat approval. The SWPPP shall meet
the performance and design criteria and standards in Chapter 450,
Zoning, Article XVI, Stormwater Control. The approved final
subdivision plat shall be consistent with the provisions of Local Law
No. 2-2005. [Added 1-25-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
§ 425-11 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-11
1:712
ARTICLE V
General Requirements for Subdivisions
§ 425-12. Minimum requirements.
The Planning Board, in considering an application for the subdivision of
land, shall be guided by the considerations and standards, which standards
shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements for the convenience,
health, safety and welfare of the Village.
§ 425-13. General.
A. Character of land. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that
it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or
peril from fire, flood or other menace. Land subject to such hazards
shall not be subdivided or developed for residential purposes nor for
such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or
aggravate a flood hazard, but such land may be set aside for uses as
shall not involve such danger nor produce unsatisfactory living
conditions.
B. Preservation of natural features.
(1) Land to be subdivided shall be designed in reasonable conformity
to existing topography in order to minimize grading, cut and fill and
to retain, insofar as possible, the natural contours to limit
stormwater runoff and to conserve the natural vegetative cover and
soil. No tree, topsoil or excavated material shall be removed from
its natural position except where necessary and incidental to the
improvement of lots and the construction of streets and related
facilities in accordance with the approved plan. Topsoil shall be
restored to a depth of at least six inches and properly seeded and
fertilized in those disturbed areas not occupied by buildings or
structures.
(2) Existing natural features which are of ecological, aesthetic or
scenic value to residential development or to the Village as a whole,
such as wetlands, watercourses, water bodies, rock formations,
stands of trees, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets, shall
be preserved, insofar as possible, through harmonious design of
the subdivision, and, where appropriate, the Planning Board may
require the inclusion of such features as permanent reservations.
C. Conformity to Official Map and Village Plan. Subdivisions shall conform
to the streets and parks shown on the Official Map of the Village and
shall be properly related to the Comprehensive Development Plan.
D. Frontage on improved streets. The area proposed to be subdivided shall
have frontage on and direct access to a street duly placed on the Official
Map, and if such street is private, it shall be improved to the
§ 425-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-13
1:713
§ 425-14. Standards for streets, blocks and lots.
satisfaction of the Planning Board or there shall be a bond held by the
Village to guarantee such improvement.
A. Location and design.
(1) The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or
Official Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate
extension of existing streets.
(2) Local streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
(3) Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal
service road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting or
some other means of separation of through and local traffic as the
Planning Board may determine appropriate.
(4) No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be approved except where the control and disposal of land
comprising such strips has been placed in the governing body
under conditions approved by the Planning Board.
B. Width.
(1) The right-of-way width shall be measured from the lot line and shall
not be less than the following.
(a) Arterial streets: 80 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 60 feet.
(c) Local streets: 50 feet.
(d) Marginal access streets: 40 feet.
(e) The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in
multifamily, commercial and industrial development shall be
determined on an individual basis, and shall in all cases be of
sufficient width and design to safely accommodate the
maximum traffic, parking and loading needs and maximum
access for fire-fighting equipment.
(2) Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or
the street width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate
additional width along either one or both sides of said road. If no
subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of the required extra width
shall be dedicated. Where required because of topographic
conditions, slope easements shall also be provided.
C. Grades.
(1) Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 5%.
§ 425-13 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-14
1:714
(2) Grades on other streets shall not exceed 10%.
(3) No streets shall have a minimum grade of less than 0.5%.
(4) Within 50 feet of the intersection of any street with a collector
street, major thoroughfare, arterial street or controlled access
highway, grade shall be limited to 2%.
D. Intersections.
(1) Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible
and in no case shall be less than 60°.
(2) The block corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline
with a curve having a radius of not less than 20 feet.
(3) Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
E. Curves.
(1) A tangent at least 200 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves or curves of different degree on arterial and
collector streets.
(2) When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one
point by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be
connected by a curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for
minor streets and 300 feet for arterial and collector streets.
(3) All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of
sufficient radius to provide a smooth transition and unobstructed
sight distance of 300 feet.
F. Culs-de-sac and dead-end streets.
(1) Culs-de-sac shall not be longer than 600 feet and shall provide a
turnaround at the end with a radius of not less than 60 feet and
tangent, whenever possible, to the right of the street.
(2) If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround
shall be provided and provisions made for future extension of the
street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining
properties.
G. Street names.
(1) All streets shall be named, and such names shall be subject to the
approval of the Planning Board.
(2) Names shall be sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from
other street names in the Village so as not to cause confusion.
(3) A street which is a continuation of an existing street shall bear the
same name.
§ 425-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-14
1:715
§ 425-15. Lots.
H. Blocks.
(1) Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be
such as to accommodate the size of the lot required in the area by
Chapter 450, Zoning, and to provide for convenient access,
circulation control and safety of street traffic.
(2) In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be
required in locations deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
Such walkway shall be 10 feet wide and be straight from street to
street.
(3) For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
A. Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be
no foreseeable difficulty, for reasons of topography or other conditions,
in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with
Chapter 450, Zoning; Chapter 418, Wetlands and Watercourses; and the
County Health Department regulations.
B. Driveway. Approximate driveway locations shall be shown on the
construction plans. The maximum driveway gradient to the building site
shall not exceed 10%, and the intersection of driveways with the road
shall be so oriented and graded that vehicles may use the driveways
safely. The Planning Board may require that the applicant submit
necessary topographic and design information to demonstrate that the
lot layout will allow driveways that meet these criteria and provide
proper drainage.
C. Lot dimensions.
(1) Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter or otherwise
permitted by the Planning Board, lot area and dimensions shall
comply with at least the minimum standards of the Chapter 450,
Zoning, for the district in which they are located. Where lots are
more than double the minimum required area, the Planning Board
may require that they be arranged so as to allow for further
subdivision and the opening of future streets where necessary to
serve such potential lots, all in compliance with the Chapter 450,
Zoning, and this chapter. Where, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, lots of larger than minimum size are required for purposes
of proper drainage, water supply, waste disposal or the
preservation of important ecological features, the Board may
require such oversized lots as a condition of plat approval.
(2) Side lot lines shall generally be at right angles to street lines (or
radial to curving street lines) unless the Planning Board allows a
variation from this rule to give a better street or lot arrangement.
Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for
§ 425-14 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-15
1:716
§ 425-16. Improvements.
erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback
from both streets.
(3) Where a proposed subdivision includes an existing residence larger
in size than can appropriately be placed on a lot of the minimum
size permitted in the zoning district, the Planning Board may
require that the lot be of such size and relationship to the proposed
street system that the structure will be an appropriate and
harmonious part of the subdivision.
(4) Each lot must front upon an approved street at least 50 feet in
width, except lots fronting on streets described in § 425-14B(2).
(5) Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing
streets, lots shall begin at such extra-width line and all setbacks
shall be measured from such line.
A. Street improvements. Streets shall be graded and improved with
pavement, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, streetlighting standards, street
signs, street trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, fire
alarm signal devices, fire hydrants and other utilities, except that the
Planning Board may waive, subject to appropriate conditions, such
improvements as it considers are not requisite in the interest of the
public health, safety and welfare. The subdivider shall install
underground service connections to the property line of each lot before
the street is paved. Except where waivers are granted, all such grading
and street improvements shall conform in all respects to this chapter
and to the Village Construction Standards and Specifications.
B. Drainage improvements.
(1) The subdivider may be required by the Planning Board to carry
away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may
exist either previous to or as a result of the subdivision. Such
drainage facilities shall be located in the street right-of-way where
feasible or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate
width and shall be constructed in accordance with the Village
Construction Standards and Specifications.
(2) Drainage facilities shall, in each case, be large enough to
accommodate potential runoff from their entire upstream drainage
area, whether inside or outside the subdivision, based on a onehundred-
year storm and assuming conditions of maximum potential
development within the watershed as permitted by Chapter 450,
Zoning. The applicant shall be responsible for submitting such
computations to the Director of Public Works in sufficient detail to
make possible the ready determination of the adequacy of the
proposed drainage installations, and the Director of Public Works
§ 425-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-16
1:717
shall be responsible for reviewing these and preparing
recommendations for the Planning Board.
(3) The Planning Board may also require the subdivider to prepare a
study of the effects of the subdivision on existing downstream
drainage facilities. Where such study or the Planning Board after
an independent analysis determines that the additional runoff
incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an
existing downstream drainage facility, the Planning Board shall
notify the owner of such downstream facility of such potential
condition and may withhold approval of the subdivision until
provision has been made for the correction of said potential
condition.
C. Underground utilities. In order to assure greater safety and improved
appearance, all utility lines and related equipment for providing power
and communications services shall be installed underground in the
manner prescribed by the regulations of the utility company having
jurisdiction. Underground utility lines shall be located outside of the
traveled way of the streets but, except in unusual circumstances, within
the street right-of-way. Underground service connections shall be
provided to the property line of each lot before the street is paved and
may pass under the traveled way of the street.
D. Other improvements.
(1) Monuments.
(a) Monuments shall be required wherever deemed necessary by
the Planning Board to enable all property lines to be readily
reproduced on the ground. In general, monuments shall be
located no more than 500 feet apart on street lines, preferably
at street, lot or easement corners or at points of curvature or
tangency on curved streets, and spaced to be within sight of
one another along lines entirely within the street right-of-way.
(b) Monuments shall be set vertically in solid ground three inches
above the ground surface with accurate reference to a
permanently identifiable fixed point and shall meet or exceed
the construction requirements specified in the Village
Construction Standards and Specifications.
(2) Traffic control and street signs. Traffic control and street signs
shall be provided by the subdivider and placed at all intersections
within the street right-of-way and in other locations as required by
the approving authority. In the case of traffic control signs, their
type and location shall be approved by the Director of Public Works
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, and in the case of street signs, by
the Director of Public Works of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
(3) Streetlighting standards. When required by the Planning Board,
streetlighting standards, of a design and location specified in the
§ 425-16 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-16
1:718
§ 425-17. Reservations and easements.
All reservations and easements shall be clearly indicated on the final
subdivision plat, along with appropriate notations indicating the rights
which exist with respect to each such reservation and/or easement.
Village Construction Standards and Specifications, shall be
provided and installed by the subdivider.
(4) Sanitary sewers and sewerage facilities, water mains and water
supply facilities and fire hydrants. Where required by the Planning
Board, the subdivider shall install sanitary sewers and sewerage
facilities and/or water mains and water supply facilities and fire
hydrants of the type and in a manner specified in the Village
Construction Standards and Specifications.
(5) Fire alarm signal devices. Where required by the Planning Board,
the subdivider shall install fire alarm signal devices, including
necessary ducts, cable and other connecting facilities, of a type and
in a manner and location prescribed by the appropriate fire district
or other municipal agency having jurisdiction.
(6) Street trees. The Planning Board may require the planting of street
trees. Such trees shall be of a hardwood variety indigenous to the
neighborhood and shall be at least five inches caliper at a height of
five feet above ground level. Where they are required by the
Planning Board, such trees shall be planted along both sides of the
street within the street right-of-way and spaced approximately 40
feet on center.
(7) School bus pickup areas. The Planning Board may require that the
subdivider reserve, clear, grade, pave and otherwise improve an
area of such size and location as will provide a safe and suitable
place for the use of children awaiting school buses. In general, the
size of such area shall not be less than 100 square feet, and no
dimensions shall be less than eight feet. Such area shall be
included within the street right-of-way and shall be maintained by
the holder of fee title to the street. The layout and design shall be
subject to Planning Board approval.
A. Park reservations.
(1) General standards. The Planning Board may require that land be
reserved within subdivisions for a park or parks suitably located for
playground or other recreational purposes. Such locations shall be
designated on the Village Long-Range Development Plan or Official
Map or as otherwise deemed appropriate by the Planning Board.
Each reservation shall be of suitable size, dimensions, topography
and general character and shall have adequate street access for the
particular purpose or purposes envisioned by the Planning Board.
§ 425-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-17
1:719
The area shall be shown and marked on the plat as "Reserved for
Park Purposes."
(2) Minimum size.
(a) Areas for parks shall be of reasonable size for neighborhood
playgrounds or other recreational uses. In general, not less
than 10% of the area of the subdivision shall be set aside for
these purposes.
(b) In general, sites reserved for park purposes shall have an area
of at least one acre. The Planning Board may require the
location of such areas along the boundary of a subdivision so
that additional land may be added at such time as the adjacent
property is subdivided.
(3) Ownership of park area. The ownership of reservations for park
purposes shall be clearly indicated on the plat and established in a
manner satisfactory to the Planning Board so as to assure their
proper future continuation and maintenance.
(4) Cash payment in lieu of reservation. Where the Planning Board
determines that a suitable park or parks of adequate size cannot be
properly located in a subdivision, or where such a reservation is
otherwise not appropriate or practical, the Planning Board may
require as a condition to approval of any such plat a payment to the
Village of a sum determined for such cases by the Planning Board.
B. Widening or realignment of existing streets. Where the subdivision
borders an existing street and the Official Map or Master Plan indicates
plans for realignment or widening of the street that would require
reservation of some land of the subdivision, the Planning Board may
require that such areas be shown and marked on the Plat "Reserved for
Street Realignment (or Widening) Purposes." Land reserved for such
purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements of
Chapter 450, Zoning.
C. Utility and drainage easements.
(1) Where topography or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of utilities or drainage facilities within
street rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20
feet in width for such utilities or drainage shall be provided across
property outside the street lines and with satisfactory access to the
street.
(2) Drainage easements shall extend from the street to the
watercourse or other drainage facility and shall convey to the
holder of fee title of the street the perpetual right to discharge
stormwater runoff from the street and the surrounding area onto
and over the affected premises by means of pipes, culverts or
ditches, or a combination thereof, together with the right to enter
§ 425-17 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-17
1:720
§ 425-18. Miscellaneous.
said premises for the purpose of making such installations and
doing such maintenance work as the holder of such fee title may
deem necessary to adequately drain the street and the surrounding
area. When a proposed drainage system will carry water across
private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights
must be secured in a form satisfactory to the Village Attorney and
suitable for recording in the office of the County Clerk.
(3) All easements shall be indicated on the plat.
D. Easements for pedestrian access. The Planning Board, where it deems
it necessary, may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from
streets to schools, parks, playgrounds or other nearby streets,
perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width. All
easements shall be indicated on the plat.
E. Slope easements. Where determined appropriate by the Planning
Board, said Board may permit an embankment alongside a proposed
street to extend beyond the normal right-of-way of such street, provided
that a slope easement is granted, conveying to the holder of fee title of
the street the right to enter the premises for the purpose of maintaining
such slope. Where the embankment slope is located on private land
outside the subdivision, such easement shall be permitted only where
the appropriate rights have been secured in a form satisfactory to the
Village Attorney and suitable for recording in the office of the County
Clerk.
F. Sight easements. Sight easements shall be provided across all street
corners, outside the street right-of-way, within the triangular area
formed by the nearest edges of street pavement and a straight line
between two points each 75 feet back from the theoretical intersection
of the edges of such pavement prolonged. The easements shall provide
that the holder of fee title to the abutting streets shall have the right to
enter the easement area for the purpose of clearing, pruning or
regrading so as to maintain a clear line of sight in either direction
across such triangular area between an observer's eye 3.5 feet above
the pavement surface on one street and an object one foot above the
pavement surface on the other. The initial establishment of clear sight
lines within the sight easement area shall be the responsibility of the
subdivider.
G. Responsibility for ownership of reservations. Ownership shall be clearly
indicated on all reservations for parks and playground purposes.
A. Self-imposed restrictions. The owner may place restrictions on the
development greater than those required by Chapter 450, Zoning. Such
restrictions, if any, shall be indicated on the final plat.
§ 425-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-18
1:721
B. Modifications of standards. The Planning Board may waive or modify
the specified requirements in any individual case where, in the Board's
judgment, such waiver or modification is in the public interest or will
avoid the imposition of unnecessary individual hardship.
§ 425-18 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-18
1:722
ARTICLE VI
Required Improvements
§ 425-19. General.
Prior to an action by the Planning Board approving a final plat, the
applicant, at his own expense and without reimbursement by the Village,
shall have installed or shall furnish performance guarantees for the ultimate
installation of certain street, sanitary and other improvements as specified
in the conditional approval of the preliminary plat and as outlined below.
§ 425-20. Minimum requirements.
A. Streets.
(1) Streets shall be graded and improved as noted below, with such
grading and improvements to conform to the Village's minimum
specifications for roads, sidewalks, etc., and which shall be
approved as to design and specifications by the Village Engineer or
other appropriate representative of the Village.
(2) The following are the minimum improvements to be installed in the
right-of-way of a street:
(a) Pavement.
(b) Curbs and/or gutters.
(c) Sidewalks.
(d) Streetlighting.
(e) Street signs.
B. Public utility installations.
(1) The developer shall be responsible for the installation of the
following improvements, which shall be connected to an approved
system and shall be adequate to handle all present and probable
future development:
(a) Water mains.
(b) Fire hydrants.
(c) Culverts.
(d) Storm sewers.
(e) Sanitary sewers.
(f) Fire alarm signal devices.
(2) The developer shall arrange with the appropriate private utility
companies for the installation of at least the following services:
§ 425-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-20
1:723
(a) Electricity.
(b) Gas.
(c) Telephone.
(3) Underground utility lines, if placed in the right-of-way of a street,
shall be located between the curb and the property line to simplify
the location and repair of such lines, and the subdivider shall install
underground service connections to the property line of each lot
before the street is paved. Utility services carried on pole lines
shall be located along rear lot lines, with easements provided and
adequately documented for maintenance and tree trimming.
C. Shade trees.
(1) Shade trees shall be located inside the street line so as not to
interfere with underground utilities, pole lines or sidewalks.
(2) Shade trees shall be of a variety approved by the Planning Board or
Village Tree Commission, when applicable.
D. Monuments. Permanent monuments shall be set at block corners and at
intervals of approximately 500 feet, or such other distance as the
Planning Board may determine appropriate, and their location shall be
shown on the subdivision plat. Iron pipes shall not be considered
permanent monuments for the purpose of this chapter.
E. Protection of topsoil. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used
as spoil. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover to all areas of
the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting on slopes
of less than 12%, as shown on the final grading plan, and shall be
stabilized by sodding on slopes of 12% or over, as shown on the final
grading plan.
F. Inspection of improvements.
(1) All of the above-listed improvements shall be subject to inspection
and approval by the Village Engineer (or other appropriate Village
representative, as determined by the Planning Board and named in
the resolution approving the final plat), who shall be notified by the
developer at least 24 hours prior to the start of construction. No
underground installation shall be covered until inspected and
approved.
(2) If the Village Engineer or other appropriate Village representative
finds, upon inspection, that any of the required improvements have
not been constructed in accordance with the approved construction
detail sheets, the applicant and the bonding company will be
severally and jointly liable for the costs of completing said
improvements according to specifications.
§ 425-20 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-20
1:724
§ 425-21. Completion of improvements or filing of bond.
(3) The Village Engineer or other appropriate Village representative,
as determined by the Planning Board and named in the resolution
approving the final plat, shall act as an agent of the Planning Board
for the purposes of assuring the satisfactory completion of
improvements required by the Planning Board.
(4) The Village Engineer or other appropriate Village representative
shall determine an amount sufficient to defray costs of inspection,
which sum shall be paid to the Village by the applicant before the
final plat is signed.
A. After adoption of a resolution approving a final subdivision plat and
before the plat is endorsed by the Planning Board, the applicant shall be
required to complete, at his expense and without reimbursement by the
Village or any special district, all street and other improvements as
shown on the approved construction plans or otherwise specified in the
resolution or, as an alternative, file with the Village Clerk a bond in an
amount fixed by the Planning Board in its resolution as sufficient to
secure to the Village the satisfactory construction, installation and
completion of the required improvements. Such performance guarantee
shall comply with the requirements of Article 7 of the Village Law and
shall be satisfactory to the Village Attorney as to form, sufficiency and
execution. Such performance guarantee shall be issued by a bonding or
surety company approved by the Village Board or by the owner with
security acceptable to the Village Board. The term of such bond shall be
fixed by the Planning Board but in no case for a period longer than
three years. Such term may be extended, however, with the consent and
agreement of all parties. Such bond shall state the period within which
the required improvements must be completed, which period shall be
that specified in the Planning Board resolution. All improvements shall
be completed to the satisfaction of the Planning Board in accordance
with the approved construction plans and the requirements of this
chapter and the Village Construction Standards and Specifications.
B. Failure to complete improvements.
(1) Where a bond is not filed. If all required improvements are not
completed within the period specified in the Planning Board
resolution of approval, such approval shall be deemed to have
expired, unless, upon request of the applicant, the period has been
extended by resolution of the Planning Board.
(2) Where a bond is filed. If all required improvements are not
completed within the term specified by the Planning Board and set
forth in the filed bond, and if no application for the extension of
such period and bond has been made by the applicant and
approved by the Planning Board, the Board may thereupon declare
said bond to be in default and collect the sum remaining payable
thereunder, and upon receipt of the proceeds thereof, the Village
§ 425-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-21
1:725
shall install such improvements as are covered by the bond and
are commensurate with the extent of the building development that
has taken place in the subdivision, but not exceeding in cost the
amount of such proceeds.
C. Modification of bond.
(1) Extension of period specified in bond. The time period specified for
the completion of all required improvements, as set forth in the
bond, may be extended only by resolution of the Planning Board
upon request by the applicant, setting forth, in detail, the amount
of work which has been completed, reasons for failure to complete
the remainder of the work within the specified period, the
maximum estimated time required to complete the remainder of
the work and the time period extension which is requested.
(2) Reduction of bond. An applicant may request, in writing, that the
Planning Board authorize a reduction in the amount of the bond.
Such request shall itemize the extent of required improvements
already completed, the estimated cost of improvements remaining
to be completed, and the amount of bond reduction requested. The
Planning Board may, if it determines that sufficient required
improvements have been installed to warrant such action, reduce
the face amount of the bond by an appropriate amount so that the
new amount will cover the cost in full of all required improvements
remaining to be completed, and any security deposited with the
bond may be reduced proportionately.
D. The performance guarantee shall in all cases extend for a period of one
year beyond the date of completion of the required improvements to
assure their satisfactory condition. Any defects in the construction or
faulty equipment shall be repaired or replaced by the applicant without
cost to the Village.
E. Modification of requirements. If at any time, either before or during the
course of construction of the required improvements, it is determined
by the Planning Board that unforeseen conditions make it necessary to
modify the location or design of any improvements, the Board may
modify the terms and conditions of the approval so as to require such
change as may be necessary to comply with the spirit and intent of the
Board's original approval and to conform to accepted engineering
practices. If such modification affects the scope of work covered by a
bond, the Board may require or allow appropriate modification of such
bond.
F. Guarantees by utility companies. As to utilities required by the Planning
Board, the Board may accept assurance from such public utility
company whose facilities are proposed to be installed. Such assurance
shall be in writing, addressed to the Board, stating that such public
utility company will make the installations necessary for the furnishing
§ 425-21 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-21
1:726
§ 425-22. Inspection of improvements.
of its services within a specified time in accordance with the approved
construction detail sheets.
A. Inspection required. The Director of Public Works, or his designee, shall
be responsible for inspecting required improvements during
construction to ensure their satisfactory completion and, upon such
completion, shall furnish the Planning Board with a statement to that
effect. If the Director of Public Works determines that any of the
required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with
the approved plan, the applicant shall be responsible for properly
completing said improvements. Failure of the Director of Public Works
to carry out inspections of required improvements during construction
shall not in any way relieve the applicant or the bonding company of its
responsibilities related to the proper construction of such
improvements.
B. Inspection of stages of construction.
(1) To facilitate inspection of required improvements during
construction, the applicant shall notify the Director of Public
Works, or his designee, at least three working days before reaching
each of the following stages of construction;
(a) Rough grading completed.
(b) Drainage and other underground facilities installed, but prior
to backfilling.
(c) Before installing curbing.
(d) After gravel base is spread and compacted.
(e) When each paved course is being applied.
(f) After completion of all improvements.
(2) The applicant shall not proceed to work on any stage subsequent to
the first stage until the work of the previous stage has been
inspected and approved by the Director of Public Works or his
designee. In the case of any other improvements, the Director of
Public Works or his designee shall inspect the work at such
progressive stages as he shall specify, and he shall certify to the
Planning Board that the work was inspected by him and was in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
C. Certificate of construction. At such time as the applicant has completed
construction of all required improvements, he shall furnish to the
Director of Public Works three copies of as-built plans and profiles
which show the actual location of all paved streets, culverts, headwalls,
drains, manholes, catch basins, sidewalks, curbs, utility lines and
equipment, monuments, street signs, street trees and all other required
§ 425-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-22
1:727
§ 425-23. Public acceptance of streets and reservations.
improvements, as constructed, and all other pertinent information,
such as cross sections of the streets at intervals determined by the
Director of Public Works, the culvert and drain grades, sewer grades,
sidewalk and curb grades and invert elevations at manholes. Such plans
and profiles shall bear a dated certification by a professional engineer
or licensed surveyor to the effect that the data shown thereon was
accurately determined by field survey. If the location or accuracy of
improvements does not, in the opinion of the Planning Board, fully
comply with the approved construction plans and specifications, the
Planning Board shall have the right to refuse to sign the final plat or
release the bond until such situation is corrected.
D. Inspection fee. To offset the cost incurred by the Village in conducting
inspections, all applicants for approval of submissions involving the
construction of streets and/or other improvements shall be required to
submit an inspection fee, payable to the Village of Sleepy Hollow, in an
amount as set by resolution of the Planning Board.
A. The approval by the Planning Board of a final plat shall not be deemed
to constitute or imply the acceptance by the Village of any street, park,
playground or other open space shown on said plat.
B. Offers of dedication. All streets, parks and easements shall be indicated
on the plat. In accordance with § 7-732 of the Village Law, the applicant
may add as part of the plat a notation, if he so desires, to the effect that
no offer of dedication of such streets or parks or any of them is made to
the public. All offers of cession to the public of all streets and parks not
so marked shall be filed with the Planning Board at the time of
submission of the final application.
C. Petition for dedication. Upon completion of the subdivision and the
road(s), a petition in the form required by the Village shall be filed for
the acceptance of parks or any other reservations or easements.
D. Acceptance by Village. Acceptance of any offer of cession of streets or
parks shall rest with the Board of Trustees. In the event that the
applicant shall elect not to file the plat in the office of the County Clerk
within the period prescribed for such filing, then such formal offer of
cession shall be deemed void. The approval by the Planning Board of a
subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute nor imply the
acceptance by the Village of any streets, parks or other areas shown on
said plat, and the Planning Board may require the addition of
appropriate notes to this effect on the plat.
E. Maintenance. In the event that no offer of cession to the public is made
for the streets, parks and required easements shown on the plat, there
shall be submitted with the final application copies of agreements or
other documents providing for the suitable maintenance of such
facilities and a statement of all rights which exist with respect to each
§ 425-22 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-23
1:728
§ 425-24. Waiver of required improvements.
The Planning Board may waive, subject to appropriate conditions, the
provision of any or all such improvements and requirements as, in its
judgment of the special circumstances of a particular plat, are not requisite
in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare or which, in
its judgment, are inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting
facilities adjacent or in proximity to the subdivision.
§ 425-25. Certificates of occupancy for structures on bonded
streets.
A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for a structure within a
subdivision where the improvements are guaranteed by a performance
bond unless it is determined by the Planning Board that both of the
following conditions have been complied with:
§ 425-26. Covenants and agreements.
of them. The adequacy of such documents shall be subject to the
Planning Board's approval.
A. Status of street improvements. The improvement of the street or streets
giving access to the structure has progressed to a stage deemed
adequate by the Planning Board to render safe all-weather vehicular
access for both routine and emergency purposes.
B. Maintenance agreements. Written agreements have been filed
providing for the maintenance of the bonded street or streets in such
all-weather passable condition, including snow removal and sanding,
during the period between the issuance of the certificate of occupancy
and the acceptance of the fully completed street by the Planning Board.
(If the street is not to be offered for dedication to the Village, such an
agreement will have been required in accordance with § 425-17 of this
chapter.)
A. Copies of all covenants or deed restrictions that are intended to apply to
all or any part of the proposed subdivision or resubdivision shall be
submitted by the subdivider to the Planning Board and the Village
Attorney prior to final subdivision approval.
B. Where title to land designated for parks, recreation areas or open space
is to remain for the subdivider or reserved by covenant for the common
use of the property owners of the subdivision or resubdivision, the
subdivider shall submit copies of agreements or other documents
showing the manner in which such areas are to be maintained and the
provision made therefor to the Village Attorney for approval prior to
final subdivision approval. All agreements and covenants governing the
maintenance of such undeeded parcels of land shall be in a form
acceptable to the Village Attorney as to their legal sufficiency. The final
§ 425-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-26
1:729
§ 425-27. Updated Tax Maps.
The subdivider shall submit a copy of the full-scale Tax Map(s) on which the
location and layout of the proposed subdivision or resubdivision, including
all lots, streets, parks, playgrounds, open spaces and easements, have been
clearly shown to scale as part of the subdivision process.
subdivision plat of any subdivision or resubdivision shall not be
executed until the provisions of this section are complied with.
§ 425-26 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-27
1:730
ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous
§ 425-28. Conflict with other laws.
Should any of this chapter conflict or be inconsistent with any provision of
the Village Law, such provisions of the Village Law shall apply.
§ 425-29. Compliance; certificate of occupancy.
After signing and filing of the final plat, if it is determined that the
structure(s) as built do not conform to the approved plat, no certificate
of occupancy shall be issued until such time that the structure(s) is/are
in compliance. The continued validity of a certificate of occupancy shall
be subject to continued conformance with the approved final plat, the
applicable laws, and any conditions of approval. If it is determined by the
Department or other appropriate Village representative that a structure(s)
is/are not in compliance with its approved plat, the Department may revoke
said certificate of occupancy, and a new certificate of occupancy shall be
issued only once the structure(s) is/are in full compliance with its approved
plat.
§ 425-30. Appeals. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Any appeal from a decision of the Planning Board with respect to a
subdivision plat shall be presented to a court of record within 30 days after
the filing of the decision in the office of the Village Clerk, pursuant to the
provisions of Article 7 of the Village Law.
§ 425-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-30
1:731
Chapter 450
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Architectural Review Board — See Ch. 9.
Boardinghouses — See Ch. 139.
Building construction — See Ch. 145.
Excavation, filling and topsoil removal — See
Ch. 190.
Fees — See Ch. 200.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 220.
Gasoline stations — See Ch. 229.
Industrial facilities — See Ch. 251.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Residential occupancy restrictions — See Ch.
319.
Sewers — See Ch. 330.
Signs — See Ch. 338.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 358.
Trees — See Ch. 385.
Waterfront consistency review — See Ch. 414.
Wetlands and watercourses — See Ch. 418.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 425.
§ 425-30 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 425-30
1:732
ARTICLE I
Intent, Purpose and Procedure
[Amended 9-21-2004 by L.L. No. 10-2004]
§ 450-1. General intent.
A. The intent of this chapter is to establish a precise and detailed plan for
the use of land in the Incorporated Village of Sleepy Hollow, based on
the Comprehensive Development Plan of the Village as adopted and
from time to time amended, and enacted in order to promote and to
protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort and convenience and
the general welfare of the people.
B. Purpose. The regulations established herein are deemed necessary to
achieve the following purposes:
(1) Promote orderly development: to protect the character and
maintain the stability of residential, business and commercial areas
within the Village, and to promote the orderly and beneficial
development of such areas. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
(2) Limit congestion on streets: to limit congestion in the public streets
by providing for off-street parking of motor vehicles and for the
loading and unloading of motor vehicles.
(3) Protect against hazards: to provide protection against fire,
explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards.
(4) Regulate intensity of use: to regulate the intensity of use of zone
lots, and to determine the area of open spaces surrounding
buildings, which spaces shall be necessary to provide adequate
light and air, privacy and convenience of access to property and to
protect the public health.
(5) Regulate location of buildings: to establish building lines and yards
and thereby control the location of buildings designed for
residential, commercial, or other uses. [Amended 1-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
(6) Establish standards of development: to fix reasonable standards of
height and bulk to which buildings or structures shall conform.
(7) Prohibit incompatible uses: to prohibit uses, buildings or structures
which are incompatible with the character of development or the
permitted uses within specified zoning districts.
(8) Regulate alterations of existing buildings: to prevent such additions
to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing buildings or
structures as would not comply with the restrictions and limitations
imposed hereunder.
§ 450-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-1
1:733
§ 450-2. Planning Board procedure.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Sleepy Hollow hereby adopts the
following rules, regulations and procedures relative to the conduct of the
duties of the Village Planning Board, pursuant to the Village Law of the
State of New York and §§ 239-k through 239-n of the General Municipal Law
of the State of New York.
(9) Conserve taxable value of land: to conserve the taxable value of
land and buildings throughout the Village.
A. Officers. The Planning Board shall consist of seven members, appointed
to staggered seven-year terms. The Chair, who shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Village Board of Trustees, and
Deputy Chair, who shall be selected by the Planning Board, shall take
office immediately following their selection and shall hold officer
positions until a successor is appointed. The Planning Board shall also
appoint a Secretary, who may be a Village employee or consultant
under contract to the Village. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
B. Duties of officers.
(1) The Chair, or in the absence of the Chair, the Deputy Chair, shall
preside at all meetings, hearings and work sessions, appoint
committees, propose agendas for meetings, and perform such
other duties as may be required by law, or as may be ordered by the
Planning Board or Village Board of Trustees. When required, the
Deputy Chair shall act in the capacity of the Chair in her or his
absence.
(2) The Secretary shall maintain the minutes of the Board,
authenticate decisions of the Board and undertake such other
duties as may be required by law, and the Secretary may assign to a
Village employee or to a consultant under contract to the Village
such tasks as are deemed appropriate to implement her or his
duties.
C. Meetings.
(1) The Planning Board shall meet each month, except for August, on
the third Thursday of each month. The Board may schedule and
notice work sessions and additional meetings as needed. All
meetings and work sessions shall be open to the public. A quorum
of at least four members shall be required to conduct business
during a meeting or work session. Whenever a quorum is not
present, the Chair may adjourn the meeting to another day, or may
hold the meeting for the purpose of considering matters on the
agenda; provided, however, that no action shall be taken until a
subsequent meeting at which a quorum is present. Decisions shall
not be taken at work sessions, unless necessary.
§ 450-1 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-2
1:734
(2) The Department of Architecture, Land Use Development, Buildings
and Building Compliance (hereinafter the "Department") or any
successor department shall notify all Planning Board members of
each meeting and each work session at least 72 hours prior to each
meeting or work session. The Department shall also notify other
applicable Village representatives and Village consultants of each
meeting and each work session at least 72 hours prior to each
meeting or work session. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
(3) At monthly meetings and work sessions, the Secretary, a
representative of the Department, and applicable Village
consultants shall be present.
D. Special meetings. Special meetings of the Planning Board may be called
at any time by the Chair, at the request of the Mayor, or on the request
of a majority of the Planning Board members. At special meetings, only
such business may be transacted as is stated in the notice of the special
meeting. Each member of the Planning Board shall be notified by the
Department or other applicable Village entity with reasonable notice
before the meeting, if possible, by telephone, facsimile transmission, or
other means, and a notice shall also be posted at Village Hall in a public
place.
E. Attendance. If a member must miss a meeting, she or he shall advise the
Chair in advance and shall be recorded as "excused" for the meeting
missed. In the event that a member is absent for three meetings in any
one calendar year or without excuse for two consecutive meetings, the
Chair shall notify the Mayor and the member may be deemed to have
resigned from the Board, and a replacement may be appointed for the
balance of the term outstanding.
F. Conduct of meetings.
(1) Procedures.
(a) The Chair shall conduct the meeting using Roberts' Rules of
Order, to the extent that said Rules facilitate the deliberations.
By majority vote, the Board may modify such procedures as
may be reasonably required for the expeditious conduct of the
meetings and the Board's deliberations. Modifications to the
rules of procedure shall be proposed at a regularly scheduled
monthly meeting of the Planning Board, and notice given as to
the amendment or modification, and shall be placed on the
calendar and agenda for adoption at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Planning Board.
(b) The Department shall advise the Chair of the Planning Board
on matters pending before the Planning Board prior to the
upcoming meeting. The Department shall prepare a draft
agenda for each regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning
§ 450-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-2
1:735
Board and the Department shall deliver the draft agenda to the
members of the Board and applicable Village staff the second
week of the month, and at the same time post the draft agenda
at Village Hall.
(c) All new applications, any information requested of an applicant
by the Planning Board or staff and other relevant materials
shall be submitted to the Department at least 14 calendar days
prior to a regularly scheduled meeting, and for all other
meetings, as reasonably practicable. If determined by the
Department, in conjunction with the Village planning
consultant, to be complete, these items will be distributed to
the Planning Board and applicable Village staff for their review
approximately 10 days prior to the meeting at which the
application will be considered. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
(2) Order of business for regularly scheduled meetings. The order of
matters considered at regular meetings of the Planning Board shall
be as set forth below. The regular order of business at any meeting
may be suspended or revised at any time by an affirmative vote of
four members.
(a) Call to order and note quorum;
(b) Adoption of the draft agenda, based on the calendaring of
matters in the notice of meeting as submitted by the
Department and the Village planning consultant to the Board;
(c) Public hearings on Board calendar, for which notice has been
given. Upon reading the notice of each public hearing, the
Chair shall open the public hearing and then may recognize:
[1] Applicant(s) presentations.
[2] Comments by Village staff and consultants.
[3] Comments by officials of other government agencies.
[4] Comments by members of the public, in the order
recognized by the Chair.
[5] Comments for the record by members of the Planning
Board.
[6] Further comments by applicant(s).
[7] Closure of stated public hearing (or continued to the next
or a future meeting, as needed).
(d) Consideration and/or adoption of minutes of previous
meeting(s);
(e) Old business;
§ 450-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-2
1:736
(f) New business;
(g) Persons appearing before the Board;
(h) Consideration of matters not listed on the noticed calendar of
the meeting, if unanimous consent was given by the members
present at the adoption of the agenda; and
(i) Adjournment.
(3) Order of matters considered at work sessions. The order of matters
considered at work sessions shall be agreed to at the outset of the
work session, but shall generally adhere to the following
guidelines, where appropriate:
(a) Call to order and note quorum;
(b) Read notice of meeting and stated subject(s) for consideration;
(c) Board members' deliberations;
(d) Persons appearing before the Board;
(e) Board action, if necessary; and
(f) Adjournment.
(4) Public hearings convened following public notice, independent of a
regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Board, shall follow
procedures set forth in Subsection F(2)(c) above. Written notice of
public hearings shall be provided by the applicant, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to all property owners abutting the
site of the development, and proof of mailing shall be submitted to
the Department by the Friday prior to the week of the Planning
Board meeting. Written notice shall be provided in a newspaper of
record designated by the Village Board of Trustees at least five
days before the hearing.
(5) Formal decisions. Motions shall be restated by the Chair. The
names of the Planning Board members making and seconding a
motion shall be recorded by the Secretary in the minutes. Votes
shall be by voice, and individual votes shall not be recorded unless
requested by a member of the Planning Board.
G. Planning Board submissions.
(1) SEQRA regulations. The Planning Board shall follow and adhere to
the generic regulations promulgated by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation for the implementation
of the State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA), Article 8
of the Environmental Conservation Law, as such regulations are
now in force (6 NYCRR Part 617) and as may be from time to time
amended, and such regulations are hereby incorporated by
reference. Where a full environmental impact statement (EIS) has
§ 450-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-2
1:737
been prepared for some phase of a project by the Village Board
of Trustees, by another agency of the State of New York or by a
federal agency under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA,
42 U.S.C. § 4321), the Planning Board shall convene a scoping
meeting to tier its environmental assessment reviews onto the prior
assessments, so as to incorporate the prior assessment and set
forth the supplemental or further analysis required, making use of
and considering those prior assessments.
(2) SEQRA extended review of significance. Specifically elaborating on
the general SEQRA regulations to apply them to the Village of
Sleepy Hollow, and notwithstanding Subsection G(1), for the
implementation of the requirements of SEQRA, the Planning Board
may require the preparation of an extended environmental
assessment for the consideration of applications based upon the
long version of the environmental impact assessment form ("longform
EAF"), in order to study in-depth how a proposed project may
avoid or mitigate adverse environmental effects, and may base the
Planning Board's findings on such a record before making a
determination of significance, including a finding of no significant
impact (FONSI, or a "negative declaration") under SEQRA.
(3) Village board and committee consultation. For all applications
submitted, the Planning Board shall require and consider the
findings of the Village of Sleepy Hollow Waterfront Advisory
Committee and the recommendation of the Architectural Review
Board, as required by Village Law. In addition, the Planning Board
shall require and consider the approvals and/or recommendations
of the Village Board of Trustees, the Zoning Board of Appeals, the
Tree Commission, and the Historic Resource Evaluation
Committee, when applicable.
(4) General submission requirements: site plan.
(a) A submitted plan shall comprise a general development plan
for the entire project, showing all of the below items, together
with such architectural sketches and drawings as may be
necessary to demonstrate the nature and character of the
proposed and existing uses, the physical relationship of such
uses and such other information as may be required for the
Planning Board to make its determination. All maps, grading
plans, surveys and site plans, building plans and elevations
shall be submitted drawn to scale (no smaller than one inch
equals 20 feet unless otherwise requested by the Department),
and shall be signed and sealed by an architect, engineer, or
surveyor who is duly licensed by New York State. Elevations
and floor plans are to be drawn at a clearly legible and
standard architectural scale. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
§ 450-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-2
1:738
(b) For placement on the Planning Board agenda, all applicants
shall submit to the Department, at the Village Hall of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow, during normal business hours, no less
than 14 days prior to a meeting of the Planning Board at which
the applicant proposes to appear before the Board, a complete
application
[1] A complete application shall include, at a minimum, the
following:
[a] A cover sheet setting forth the name, address, phone
number, e-mail address of the project's applicant,
owner, location, project name, and designated
planning, engineering, architectural, surveying,
environmental, historic, and/or any other consultants
by name and address, and legal counsel, if any, by
name and address. A checklist constituting a table of
contents of all documents shall be attached to the
cover sheet. A written narrative statement describing
the existing and proposed project, including the type,
hours and manner of the use of the building or land,
traffic and parking conditions in the area, and other
salient features shall also be attached to the cover
sheet;
[b] The environmental assessment form (EAF), as
required by the State Environmental Quality Review
Act (SEQRA);
[c] A coastal assessment form;
[d] The name, address, and endorsement of the owner of
record, or written permission from the owner(s) of
record to apply. Such permission shall include an
acceptance by the owner of record of responsibility for
all filing and review and other fees required in
connection with the submission;
[e] The names of all owners of record within 200 feet of
each corner of the property line;
[f] A property boundary survey;
[g] An area map showing all streets and property within
1,000 feet of the applicant's property at a scale of one
inch equals 400 feet. All property owned by the
applicant shall be clearly identified;
[h] The location of all existing structures and other manmade
features of the site, as well as those on adjacent
properties, including existing utility lines (water,
sewer, gas, and electric). The proposed structure(s)
§ 450-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-2
1:739
and/or man-made feature(s) shall reflect adequate
provision for water, sewage and other utilities,
parking, curb cuts, and other applicable provisions as
determined by local, state, or federal regulations and
a determination by the Village's consulting engineer.
The location and design of the proposed project's
water supply, sewage disposal, and stormwater
drainage systems, including the locations, sizes, invert
and rim elevations, to the existing water supply,
sewage disposal, and stormwater drainage systems
shall also be included. All proposals shall include
projections for estimating and accommodating storm
runoff volumes at least that of the one-hundred-year
flood. Where determined to be necessary by the
Planning Board during its review of a submitted
application, a proposal shall project Hudson River
estuary high, low, and mean tide levels based on levels
at three feet (or one meter) higher than the present
recorded levels;
[i] The location of the nearest fire hydrants and the
widths of streets and avenues encompassing the site.
All proposals shall reflect adequate access for
emergency access for fire protection and emergency
medical services, reflecting the advice of the
Department of Architecture, Land Use Development,
Buildings and Building Compliance, and shall include
flow and pressure requirements for the fire sprinkler
system and back flow preventer; [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
[j] An existing and proposed topography map of the
subdivision and/or site plan, extending at least 20 feet
beyond the site boundaries with contour intervals not
greater than two feet and referenced to USGS or other
approved benchmark and scale;
[k] The nature and location of all other existing site
features, including wetlands, watercourses, wooded
areas, and rock outcrops;
[l] Proposed use or uses;
[m] Tree survey;
[n] Dimensions and location of proposed structures,
signs, lighting, curbing, walls, roadways, erosion
control and detail sheets;
§ 450-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-2
1:740
[o] Dimensions and location of areas to be reserved for
vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and
areas reserved to park;
[p] Dimensions and location of areas to be reserved for
recreational use, landscaping, and other open spaces.
All landscape plans, including tree conservation
measures and proposed new plantings, shall show the
quantity and placement of each plant on site,
including a planting schedule indicating the plant
species with both English and Latin names, plant
dimensions at the time of planting, full growth height/
width ranges, and projected maturation time for each
plant;
[q] All proposals shall set forth any historic structure or
land uses and/or natural configurations of the
parcel(s) and identify any historic or prehistoric
objects, sites, or features on, under or about the site,
where applicable;
[r] The name, address and professional seal of the
licensed professional engineer, surveyor, or registered
architect (as per the New York State Education Law)
preparing the application;
[s] All applicable fees and deposits, and a completed fee
agreement form;
[t] A completed application form;
[2] Applications shall also specify whether any further
recommendations and/or approvals are required from the
Village Board of Trustees, Architectural Review Board,
Tree Commission, Waterfront Advisory Committee,
Historic Resource Evaluation Committee, or the Zoning
Board of Appeals for a related variance. Upon receiving
any necessary permits from such other Village boards or
committees, the applicant shall submit copies of such
approvals or permits to the Planning Board, together with
any necessary application to amend any prior approvals of
the Planning Board in order to conform to the findings of
the other boards; and
[3] An applicant may petition the Planning Board to waive
certain of the above requirements if it is determined by the
Board that the requirement is not applicable to the review
of the applicant's site plan.
(c) An applicant shall provide 11 complete packages (one original
and 10 copies) of all materials submitted for consideration by
the Planning Board. Each package shall be submitted to the
§ 450-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-2
1:741
Department not less than 14 days before the Planning Board
meeting at which the matter could be considered. Receipt of
the above information does not, however, guarantee placement
on the Planning Board agenda, since the materials must be
reviewed and accepted for completeness by Village staff and its
applicable consultants. For additional information regarding
completeness of an application, please see Subsection G(5)
below.
(d) An applicant shall also provide evidence that it has given notice
of its application to the public schools of the Tarrytowns, to the
public schools of Pocantico Hills (if the project lies within the
school district), to the Village of Tarrytown, Village of Briarcliff
Manor, Town of Mount Pleasant and Town of Greenburgh, and
the County of Westchester, and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation, the New York
State Department of Transportation, and the New York State
Department of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation,
and any other interested state agencies or interested agencies
of the government of the United States of America, when
required.
(5) Completeness of submissions.
(a) The Department shall determine that all necessary and
requested materials have been submitted for an application,
and shall notify the applicant to appear before the Planning
Board at its next monthly meeting for formal consideration.
Also, if an applicant with an application pending before the
Planning Board has not provided a substantial majority of
information requested by the Planning Board at least six
calendar days prior to the Planning Board meeting, said
application may not be placed on the Planning Board agenda.
(b) If the applicant(s) or a representative of the applicant(s) is not
present before the Planning Board, the application will be
adjourned without discussion to the next meeting of the
Planning Board and the applicant(s) will be notified to appear
at that time.
(c) An application shall be deemed incomplete if filing, planning/
engineering review fees, or other consultant fees have not
been paid. If the escrow sum for review fees falls below the
minimum specified for the escrow amount of the review fees,
the application shall be deemed incomplete and the
consideration of the application shall be suspended.
(6) Notice of public hearings on applications. In addition to the
distribution of written notice sent by use of the United States Postal
Service of any hearing on an application, and in addition to the
posting of the written notice in a public place in Village Hall, a
§ 450-2 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-2
1:742
prominent sign shall be posted two weeks prior to the hearing at
the edge of the property wherever it abuts a public street, in a clear
and visible location, giving notice of the public hearing and any
continuation and its subject, and the location of the hearing and
its time and date. This shall be performed by the applicant and an
affidavit of posting submitted to the Department the Friday before
the meeting at which it is to be heard. The applicant shall maintain
the sign until the public hearing is closed.
H. Records. The Department shall maintain a record of all submissions to
the Planning Board, of all draft and approved minutes of Planning
Board meetings, of all notices and records of public hearings, a copy of
all resolutions and actions of the Planning Board, and all
communications to and from the Planning Board. The Department shall
provide any member of the public with access to the records at
reasonable times during normal business hours, and shall ensure full
compliance with the Freedom of Information Law of the State of New
York with respect to such records. The Department shall provide copies
of all resolutions and actions of the Planning Board and of approved
minutes of Planning Board meetings to the Village Clerk-as soon as
such documents are available.
§ 450-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-2
1:743

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 450-3. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms are herein defined.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following shall be used in the
interpretation and construction of this chapter. Words used in the present
tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural
and the plural the singular; the word "building" shall include the word
"structure"; the word "used" shall include "arranged, designed, constructed,
altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be used"; the word "shall"
is mandatory and not optional; the word "abut" shall include the words
"directly across from."
§ 450-4. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure subordinate to the
principal use of a building, located on the same lot and serving a purpose
customarily incidental to the use of the principal building.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting members of a
building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
AREA, BUILDING — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at
the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground but having more than 1/2 of
its floor-to-ceiling height above the average level of the adjoining grade.
A basement shall be counted as a story if used for business or as an
independent dwelling unit, in which case the floor-to-ceiling height must be
at least seven feet six inches clear.
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any dwelling in which more than three persons,
either individually or as families, are housed or lodged for hire or otherwise,
with or without meals. A rooming house or a furnished rooming house shall
be deemed a "boardinghouse."
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or
chattel.
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF — The line of that face of the building nearest
the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered porches,
whether enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
CAR WASH — A building or portion thereof which is used for drive-through
or automated car washing. "Car wash" shall include hand washing or
§ 450-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-4
1:745
detailing where such is a principal use of the premises.[Added 2-15-1994
by L.L. No. 1-1994]
CELLAR — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its clear
height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be
considered in determining the permissible number of stories.74
COURT — An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same lot
with a building, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls of such
building.
COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area covered by the building area.
CURB LEVEL — The officially established grade at the top of the curb of
the street midpoint in front of the lot. Where a lot fronts upon two or more
streets of different levels, the curb of the higher street may be taken as the
base for measuring the height of structures to a distance 100 feet back from
that street.
DWELLING — A building designed or used as the living quarters for one or
more families.
DWELLING, ATTACHED OR ROW — A dwelling, the walls on two sides of
which are in common with the walls of adjoining dwellings and are party or
lot line walls.
DWELLING, GROUP — A group of two or more one-family, two-family or
multiple dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership and having any yard in
common.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building or portion thereof containing three or
more dwelling units.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building containing one dwelling unit only;
also referred to as a "single-family dwelling."[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building containing two dwelling
units.
DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling or portion thereof providing complete living
facilities for one family.
FAMILY — A householder plus one or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption living together in a family-like arrangement as a
single, not-for-profit housekeeping unit sharing kitchen facilities; or a group
of persons headed by a householder caring for a reasonable number of
individuals in a family-like living arrangement which is the functional and
factual equivalent of a family of related persons; or a maximum of two
persons not sharing a relationship as described above. A householder is an
individual who resides in a dwelling unit and who owns, rents or otherwise
has legal possession of such unit. The foregoing are distinguished from
74.Editor's Note: The definition of "cleanomat," which immediately followed, was repealed
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013.
§ 450-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-4
1:746
a group occupying a boardinghouse, lodging house, club, fraternity or
hotel.[Amended 11-10-1986 by L.L. No. 5-1986]
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors
of a structure and its accessory buildings. Floor area shall not include cellar
space (whether finished or unfinished), stairways, unenclosed porches
(screening not being deemed to constitute enclosure), decks, patios and
breezeways, accessory off-street parking space or loading berths or any
area having a floor-to-ceiling height of less than seven feet.[Amended
10-18-2002 by L.L. No. 13-2002; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio of gross floor area of all structures on a
lot to the total lot area.[Amended 10-18-2002 by L.L. No. 13-2002]
GARAGE — A building or part thereof used primarily for the storage or
parking of one or more motor vehicles.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A garage that is accessory to a residential or
nonresidential building and which is not used by the general public. A
private garage shall not include an automobile service station.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any garage, other than a private garage, available
to the public, operated for gain and which is used for storage and for
the following accessory uses: repair, rental, greasing, washing, servicing,
adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other motor vehicles. "Public
garage" shall not include drive-through or automated car washing and shall
not include hand washing or detailing where such is a principal use of the
premises. This use shall also not include auto wrecking or auto recovery
services and shall not involve the outdoor storage of more than five partially
dismantled or significantly damaged vehicles at any one time or the outdoor
storage of any partially dismantled or significantly damaged vehicle for
more than seven days.[Amended 2-15-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including structures
thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline or any other motor vehicle
fuel and oil and other lubricating substances, including any sale of motor
vehicle accessories, and which may or may not include accessory facilities
for lubricating, washing or otherwise servicing motor vehicles, but not
including the painting thereof by any means. "Gasoline service station" shall
not include drive-through or automated car washing and shall not include
hand washing or detailing where such is a principal use of the premises.
This use shall also not include auto wrecking or auto recovery services and
shall not involve the outdoor storage of more than five partially dismantled
or significantly damaged vehicles at any one time or the outdoor storage
of any partially dismantled or significantly damaged vehicle for more than
seven days.[Amended 2-15-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
HEIGHT — The height of a building is the vertical distance measured from
the curb to the roof. In the case of pitched roofs, such measurement shall
be to the average height of the gable. In the case of a flat roof, such
measurement shall be to the highest point of the roof deck.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use customarily conducted entirely within a
dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly
§ 450-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-4
1:747
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes
and does not change the character thereof. The conducting of a clinic,
hospital, barbershop, beauty parlor, tearoom, tourist home, animal hospital
or any similar use shall not be deemed to be a home occupation.
HOME PROFESSION — The practice of a physician, surgeon, dentist,
architect, artist, musician, instructor in arts and crafts, engineer, lawyer or
similar professional persons, which practice is conducted entirely within a
dwelling which is the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner.
HOSPITAL — Unless otherwise specified, includes a clinic, rest home,
nursing home, convalescent home and any other place for the diagnosis,
treatment or other care of ailments and shall be deemed to be limited
to places for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human
ailments.[Amended 7-17-2001 by L.L. No. 11-2001]
HOTEL — A building containing rooms intended or designed to be used or
which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for
sleeping purposes by guests, and where only a general kitchen and dining
room are provided within the building or in an accessory building.
JUNKYARD — The use of more than 200 square feet of the area of any lot,
whether inside or outside a building, or the use of that portion of any lot that
abuts any street for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk or scrap
materials, or the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles,
boats or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
LAUNDROMAT — A business premises equipped with individual coinoperated
clothes-washing and/or -drying machines for the use of retail
customers, exclusive of laundry facilities provided as an accessory use in an
apartment house or an apartment hotel. For the purposes of this chapter,
the word "laundromat" is a generic term which shall apply to variations of
names for a similar use.
LINE, LOT — A line dividing one lot from another.
LINE, STREET — A line dividing a street from abutting properties.
LOT AREA — The total area included within lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets, when the interior angle of intersection does not exceed
135°. Regardless of legal lot lines, no area greater than 100 feet in either
direction from the corner will be treated as a corner lot; its excess area shall
be treated as an interior lot.
LOT DEPTH — The mean distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT or ZONE LOT — A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be
occupied by a principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory
buildings, or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory or incidental to
the operation thereof, together with such open spaces as required by this
chapter, and having frontage on a public street. A lot may or may not be the
land shown as a lot on a duly recorded subdivision plat.
§ 450-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-4
1:748
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
at right angles to the lot depth.
MIXED-USE (COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL) DEVELOPMENT — A
building which has nonresidential use of the first story level and residential
use of the floor or floors above.[Added 2-15-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
MOTEL, MOTOR COURT or MOTOR HOTEL — A building or building group
designed for occupancy as the temporary residence of individuals who are
lodged with or without meals and in which no provision is made for cooking
in any individual room or suite, with a parking space closely related to each
room or suite.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP — A building or portion of a building
arranged, intended or designed to be used for making repairs to motor
vehicles. "Motor vehicle repair shop" shall not include hand washing or
detailing where such is a principal use of the premises. This use shall also
not include auto wrecking or auto recovery services and shall not involve
the outdoor storage of more than five partially dismantled or significantly
damaged vehicles at any one time or the outdoor storage of any partially
dismantled or significantly damaged vehicle for more than seven
days.[Amended 2-15-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A zone lot in single ownership which does not
conform to the minimum area and/or dimensions required in the district
where such lot is located or for any special permit use, as the case may be,
and where the owner of said lot does not own any adjoining property, the
subdivision of which could create one or more conforming lots.
NONCONFORMING USE — A building, structure or use of land existing at
the time of enactment of this chapter or any amendment thereto, and which
does not conform to the regulations of the district or zone in which it is
situated.[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
NURSERY SCHOOL — A school designed to provide daytime care or
instruction for two or more children from two years of age to five years of
age, inclusive, and operated on a regular basis.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME — Any dwelling with fewer than
15 sleeping rooms where persons are housed or lodged and furnished with
meals and nursing care for hire.
PARKING AREA — An open area used for the storage of motor vehicles.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — A parking area accessory to a residential or
nonresidential use and which is not used by the general public.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — A parking area which is available for public or
quasi-public use, such as for the accommodation of clients or customers, or
visitors to an institution.
PARKING SPACE — The area required for parking one automobile, which
in this chapter is held to be an area nine feet wide and 18 feet long, not
including passageways.[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 450-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-4
1:749
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT GROUP — Two or more buildings in single
ownership or control designed to be maintained and operated as a unit and
which may have certain facilities in common, such as yards, open space,
recreational spaces, garages and parking areas.[Amended 2-15-1994 by
L.L. No. 1-1994]
RESTAURANT, DELICATESSEN OR OTHER FOOD SERVICE
ESTABLISHMENT — A place where food is prepared and intended for
individual portion service and includes the site at which the individual
portions are provided, whether consumption occurs on or off premises. The
term excludes food processing establishments, retail food stores, private
homes where food is prepared or served for family consumption and food
service operations where a distinct group mutually provides, prepares,
serves and consumes the food, such as a covered-dish supper limited to
a congregation, club or fraternal organization.[Added 7-18-1989 by L.L.
No. 11-1989]
ROOMING HOUSE (see "BOARDINGHOUSE") — A building in which three
or more rooms are rented and in which no table board is provided. However,
for the purposes of this chapter, a rooming house shall be deemed a
boardinghouse.
SCHOOL — A public, parochial or private institution giving regular
instruction at least five days each week, except for holidays, for a normal
school year of not less than eight months.
SETBACK — The distance between the front line of a structure and the
street line.
SIGN — As defined in Chapter 338, Signs, of the Village Code.[Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
SPECIAL PERMIT USE — A use which, because of its special
characteristics, requires individual consideration.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above
it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF — A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates
of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet
above the floor of such story.
STREET — A public or private way which affords the principal means of
access to abutting properties.
STRUCTURE — Any combination of materials forming any construction, the
use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something
having location on the ground, and including, among other things, display
stands, fences and walls, gasoline pumps, gates and gate posts, mobile
dwellings, outdoor bins, pergolas, platforms, pools, porches, reviewing
stands, sales stands, signs, stadiums, stagings, standpipes, tanks of any
kind, tents, towers of any kind, including radio and television towers and
antennas, and trellises. The word "structure" shall be construed as though
followed by the words "or part thereof."
§ 450-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-4
1:750
SWIMMING POOL — An artificial pool of water used for swimming
purposes, including any structures that are auxiliary thereto, such as toilets,
showers, dressing and locker rooms, deck areas and any other areas and
enclosures maintained in connection with the use of the pool. For the
purposes of this chapter, the term includes swimming pools of permanent
and temporary construction, with a depth of 24 inches or more.
SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL — A swimming pool that is operated for
gain.
SWIMMING POOL, COMMUNITY — A nonprofit swimming pool that is used
exclusively by members of a club or other organization or by the residents
of a specific neighborhood or community and by bona fide guests of any of
the foregoing.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — A swimming pool that is accessory to a
dwelling and is used exclusively by the occupants of the dwelling and their
bona fide guests.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — A nonprofit swimming pool that is operated
by a public agency, such as a municipality, a school district or a county.
TAVERN or BAR — A place where alcoholic liquors are sold to be consumed
on the premises. This term excludes private homes where alcoholic
beverages are served for family consumption or where a distinct group,
limited to a congregation, club or fraternal organization, serves and/or
consumes alcoholic beverages.[Added 7-18-1989 by L.L. No. 11-1989]
TRAILER — A vehicle designed to be transportable by traction and used
for living or sleeping quarters, for a temporary place of business (such as a
field office of a construction company) or for the transportation or storage of
goods or materials, whether standing on its own wheels or resting on rigid
supports.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include
any nonconforming use.
VENDING MACHINE — A coin-operated device for dispensing food,
beverages and other food products, unattended except for periodic
servicing and replenishment of supplies.
YARD — An unoccupied space open to the sky, on the same lot with a
building or structure.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending the full width of a lot and situated
between the street line and the front line of a building projected to the
side lines of the lot. The depth of a front yard shall be measured between
the front line of the building and the street line. Covered porches, whether
enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered part of the main building and
shall not project into a required front yard.
YARD, REAR — A yard between the rear line of a building and the rear line
of the lot and extending the full width of the lot.
§ 450-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-4
1:751
YARD, SIDE — A yard situated between the side line of a building and the
adjacent side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front
yard to the front line of the rear yard. If no front yard is required, the front
boundary of a side yard shall be the front line of the lot; and if no rear yard
is required, the rear boundary of a side yard shall be the rear line of the lot.
§ 450-4 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-4
1:752
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts; Zoning Map
§ 450-5. List of districts. [Amended 12-18-1967; 1-28-1997 by L.L.
No. 4-1997; 12-22-2009 by L.L. No. 9-2009; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
§ 450-6. Zoning Map.
A. For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, the Village is hereby
divided into the following types of districts:
R-1 One-Family Residence, Open
R-2 One-Family Residence, Low Density
R-2A1 One-Family Residence, Low Density
R-3 One-Family Residence, Medium Density
R-4 One- and Two-Family Residence
R-4A One- and Two-Family Residence/Neighborhood Commercial
R-5 Multiple Residence, Medium Density
R-6 Multiple Residence, High Density
H Hospital
C-1 Highway Commercial
C-2 Central Commercial
CEM Cemetery Area
P Parks
PP Public Parking Area
RF Riverfront Development District
Overlay Districts
SRF Southern Riverfront Development Overlay District
Note:
1 Shall be applicable to all parcels of real property within the bounds
of the Sleepy Hollow Manor area of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
B. All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the Village shall be
considered to be zoned in the same manner as the contiguous territory
inside previous Village limits until otherwise classified.
A. Zoning Map. Said districts are bounded as shown on a map entitled
"Zoning Map of Village of Sleepy Hollow," adopted September 8, 1964,
and certified by the Village Clerk, which accompanies and which, with
all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made a part of this chapter.
§ 450-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-6
1:753
B. Official Zoning Map. The original copy of the Zoning Map shall be
maintained in the office of the Village Clerk, and shall be made available
for public reference as the Official Zoning Map. Copies of all or part of
the Official Zoning Map may be reproduced for public distribution.
However, the Official Zoning Map maintained in the office of the Village
Clerk shall be the final authority as to the current status of zoning
districts in the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
(1) Authentication. Subsequent to the adoption of this chapter, the
Official Zoning Map shall be authenticated by the Mayor's
signature and the seal of the municipality, attested by the Village
Clerk, under the following certificate:
"I certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow, New York, referred to in § 450-6B of the Zoning
Ordinance . . . of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, New York, adopted
on September 8, 1964."
(2) Changes to Official Zoning Map.
(a) When, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and of
state law, changes are made in district boundaries or other
matters portrayed in the Zoning Map, such changes will not
become effective until the Official Zoning Map has been
amended, with an entry bearing the following notation:
"On _______________, by adoption of Local Law Number _____,
the governing body made the following change(s) in the
Official Zoning Map:" (brief description of change)
(b) Each such entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by
the Village Clerk. Each local law amending the Zoning Map in
any manner shall include the proviso that it shall not take
effect until the Official Zoning Map has been amended in
accordance with these provisions. No changes of any nature
shall be made to the Official Zoning Map except in conformity
with the above procedure. Any unauthorized changes to the
map or its contents by any person or persons shall be
considered a violation of this chapter, punishable as provided
under § 450-92 of this chapter.
C. Interpretation of the Zoning Map. Where uncertainty exists with
respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on
the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the center lines of streets or highways, street lines or highway
right-of-way lines, such center lines, street lines or highway rightof-
way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
§ 450-6 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-6
1:754
(2) Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said
boundaries.
(3) Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the center lines or street lines of streets,
or the center lines or right-of-way lines of highways, such district
boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such
distance therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map. If no distance
is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale
shown on said Zoning Map.
(4) Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such
boundary shall be deemed to be located in the middle of the main
tracks of said railroad line.
(5) Where the boundary of a district follows a lake, river, stream or
other body of water, said boundary line shall be deemed to extend
to the water line; if the location of said water line is changed, the
district boundary shall be relocated to conform to such change.
(6) Where a district is adjacent to the Hudson River, it shall be deemed
to include all lands under water as far west as the legal westerly
boundary of the Village, all such lands as may be filled in or
otherwise reclaimed shall be subject to the indicated adjacent
zoning for the district.
§ 450-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-6
1:755

ARTICLE IV
Riverfront Development District
[Added 1-28-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
§ 450-7. Authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of § 10 of the Municipal Home
Rule Law and Article 42 of the Executive Law of New York State in order to
protect and enhance the physical and visual environment of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow and for the protection, control, order, safety, health and wellbeing
of people and property with the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 450-8. Purpose.
A. The land and water area of the Village of Sleepy Hollow's Hudson River
waterfront represent a unique mix of natural and man-made resources.
These resources have historically played an important role in the
development, economy and cultural heritage of the Village and the
region. The general quality of the water bodies within and adjacent to
the Village, the visual, scenic, natural resources, cultural character,
historic resources and structures, and the Tappan Zee East Scenic
District (Article 49 of the New York State Environmental Conservation
Law) are some of the primary elements comprising and documenting
these important natural and man-made resources.
B. The overall purpose of this district is to promote the policies and
purposes of the Village's Local Waterfront Revitalization Program,75
including positive development and revitalization of the waterfront
area, while ensuring that such revitalization takes place in a manner
which is sensitive to the Village's coastal and community resources.
C. It is also the purpose of the RF Riverfront Development District to
afford a priority to waterfront-compatible well-designed uses, achieve
public access to the coastal area and provide standards for
development in such a fashion so as to create a distinct waterfront
district which is in the spirit of an old Hudson River waterfront
community image. Further, it is the purpose of the district to provide
opportunities for permanent public views and visual access to the
Hudson River and to encourage the phasing out of land uses which are
incompatible with and detract from the Village's Hudson River
waterfront area. It is also the purpose of this district to protect,
preserve and enhance sensitive environmental areas; prevent soil
erosion, sedimentation and slope failure; prevent, to the maximum
extent possible, the loss, alteration or diminution of public views of the
Hudson River and opposite shore; prevent activities which will cause
water and air pollution; and ensure that the benefits provided by
implementation of this article and the Village's Local Waterfront
Revitalization Program will provide future generations with a
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 414, Waterfront Consistency Review.
§ 450-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-8
1:757
§ 450-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS DEVELOPMENT AREA — All land and landfill areas inland of the
Hudson River shoreline, including all easement areas.
PROPERTIES THAT HAVE DIRECT FRONTAGE ON THE HUDSON RIVER
— Any lot, parcel, property, riverfront development or special permit use
project which adjoins the Hudson River.
WATER-DEPENDENT USE — Any use that requires for its primary purpose
location on submerged lands or that requires direct access to or location
in coastal waters and which therefore cannot be located away from these
waters.
§ 450-10. Permitted principal uses.
A building may be erected, reconstructed, altered, arranged, designed or
used, and a lot or premises may be used for any of the following purposes
and for no other purpose, subject to site plan review and conformance with
the riverfront development design standards listed in § 450-18 herein:
continuation of those elements and resources of the Village that serve
to create a distinct community character and strong sense of place for
its residents.
D. It is also the purpose of this district to encourage an economic stimulus
and revitalization of the Village and its Hudson River waterfront by
establishing a well-designed, comprehensively planned central focus
for the Village's waterfront area. Another purpose of this district is to
provide for land uses which are consistent with the Village's Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program, including residential and waterfront
commercial uses, to serve as a catalyst for the economic and physical
revitalization of the entire Village core area. It is also the purpose of
this district to encourage a mix of uses on the waterfront with a
consistent set of design standards to ensure a unified and
comprehensively planned development that will function effectively and
achieve a high standard of site planning and architectural design.
E. It is also the purpose of this district to eliminate deteriorated structures
and incompatible, visually unattractive or otherwise deleterious land
uses. Further, it is the purpose of this district to provide for and
increase pedestrian public access to and the potential for enjoyment of
the waterfront and to integrate that access with existing and
anticipated pedestrian public access opportunities on adjacent public
lands.
A. Charter/Excursion boat and fishing guide operations.
B. Mariculture and aquaculture activities.
§ 450-8 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-10
1:758
§ 450-11. Special permit uses. [Amended 2-22-2000 by L.L. No.
7-2000]
C. Fishing/Marine supply stores (not to include marinas).
D. Wholesale and retail fish/seafood stores.
E. Community centers when part of coastal public access or other public
recreational access.
F. Municipal parks, playgrounds, trails and beaches.
G. Scientific, historic, artistic and educational activities and uses which,
by their nature, require or are enhanced by a location on coastal
waters, including museums, construction of historic boat replicas or
other river-related educational facilities or activities.
H. Structures needed for boat/vessel navigational purposes, such as
lighthouses or other navigational aids.
I. Recreational activities which depend on or are enhanced by access to
coastal waters, such as swimming, fishing, boating, wildlife viewing,
walking, sitting, jogging, bicycling and other forms of passive
appreciation of scenic resources.
J. Boat rental facilities.
K. Specialty boat uses/facilities, such as tour, cruise and dinner boats.
L. Boat launch facilities.
M. Municipal public safety uses and facilities associated with other uses in
this district.
N. Flood and erosion control structures, such as bulkheads, rip-rap and
breakwaters.
O. Mass transit facilities, including railroad tracks and appurtenant
structures such as railroad stations, and historic and/or alternative
modes of transportation.
P. Support facilities necessary for successful functioning of the above uses
(for example, parking areas, snack bars, first aid stations, information
stations/services and short-term storage facilities). To the extent
possible, such facilities should be sited inland of the principal use.
A. Special permit uses for properties that have direct frontage on the
Hudson River waterfront. A building may be erected, reconstructed,
altered, arranged, designed or used and a lot or premises may be used
for any of the following purposes and for no other purpose in the RF
Riverfront Development District, subject to the issuance of a special
permit by the Mayor and Board of Trustees. In addition, the following
uses will be subject to site plan review and the requirements of other
applicable portions of the RF Zoning District:
§ 450-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-11
1:759
(1) Riverfront development projects for properties that have direct
frontage on the Hudson River.
(a) In order to recognize that the Sleepy Hollow waterfront area is
attractive for a variety of uses which are not water-dependent,
while at the same time achieving the goals of the Village's
Local Waterfront Revitalization Program, the following uses,
when proposed as part of a riverfront development, are
allowed in the RF Riverfront Development District subject to
the issuance of a special permit by the Mayor and Board of
Trustees whenever the owner dedicates meaningful,
permanent public access (Such determination shall be made by
the Mayor and Board of Trustees as part of concept or site plan
approval.) along and, where appropriate, across the property
to the dry shore area. Further, any of the uses listed in § 450-10
above may be allowed in conjunction with any of the uses listed
below. In addition, the following uses shall be subject to site
plan review. "Meaningful, permanent public access" is defined
as safe and unobstructed access to and along the dry, nontidal
or submerged shore areas of the Hudson River for all members
of the public in order to provide a public access system to and
along the waterfront and/or public rights-of-way. Such access
shall be, at the option of the applicant, in the form of a
permanent easement or the granting of fee title to the Village
of Sleepy Hollow. Access may be regulated by reasonable
conditions in a management plan submitted by the applicant
and approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees as part of
the final site plan approval. The access shall be at least 15 feet
wide from a street to the shoreline and at least 20 feet wide
along the shoreline for the entire width of the property in the
RF Riverfront Development District. A surface or material
suitable for pedestrian use at least 10 feet wide shall be
provided for the entire length of the access easement and to a
standard approved by the Sleepy Hollow Village Engineer.
(b) A riverfront development is a mixed-use project which
incorporates various permitted land use elements as part of a
comprehensively planned development. The Village of Sleepy
Hollow is looking for an attractive, well-planned riverfront
development which is in the spirit of an old Hudson River
waterfront community image. Riverfront development plans
should incorporate hamlet centers, following the traditional
patterns and layout of such centers. This may include provision
for village squares, walking areas and alleyways. Building
designs should visually complement, be harmonious with and
in the spirit of the architectural style that prevailed in Hudson
River communities prior to 1900.
(c) The uses permitted in a riverfront development are as follows:
[1] All uses listed in § 450-10.
§ 450-11 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-11
1:760
[2] Marinas and related uses such as sale of marine supplies,
services, fuel, equipment, etc.; marine-related retail and
service businesses, including boat and marine engine sale
and repair and boat rental. The marina standards found
below in Subsection A(4) shall also apply here;
[3] Enclosed dry rack storage for boats;
[4] One-family, two-family and multifamily residential uses;
[5] Commercial retail shops, designed primarily to serve the
needs of pedestrian and marine visitors to the riverfront;
[6] Retail and personal service shops with a maximum floor
area per building of no greater than 50,000 square feet
which are designed to serve the needs of area residents,
commuters and visitors, such as neighborhood grocery
stores or delicatessens; pharmacies; audio/video,
newspaper, candy and sundries; barber/beauty shops;
retail cleaners; and other similar uses;
[7] Restaurants, entertainment and bar facilities;
[8] Inns, hotels, motels, bed-and-breakfast inns, boatels,
conference centers, resort-type facilities, fitness centers,
spas; [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
[9] Public or semipublic uses such as churches, live theaters,
aquariums, concert halls, museums or meeting rooms
suitable for social, civic, cultural or educational activities;
[10] Galleries, workshops or retail shops associated with arts,
crafts or fine arts;
[11] Professional or small business offices on the upper floors
in commercial retail buildings;
[12] Charter/Excursion boat businesses;
[13] Ferry boat uses/facilities;
[14] Banks and other personal service establishments;
[15] Tennis courts and paddle tennis courts;
[16] Commercial recreational facilities, including interactive
video, bowling and theaters;
[17] Nursing homes, senior citizen housing and assisted-care
facilities;
[18] Child or elderly day-care facilities;
[19] Catering establishments, offering catering services on or
off the premises, and retail sales;
§ 450-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-11
1:761
[20] Consumer service establishments such as florists,
photographers and formal wear clothing sales and rentals;
[21] The following light industrial and other uses, provided that
such uses in aggregate do not exceed 30% of the gross
floor area of a riverfront development and provided that no
individual building housing such a use has a footprint
greater than 25,000 square feet and that the maximum
floor area per said building does not exceed 50,000 square
feet:
[a] Wholesale businesses and warehouses, including
nonprocessing storage and distribution, provided that
such uses are water-dependent. These uses may
include docks and piers necessary for the transfer of
goods and materials from the Hudson River to land
and/or from land to the Hudson River.
[b] Printing and publishing facilities;
[c] Research, experimental or testing laboratories;
[d] Service-oriented uses such as electric motor repair,
appliance repair, lawn mower repair and radio and
television repair;
[e] Cabinet shops, upholstery shops and fabric shops; and
[f] Home improvement suppliers and distributors, selling
or distributing hardware, plumbing supplies, paint,
wallpaper, lighting fixtures, carpet, garden supplies,
plant nursery products and furniture; and
[22] Other uses similar to the above uses as determined by
resolution of the Village Board. Examples of uses that may
be but are not necessarily similar to the above uses include
combining prepared materials such as bone, shell, fur,
glass, leather, precious or semiprecious metals or stones,
textiles or cloth products, wood or wood products; creation
of ceramic products, excluding building materials, using
only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired by
electricity or gas; and putting together musical
instruments, clocks, watches, toys, novelties, office
equipment, telecommunications and electronic
components from prepared material.
(2) The manufacture, assembly or repair of marine products such as
boats, vessels, sails and hardware.
(3) Ferry boat uses/facilities.
(4) Marinas and related uses such as sale of marine supplies, services,
fuel, equipment, etc.; marine-related retail and service businesses,
§ 450-11 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-11
1:762
including boat and marine engine sales and repair and boat rental.
The following standards shall apply to all new marina projects as
well as proposals for the expansion of existing marinas:
(a) All new marina proposals or the expansion of existing marinas
shall, as deemed appropriate by the Mayor and Board of
Trustees, include sufficient parking, parklike surroundings,
toilet facilities and marine pumpout facilities.
(b) The Village Board may require a performance guarantee, such
as a secured bond or money in escrow, that will be sufficient to
hire an independent contractor to complete any conditions
imposed or to effect any limitations or to restore the project
area to its original condition in the event of a failure by the
applicant to comply with the conditions or limitations of the
special permit. The performance guarantee shall be in the
amount of $100,000 plus $100 per foot of wet slip.
(c) To the extent deemed feasible by the Mayor and Board of
Trustees, marina basins shall be designed for maximum tidal
flushing and circulation due to river currents and the action of
wind while maintaining safe levels of wave action within the
protection basin. Minimum design criteria to promote flushing
include:
[1] Basin and channel depths shall not be deeper than the
prevailing depths in the water body to which they connect.
[2] Basin and channel depths shall gradually increase toward
open water or basin entrances.
[3] Openings shall be provided at the opposite ends of
enclosed basins to establish flow-through circulation. Only
one opening must be navigable. The other opening or
openings shall be as large as practicable to promote
circulation. Culverts or other enclosed conduits may be
used in place of open channels.
[4] The configuration chosen shall minimize or prevent the
formation of stagnant water zones that tend to collect
debris or cause shoaling or flushing problems.
(d) Marinas shall be located in areas where physical attributes
required by marinas already exist and where minimal initial
and subsequent maintenance dredging will be required. Such
physical attributes include natural depths at or exceeding
minimal navigable depths, low rates of sediment transport and
sufficient tidal action to promote flushing. Dredging shall be
limited to the minimum dimensions necessary for the project.
Marinas shall not be permitted in areas that would require
frequent maintenance dredging that would harm aquatic life or
would prevent the relocation of benthic organisms. Such areas
§ 450-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-11
1:763
would include those which would require maintenance
dredging more often than once every five years. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(e) Applicants must demonstrate that there is an adequate water
supply to serve all of the project needs.
(f) Sewage pumpout facilities shall be provided at all new marinas
and expansion of existing marinas at a minimum rate of one
pumpout station for every 100 wet slips or fraction thereof.
(g) Adequate rest room facilities for the exclusive use of marina
patrons will be required to discourage any overboard
discharge of sewage from boats and to protect water quality.
The number of toilets required for any given marina shall be
determined by the Mayor and Board of Trustees for the nature
and size of the marina and for its specific site location.
(h) The applicant shall demonstrate adequate capacity to properly
dispose of or treat all sanitary wastes generated by the project.
(i) An ample number of signs shall be provided to identify the
location of public rest rooms and pumpout facilities. Signs
must also fully explain the procedures and rules governing the
use of the pumpout facilities. Pumpout facilities shall be
available to all boaters, regardless of whether they are patrons
of the marina.
(j) Dedicated parking spaces shall be provided at a minimum rate
of 0.5 space per slip, plus whatever additional spaces are
required for employees and required by this chapter for
separate retail activities on premises.
(k) Rainfall runoff becomes polluted with oils, greases, organic
and inorganic wastes and other potentially harmful
substances. It is the intent of the Village of Sleepy Hollow to
limit, to the extent feasible, the introduction of these
contaminants into the waters surrounding the Village.
Therefore, new parking areas shall utilize porous pavements or
other approved measures to reduce rainfall runoff. New marina
projects must incorporate best management practices in their
design, including but not limited to the following:
[1] Maximize pervious land surface and vegetative cover to
minimize stormwater runoff and to prevent polluted
waters from reaching adjacent waters and wetlands.
Direct runoff away from adjacent waters and wetlands to
the extent feasible by site grading or other methods.
[2] Runoff from parking lots, maintenance, fueling and washdown
areas must be treated in a manner that prevents oils,
grease and detergents from reaching adjacent waters and
§ 450-11 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-11
1:764
wetlands. Accepted treatment methods include oil and
grease filtering catch basins, retention areas and
exfiltration systems.
(l) Trash receptacles shall be plentiful and convenient to
encourage the proper disposal of trash and waste. A maximum
spacing of 100 feet between receptacles shall be maintained on
all piers and docks.
(m) The underwater portions of piers and docks, including piles,
shall not be constructed using creosote-treated lumber.
(n) All marinas must have and be able to institute spill prevention
emergency response plans. Automatic cut-offs for fuel/oil and
sewage hoses and lines in the event of an accident are
mandatory.
(5) Interim storage, subject to the following standards:
(a) Interim storage may be permitted by the Village Board on
parcels which are five acres or less in size on the effective date
of these regulations;
(b) No interim storage is permitted for noxious, hazardous, toxic
or waste materials;
(c) Permits for interim storage uses shall be valid for one year in
duration and shall be subject to annual renewal by the Village
Board of Trustees;
(d) Interim storage may be allowed for a maximum of five years
unless extended by the Village Board of Trustees;
(e) Interim storage uses shall be subject to site plan review; and
(f) The approving agency may require appropriate screening of
the proposed interim storage.
B. Permitted uses for properties without direct frontage on Hudson River.
A building may be erected, reconstructed, altered, arranged, designed
or used and a lot or premises may be used for any of the following
purposes and for no other purpose, subject to site plan review and
issuance of a special permit, if applicable. (Issuance of a special permit
by the Mayor and Board of Trustees is necessary for those uses listed
above in Subsection A.): [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(1) All of the uses listed above in § 450-10 and Subsection A. For those
uses listed above in Subsection A(1) under "riverfront
developments," all of the standards and procedures applicable to a
riverfront development shall also apply here, except the provisions
for public access to and along the Hudson River waterfront.
§ 450-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-12
1:765
§ 450-12. Accessory uses.
The following shall be accessory uses:
§ 450-13. Procedure for review and approval of special permit uses.
A. Any accessory use customarily incidental to permitted uses, and
support facilities necessary to serve permitted uses.
B. Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of the RF
Riverfront Development Zoning District. No parking shall be located
within 25 feet of the Hudson River waterfront (mean high water line).
C. Retail sales of products fabricated or assembled on the premises.
D. Living quarters for owners, caretakers or watchmen and their families.
E. Public or semipublic accessory uses, such as bandshells, kiosks and
gazebos.
F. Signs in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 338, Signs, of the
Village Code. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
G. Fences, hedges or walls in accordance with the requirements of
§ 450-40F of this chapter.
A. Each special permit use, including riverfront development project
proposals, shall require the following two sequential review and
approval phases:
(1) Phase I: special permit and riverfront development concept plan
approval by the Village Board; and [Amended 2-22-2000 by L.L.
No. 7-2000]
(2) Phase II: site plan approval by the Village Planning Board.
B. The Village Board's review of a special permit use application, including
a riverfront development, shall also include review of a riverfront
development concept plan which contains a proposed designation of the
appropriate land uses, or a range of land uses, for the overall
development of the subject site and its relationship to other lands
within the RF Riverfront Development District. The purpose of this
review is to assure that the lands within the RF District will be
developed in accordance with an overall comprehensive plan, even
though a total riverfront development may consist of several separate
riverfront development projects which might be constructed at
different times. The Village of Sleepy Hollow shall comply with all
requirements contained herein, including submission of a riverfront
development concept plan, for all Village-owned property within the RF
District, except that an application for subdivision approval may be
granted prior to the submission of a riverfront development concept
plan. [Amended 2-22-2000 by L.L. No. 7-2000]
§ 450-12 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-14
1:766
§ 450-14. Application fees. [Amended 2-22-2000 by L.L. No. 7-2000]
Applications to the Village Board and Planning Board as provided herein
shall be accompanied by the appropriate fees which may be set from
time to time by the Village Board for such applications. Pursuant to the
requirements of Chapter 200, Fees, of the Village Code, the applicant shall
also be required to pay such additional fees as may be necessary for the
reasonable expenses associated with provision of technical assistance to the
Village in reviewing the technical aspects of the application/project.
§ 450-15. Phase I: Procedure for special permit and riverfront
development concept plan review. [Amended 2-22-2000 by L.L. No.
7-2000]
A. The application for a riverfront development project for one or more
riverfront development projects or a special use project shall be
submitted to the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The application shall
consist of narrative text, drawings and/or illustrations describing the
proposed riverfront development or special use project. Drawings shall
be submitted approximately to scale, but need not be to the precision of
a finished engineering drawing or a final site plan. The application shall
include the following:
(1) A written description of the riverfront development or special use
project and a description of the manner in which such proposal
meets the purposes of the RF Riverfront Development Zoning
District; how it is consistent with the Village's Local Waterfront
Revitalization Program; and a description of the manner in which
the public interest would be served by the proposed riverfront
development or special use project, including a description of the
benefits to the Village as a whole and the waterfront neighborhood
in particular.
(2) A riverfront development concept plan showing the various
proposed land uses and their spatial arrangement, including the
proposed general location of buildings, parking areas, public,
community and/or recreational facilities, utility and maintenance
facilities and open space. The riverfront development concept plan
shall include and provide all of the information required herein for
all of the lands owned by the applicant within the RF District. The
concept plan shall also show the relationship of the proposed
project uses to existing and proposed land uses adjacent to the site,
particularly those on the adjacent and nearby Village-owned and
county-owned parcels, and any other lands within the Riverfront
Development Zoning District that are not part of the application. If
no such uses have been proposed for adjoining any nearby parcels,
the application shall describe and generally show potential uses for
such other parcels.
§ 450-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-15
1:767
(3) An indication of the approximate square footage of buildings and
the approximate number of dwelling units (if applicable) of each
housing type and size.
(4) An indication of the appropriate number of parking and loading
spaces in relationship to their intended use, accompanied by a
description of any alternative means of parking to be utilized, such
as below-building parking or parking incorporated into one or more
floors of the building.
(5) An indication of the need for phasing of construction of the project.
(6) The configuration of any interior road system and connection/
access to the adjoining Village road systems.
(7) The general configuration of pedestrian circulation systems,
including the general location of any public access to or along the
riverfront, and the connection of such pedestrian passageways to
adjoining properties.
(8) The proposed overall design treatments of views and viewing
points from the site to the Hudson River; to the site from the
Hudson River; and from important viewshed protection points
(those that are applicable) identified in the Village's Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program.
(9) Descriptions, sketches and elevations, if available during the
concept plan review and approval process, showing the general
architectural treatment and design scheme contemplated for the
entire development and specifically for any public spaces or major
elements of the site plan.
(10) Incentives offered and bulk increases sought.
(11) Such additional information as the Mayor and Board of Trustees
may deem necessary in order to properly evaluate the application.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. Village Board review of special permit and riverfront development
concept plan application for environmental compliance.
(1) The approval of a special permit or riverfront development project
is an action under the State Environmental Quality Review Act
(SEQRA), and all proceedings to such project shall comply with
applicable requirements of SEQRA.
(2) Upon receipt of an application for a special permit and riverfront
development concept plan, the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall
commence a coordinated review under SEQRA and institute lead
agency procedures after identifying all involved and interested
agencies, as provided by law.
§ 450-15 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-15
1:768
(3) Because any waterfront development will constitute an important
element in the implementation of the Village's Local Waterfront
Revitalization Program, the preparation of a draft environmental
impact statement (DEIS) shall be required by the lead agency. Such
DEIS shall comply with all requirements of law. To the extent
possible, in accordance with law, the DEIS submitted in connection
with the special permit and riverfront development concept plan
approval shall be sufficiently specific as to eliminate the need for
additional and/or supplemental DEISs during the site plan review
stage of the approval process.
(4) To the extent possible in accordance with law, the preparation of
the DEIS shall be integrated into the existing agency review
processes and shall occur at the same time as the other agency
reviews, including the special permit and riverfront development
concept plan review. When a SEQRA hearing is to be held, it shall
be conducted jointly with other public hearings on the proposed
action, whenever practical.
C. Village Board referrals. The Village Board shall comply with the
applicable provisions of General Municipal Law §§ 239-l and 239-m.
Where the Mayor and Board of Trustees are serving as lead agency
under SEQRA, they shall also circulate the DEIS and final
environmental impact statement (FEIS) as provided by law. In addition
to the referrals required by law, the Mayor and Board of Trustees may
refer the application to any other Village board, department,
organization, consultant or professional they deem appropriate.
D. Village Board public hearing. The Village Board shall hold at least one
public hearing, with the same notice required by law for zoning
amendments, on the application for a special permit and riverfront
development concept plan approval. Where the Mayor and Village
Board of Trustees are serving as lead agency under SEQRA and
determine to hold a SEQRA hearing, the SEQRA hearing shall be
conducted jointly with this public hearing if practical.
E. Village Board decision on special permit and riverfront development
concept plan.
(1) Concept plan approval process. Prior to granting any special permit
for a riverfront development project, the Mayor and Board of
Trustees shall review a riverfront development concept plan which
contains a proposed designation of appropriate land uses or a
range of land uses for the overall development of the area within
the Riverfront Development Zoning District. The Mayor and Board
of Trustees shall render a decision on the application for riverfront
development concept plan approval and for a special permit after
they have held the required public hearing, completed the SEQRA
process and made the requisite SEQRA findings and made the
consistency determination required under the Village's Local
Waterfront Consistency Review Law.76
§ 450-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-15
1:769
(2) Concept plan approval. The Mayor and Village Board of Trustees
shall approve the concept plan upon a finding that it:
(a) Will substantially fulfill all of the purposes of the Riverfront
Development Zoning District;
(b) Will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly
development of the Village's waterfront area; and
(c) Will be consistent with the policies and purposes of the
Village's Local Waterfront Revitalization Program.
(3) Special permit approval. The Mayor and Board of Trustees may
authorize the issuance of a special permit for a riverfront
development project or special use project, provided that they shall
find that the following conditions and standards have been met:
(a) The proposed riverfront development or special use project
will fulfill all of the purposes of the Riverfront Development
Zoning District.
(b) The proposed riverfront development or special use project
meets the riverfront development design standards set forth in
§ 450-18, to the extent applicable at the special permit stage.
(c) The proposed riverfront development or special use project
will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly
development of the Village's waterfront area.
(d) The proposed riverfront development or special use project
will not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and
use of adjacent lands.
(e) The proposed land uses of the project will be in accordance
with the approved riverfront development concept plan.
(f) The proposed riverfront development or special use project is
consistent with the policies and purposes of the Village's Local
Waterfront Revitalization Program.
(g) The proposed project is otherwise in the public interest.
(4) Conditions. In approving any riverfront development concept plan
and special permit, the Mayor and Village Board of Trustees may
attach such conditions, safeguards and mitigation measures as
they deem necessary or appropriate to assure continual
conformance to all applicable standards and requirements and to
fulfill the intent and purposes of the Riverfront Development
Zoning District.
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 414, Waterfront Consistency Review.
§ 450-15 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-15
1:770
§ 450-16. Phase II: Site plan review. [Amended 2-22-2000 by L.L.
No. 7-2000]
F. Time periods for concept plan and special permit approval. The
approval of a riverfront development concept plan or special permit
shall remain valid for a time period specified by the Village Board. In
addition, at the time of approving a special permit, the Village Board
may, in its discretion, extend any time period it has previously set where
it finds that changing market conditions or other circumstances have
acted to prevent the timely commencement or completion of work and
that the developer has proceeded with reasonable diligence in an effort
to assure completion of the work within the permitted time period. The
extension of these time periods shall not require the holding of a new
public hearing.
G. Revisions to riverfront development concept plan and special permit.
After approval of the riverfront development concept plan or special
permit, any proposed revisions shall be submitted to the Mayor and
Board of Trustees. The Mayor and Board of Trustees, in their discretion,
shall determine the appropriate procedures for consideration of the
proposed revisions and whether such revision is material enough to
require further environmental analysis, further project review and/or a
further hearing, as they may deem appropriate.
A. In general.
(1) After approval of the riverfront development concept plan or
special permit by the Village Board, the Village Planning Board may
grant site plan approval to a riverfront development project or any
portion thereof.
(2) Application for site plan approval. The application for site plan
approval shall contain all the material set forth in Article X, Site
Plan Review, of this chapter. In addition, the applicant shall submit
the following, where deemed applicable by the Planning Board:
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(a) Information to establish that the proposed site plan meets the
riverfront development design standards set forth in § 450-18;
(b) Information to establish that the proposed site plan is in
substantial conformance with the approved riverfront
development concept plan and special permit;
(c) Elevations showing the architectural and design treatment of
all buildings, public and open spaces and other site plan
elements;
(d) Information to establish the relationship of the proposed
project to later elements of the development of the other
applicable portions of the land area within the Riverfront
Development Zoning District, including any other adjacent and
§ 450-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-16
1:771
nearby lands that are not part of the applicant's planned
riverfront development project(s);
(e) Such other information as the Planning Board may reasonably
require in order to evaluate the site plan application; and
(f) Application fees as may be required pursuant to Chapter 200,
Fees, of the Village Code.
B. Planning Board review of site plan.
(1) The Planning Board shall conduct a detailed review of the
adequacy, location, arrangement, design and appearance of each
aspect of the proposed development. While the scope of the
Planning Board's review of the site plan will generally relate to the
waterfront project at issue, the Planning Board shall have the
authority to assure that aspects of the overall development of the
land within the Riverfront Development Zoning District (e.g.,
stormwater management, fire and police protection, sanitary
sewers, all other utilities, streets, etc.) shall be adequate to suit the
purposes and needs of the Riverfront Development Zoning District,
as it is finally developed.
(2) In acting on any site plan application, the Planning Board shall take
into consideration any approved or pending riverfront development
concept plans and the proposed design and layout of the entire
waterfront area, including the proposed location, height and buffer
of buildings, traffic circulation within and outside of the site,
provision for off-street parking, exterior lighting, display of signs,
landscaping, buffer areas and open spaces and architecture and
design so that any development will have a harmonious
relationship with the existing or permitted development of
contiguous land and of adjacent neighborhoods and so that
pedestrian and vehicular traffic will be handled adequately and
safely within the site and in relation to the adjoining street systems.
In particular, the Planning Board shall assure that the proposed site
plan meets all of the riverfront development design standards set
forth in § 450-18. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(3) The proposed site plan shall be in general conformance with the
approved riverfront development concept plan. While the riverfront
development concept plan approval will constitute approval of a
general layout of the land areas within the Riverfront Development
Zoning District, the individual site plans for particular riverfront
development projects will provide detailed building envelopes,
elevations and site design details regarding proposals for various
projects within the RF Zoning District. The Planning Board may
exercise its discretion in allowing minor variations from the
riverfront development concept plan so long as the site plan is, in
the Planning Board's judgment, generally in keeping with the
§ 450-16 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-16
1:772
§ 450-17. Subdivision within riverfront development.
Notwithstanding the exemption for Village-owned properties as specified
in § 450-13 of this article, the Planning Board may review any proposed
subdivision application within a riverfront development at any time after
the approval of a special use permit and/or riverfront development concept
plan. Subsequent to the approval of a special use permit and/or riverfront
development concept plan, apportionment of the property solely for leasing,
mortgaging, taxing or other similar purposes may occur without the benefit
of subdivision approval; however, subdivision approval shall be required
prior to all conveyances of property ownership. Any requests for subdivision
approval shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 425, Subdivision
of Land, where applicable. The bulk standards, setbacks and other
dimensional requirements of the Riverfront Development Zoning District
shall apply to the gross land area of the total riverfront development
project, whether or not the gross land area is or will remain in one
ownership, and shall not apply to individual or subdivided parcels.
approved riverfront development concept plan. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
C. Time period for construction. At the time of approving the site plan, the
Planning Board may set forth the time period in which construction is to
begin and be completed. The Planning Board may, in its discretion,
extend any time period it has previously set where it finds that changing
market conditions or other circumstances have acted to prevent the
timely commencement or completion of work and that the developer
has proceeded with reasonable diligence in an effort to assure
completion of the work within the permitted time period. The extension
of these time periods shall not require the holding of a new public
hearing.
D. Adjustments to site plan during construction. During the construction
of an approved site plan, the Village Engineer may authorize minor
adjustments to the approved plans which are consistent with the overall
approved site plan when such adjustments appear necessary in the light
of technical or engineering considerations which develop during actual
construction or when such adjustments are required in order to comply
with law, rules or regulations made applicable to the subject property.
The Village Engineer may, in his discretion, refer any such proposed
change to the Planning Board for review. The Planning Board may
determine to treat the modification as a minor site plan adjustment
under this section or to treat it as a site plan amendment under
§ 450-66B of this chapter and shall have discretion to determine the
extent of further environmental analysis and project review that may be
required. After appropriate review and where it deems the amendment
appropriate, the Planning Board shall approve the site plan amendment
by resolution.
§ 450-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-18
1:773
§ 450-18. Design standards.
Because of the location of the Riverfront Development Zoning District, any
new development or redevelopment within the district will be a central
and key point of activity for the Village's waterfront and a central and
integral part of revitalization of the Village. Therefore, it is essential that
any development within this district meets the following standards:
A. Comprehensive design.
(1) The RF Riverfront Development Zoning District allows the
flexibility of design to encourage innovative site planning and
creative use of the district. While various land use elements (e.g.,
commercial, residential, recreational, water-dependent, etc.) are
expected to comprise the land area within the district, the district
must be planned as a cohesive unit with a comprehensive
development plan for ingress, egress, circulation and utility
service. Additionally, the land uses proposed must be
complementary. The architectural styles must be compatible and
must attain high standards of design.
(2) Development proposed within the RF Riverfront Development
Zoning District must afford a priority to waterfront-compatible
well-designed uses, achieve public access to the coastal area and
create a distinct waterfront district which is in the spirit of an old
Hudson River waterfront community. Further, development
proposed within the RF District must provide opportunities for
permanent public views and visual access to the Hudson River.
Development must also be designed to protect, preserve and
enhance sensitive environmental areas; prevent soil erosion,
sedimentation and slope failure; prevent, to the maximum extent
possible, the loss, alteration or diminution of public views of the
Hudson River and opposite shore; prevent activities which will
cause water and air pollution; and ensure that the proposed
development within this district will provide future generations
with a continuation of those elements and resources of the Village
that serve to create a distinct community character and strong
sense of place for its residents.
(3) Development within this district must also serve to encourage an
economic stimulus and revitalization of the Village and its Hudson
River waterfront by establishing a well-designed, comprehensively
planned central focus for the Village's waterfront area and to
provide for land uses consistent with the Village's Local Waterfront
Revitalization Program, including residential and waterfront
commercial uses, to serve as a catalyst for the economic and
physical revitalization of the entire village core area.
(4) Further, any proposed development within this district must
provide for and increase pedestrian public access to, and the
potential for enjoyment of, the waterfront and must integrate that
§ 450-18 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-18
1:774
access with existing and anticipated pedestrian public access
opportunities on adjacent public lands.
B. Relationship to uses on surrounding public property. The land uses
proposed in the Riverfront Development District shall relate, visually
and functionally, with surrounding land areas, including Kingsland
Point Park, Kingsland Point Lighthouse, Devries Field, Barnhart Park
and the Village's riverfront property on River Street. Elements of the
site plan, particularly those at the entrance(s), shall relate compatibly
with other elements of the Village. Any future development within the
district shall function as a way of linking waterfront properties and
continuing the concept of a linear public waterfront trail extending
from the Village property on River Street to Kingsland Point Lighthouse
and Kingsland Point Park. Additionally, proposed development within
the district shall also be designed to link public access to Devries Field,
Philipsburg Manor and Barnhart Park.
C. Relationship to the Hudson River. All elements of proposed projects
within the RF Zone shall also be sensitive to the site's unique and
important relationship to the Hudson River and shall be designed
accordingly.
D. Provision of view corridors and protecting views to the Hudson River.
The land within the RF Zone shall be developed in such a way as to
maximize views to the Hudson River, with design elements such as
taller building heights further away from the Hudson River, view
opportunities at the river's edge and view corridors throughout the
development. Site layout and design shall consider view corridors
identified in the Village's Local Waterfront Revitalization Program
(LWRP) and shall also consider the importance of views of the Village
from the Hudson River toward the shore. Important views shall be
protected and enhanced to the maximum extent practical.
E. Architectural design standards. It is the purpose of the RF Riverfront
Development District to afford a priority to waterfront-compatible welldesigned
uses, achieve public access to the coastal area and provide
standards for development in such a fashion as to create a distinct
waterfront district which is in the spirit of an old Hudson River
waterfront community. Further, it is the purpose of the district to
provide opportunities for permanent public views and visual access to
the Hudson River. It is also the purpose of this district to prevent, to the
maximum extent possible, the loss, alteration or diminution of public
views of the Hudson River and opposite shore and to provide future
generations with a continuation of those elements and resources of the
Village that serve to create a distinct community character and strong
sense of place for its residents.
(1) Attractive, well-planned development is envisioned as creating an
old Hudson River waterfront community image. Development plans
should incorporate hamlet centers, following the traditional
patterns and layout of such centers with strong provisions for
§ 450-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-18
1:775
pedestrian uses. This may include provision for village squares,
walking areas and alleyways. Building designs should visually
complement, be harmonious with and in the spirit of the
architectural style that prevailed in Hudson River communities
prior to 1900.
(2) Appropriate architectural scale, form and material shall be utilized
to ensure that buildings and structures are compatible with and
add interest to the landscape. More specifically, the design of all
structures is to be compatible with that of the surrounding
structures and neighborhoods. Compatibility shall be determined
by a review of proposed use of materials, scale, mass, height, color,
texture and location of the structures on the site.
(3) The various elements of the project shall be integrated by cohesive
architectural treatment and compatible design.
(4) Buildings shall be designed in consideration of appearance from all
vantage points, both within and outside of the Riverfront
Development Zoning District.
(5) Architectural elements shall be used to provide visual interest,
reduce apparent scale of the development and promote integration
of the various design elements in the project.
(6) Groups of related buildings shall be designed to present a
compatible appearance in terms of architectural style.
(7) Building lines shall be varied to the extent practical in order to
provide an interesting interplay of buildings and open spaces.
(8) Appurtenances on buildings and auxiliary structures, such as
mechanical equipment, water towers, carports, garages or storage
buildings, shall receive architectural treatment consistent with that
of principal buildings.
F. Energy conservation and efficiency. The plan for development shall be
designed in such a way as to promote energy conservation and
efficiency to the maximum extent practical for all buildings.
G. Landscaping, screening and buffering.
(1) All sidewalks, open spaces, parking areas, boat storage areas and
other similar service areas shall be landscaped and/or paved in a
manner which will harmonize with proposed buildings. Materials
for paving, walls, fences, curbs, benches, etc., will be attractive,
durable, easily maintained and compatible with the exterior of
adjacent buildings.
(2) The Planning Board may require buffer landscaping, fencing or
screening to separate different types of land uses and to screen
utility buildings, refuse collection areas, cooling systems and other
similar installations and features.
§ 450-18 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-18
1:776
(3) All plants, trees and shrubs shall be installed in accordance with a
planting schedule provided by the developer and approved by the
Planning Board. Landscape materials selected shall be appropriate
to the growing conditions of the environment of the Riverfront
Development Zoning District, this climatic zone and native species.
H. Lighting. Streets, drives, walkways and other outdoor areas shall be
properly lighted to promote safety and encourage pedestrian use. All
exterior lighting for the project shall be directed downward or
otherwise appropriately shielded and designed to minimize excessive
light. It shall have an attractive appearance, compatible with the overall
project design and waterfront character. Lighting type, number and
locations shall be subject to Planning Board review and approval as part
of the site plan review.
I. Signage.
(1) All signs shall be planned and designed in accordance with an
overall comprehensive signage plan which shall be subject to
Planning Board review and approval as part of site plan review.
(2) All signs shall be of a size and scale as determined appropriate by
the Planning Board to accomplish their intended purpose. At a
minimum, proposed signage shall comply with the standards for
different types of land uses identified in Chapter 338, Signs, of the
Village Code. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
J. Vehicular circulation system and traffic access. The rights-of-way and
pavement widths for all internal streets, drives, walks and other
accessways for vehicles and/or pedestrians shall be determined on the
basis of sound current planning and engineering standards, shall be
planned and built so as to promote safety and efficiency of movement,
shall accommodate projected demand and shall minimize impervious
surfaces and paving materials to the maximum extent possible.
K. Public access. While a riverfront development will require certain
private elements for the security and benefit of its residents and
property owners, it should provide pedestrian waterfront public access
in a manner which:
(1) Enhances existing public access opportunities at the riverfront in
furtherance of the Village's LWRP and the state's coastal policies;
(2) Coordinates such public access with existing or anticipated
opportunities for public access on adjacent public lands to facilitate
future linkages in a continuous pedestrian path system; and
(3) Provides meaningful, permanent public access to the Hudson River
in the form of safe and unobstructed access to and along the dry,
nontidal or submerged shore areas of the Hudson River for all
members of the public for purposes of providing a public access
system to and along the waterfront and/or public rights-of-way.
§ 450-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-18
1:777
Such access shall be in the form of a permanent easement or
the granting to the Village of Sleepy Hollow of fee title. Access
may be regulated by reasonable conditions in a management plan
submitted by the applicant and approved by the Planning Board
as part of the final site plan approval. The access shall be at least
15 feet wide from the street to the shoreline and at least 20 feet
wide along the shoreline for the entire width of the property in the
RF Riverfront Development Zoning District. A surface or material
suitable for pedestrian use at least 10 feet wide shall be provided
for the entire length of the access easement and shall meet a
standard approved by the Sleepy Hollow Village Engineer.
L. Off-street parking and loading. In addition to the requirements set forth
in § 450-41 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply to offstreet
parking and loading in the RF District: [Amended 1-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
(1) Off-street parking and loading areas shall be designed with careful
regard to their relationship to the uses served and to the objectives
for other open spaces. The areas shall be coordinated with the
public street system serving the project in order to avoid conflicts
with through traffic or obstruction to pedestrian walks. In addition,
all parking areas shall be designed to include provisions for
handicapped parking.
(2) Parking and loading facilities not enclosed in structures shall be
suitably landscaped and/or screened as determined appropriate by
the Planning Board.
(3) Required parking spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces
required shall be as set forth below and shall be applicable only to
those uses in the RF Zoning District:
Use
Minimum Off-Street Parking
Requirement
One-family, two-family,
multifamily dwelling
1 space per unit plus 1/2 space per
bedroom
Marina 1/2 space per slip or dry rack
storage facility
Retail or service business 1 space for each 200 square feet of
gross floor area, excluding
basement storage utility areas
Restaurant 1 space for each 3 patron seats or 1
space for each 75 square feet of
gross floor area, whichever is
greater
Office for business or
professional use
1 space for each 250 square feet of
gross floor area
§ 450-18 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-18
1:778
Use
Minimum Off-Street Parking
Requirement
Theater, auditorium,
community building, club,
social hall, lodge and
fraternal organization,
including boat, swim and
country club
1 for each 200 square feet of area
occupied by all principal uses or
structures
Hotel, motel, bed-andbreakfast
facility
1 for each guest room
Place of worship 1 for each 8 permanent seats or 1
for each 150 square feet of floor
area, whichever may be
appropriate
(4) With respect to any building, structure or use for which the
required number of parking spaces is not specifically set forth in
the above schedule, the Planning Board, in the course of site plan
review, shall determine the number of off-street parking spaces
required, which number shall bear a reasonable relation to the
minimum off-street parking requirements for specified uses as set
forth in the above schedule. In addition, all parking areas shall be
designed to include provisions for handicapped parking.
(5) Up to 30% of the required parking may be designated for compact
automobiles at the discretion of and in accordance with standards
determined by the Planning Board.
(6) Recognizing that rainfall becomes polluted with oils, greases,
organic and inorganic wastes and other potentially harmful
substances, it is the intent of the Village of Sleepy Hollow to limit,
to the extent feasible, the introduction of these contaminants into
the waters surrounding the Village. Therefore, new parking areas
shall utilize porous pavements or other approved measures to
reduce rainfall runoff. New marina projects must incorporate best
management practices in their design, including but not limited to
the following:
(a) Maximize pervious land surface and vegetative cover to
minimize stormwater runoff and to prevent polluted waters
from reaching adjacent waters and wetlands. Direct runoff
away from adjacent waters and wetlands to the extent feasible
by site grading or other methods.
(b) Treat runoff from parking lots, maintenance, fueling and
washdown areas in a manner that prevents oils, grease and
detergents from reaching adjacent waters and wetlands.
Accepted treatment methods include oil and grease filtering
catch basins, retention areas and exfiltration systems.
§ 450-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-18
1:779
(7) Alternative methods of meeting off-street parking requirements.
[Amended 2-22-2000 by L.L. No. 7-2000]
(a) The RF Riverfront Development Zoning District encourages a
mix of land uses, wherein the cumulative parking demand is
less than the sum of the peak demand values for each
individual land use. This makes it possible to share parking
without conflict and to avoid a large surplus of parking spaces
in the waterfront area. Also, because of the special nature and
value of land along the waterfront and because of the
anticipated mix of land uses, alternative parking solutions,
such as parking incorporated into buildings, valet parking, offsite
parking, etc., may, in certain situations, also be
appropriate.
(b) Village Board authority. The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall
be authorized to find that any portion of the off-street parking
requirements for a riverfront development has been satisfied
when the applicant establishes to the Board's satisfaction that
alternative parking solutions are appropriate and will provide
adequate parking for the RF District development project. If an
applicant wishes to use alternative parking methods, the
applicant must submit a complete analysis to the Village Board
for review. This analysis must include estimates of peak
parking demands for different land uses for different hours of
the day and days of the week. It shall also define strategies
intended to incorporate alternative parking methods and the
advantages of such strategies. The Mayor and Village Board of
Trustees shall consult with the Village of Sleepy Hollow
Parking Authority to gain its recommendations concerning
alternative methods of meeting off-street parking
requirements.
(c) Alternative parking methods. Acceptable alternative parking
methods include the following, and such other methods as the
Mayor and Village Board of Trustees deem appropriate, or any
combination thereof:
[1] Parking shared among various use elements within the
riverfront development project;
[2] Provision of parking off-site, in private or municipal lots,
where appropriate arrangements for such parking can be
made;
[3] Provision for parking to be incorporated within buildings;
and
[4] Valet parking.
(8) Off-street loading. Off-street loading shall be provided as the
Village Board may find appropriate and necessary.
§ 450-18 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-18
1:780
§ 450-19. Development incentives. [Amended 2-22-2000 by L.L. No.
7-2000]
M. On-site utilities and services. All development shall be served by public
water supply and sewage systems, provided that adequate capacity is
available.
(1) Underground lines. All on-site television, power and
communication lines, as well as on-site water, sewer and storm
drainage lines, shall be installed underground in the manner
prescribed by the regulations of the government agency or utility
company having jurisdiction. Any utility equipment which will
necessarily be located above ground shall be adequately screened
from view in an attractive manner.
(2) Approval of appropriate jurisdiction. All buildings within riverfront
development projects shall be served by water supply, sanitary
sewage and stormwater drainage systems as approved by the
appropriate government agency or agencies having jurisdiction
thereof. Stormwater drainage shall minimize siltation and nonpoint
source discharge of salted areas and any other pollutants. Best
management practices shall be required.
(3) Television hookups. Television hookups shall either be by cable
television or a central antenna system designed to minimize
adverse aesthetic impact.
(4) Refuse collection. The riverfront development project shall be
designed, and provision shall be made, for adequate means of
separation and storing of refuse and recyclables between
collections. Such storage systems shall be designed to minimize
adverse aesthetic impact and shall comply with all applicable
Village and county requirements.
(5) Cooling systems. Cooling systems shall be designed so as to
minimize adverse aesthetic impact.
(6) Placement of underground utilities. Where possible, all utilities
required to be placed underground shall be placed within the
rights-of-way, and all possible steps shall be taken to avoid
placement of utilities under the pavement in order to assure ease of
future maintenance.
N. Floodplain requirements. The riverfront development project plans
shall comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter 220, Flood
Damage Prevention, of the Village Code.
A. Purposes. It is recognized that the Riverfront Development Zoning
District encompasses a unique resource within the Village of Sleepy
Hollow, containing both a significant opportunity for achievement of
public amenities and a major potential for water-related development.
To provide an incentive which will further encourage the most
§ 450-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-19
1:781
appropriate use and development of the Village's waterfront in a
manner designed to achieve adopted planning objectives and to further
the policies and purposes of the Village's Local Waterfront
Revitalization Program, the Village of Sleepy Hollow may allow, only by
application for a special permit and following a public hearing held on
notice duly given in the same manner as required by law for zoning
amendments, an increased building bulk (i.e., floor area ratio and/or
building height), as set forth in Subsection B(3) below, upon acceptance
of an incentive package under the guidelines set forth in Subsection
B(1) and (2) below. Such public hearing shall be held by the Village
Board. A decision on whether or not to accept or reject an offer for a
development incentive shall be made by the Mayor and Village Board of
Trustees following such public hearing. Village Board approval shall be
in a form acceptable to the Sleepy Hollow Village Attorney.
B. The incentive features and the general guidelines for Mayor and Village
Board of Trustees consideration and action are described as follows:
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(1) The specific public benefit feature for which an incentive bulk
increase is being sought must be closely associated with the impact
of the development and, to the extent possible, adjacent to or near
the project site. Further, the Mayor and Village Board of Trustees
shall make the decision on whether to accept any particular
incentive feature being proposed and shall have the authority to
impose any and all conditions on the acceptance of the incentive
feature as deemed appropriate and in the best interest of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow. The specific public benefit features for
which incentive bulk increases may be granted include the
provision of funds, services or goods toward the following
objectives:
(a) For all uses other than a riverfront development project (in
which case a broad array of uses are permitted in exchange for
the provision of access along and to the Hudson River
shoreline), provision of improved public access to persons
other than occupants of the project, to waterfront properties
along the water's edge, including pedestrian walkways, open
space areas and promenades which are all designed to form a
continuous public right-of-way through the entire RF
Riverfront Development Zoning District. Where public access
is provided, the following guidelines shall be used: Access
should be in the form of a permanent easement or the granting
of fee title ownership to the Village of Sleepy Hollow. The
access shall be at least 15 feet wide from the street to the
shoreline and at least 20 feet wide along the shoreline for the
entire width of the property in the RF Riverfront Development
Zoning District. A surface or material suitable for pedestrian
use at least 10 feet wide shall be provided for the entire length
§ 450-19 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-19
1:782
of the access element and to a standard approved by the
Sleepy Hollow Village Engineer.
(b) New construction or restoration of deteriorated bulkheading,
rip-rap or other forms of shoreline erosion protection, not
associated with the project being proposed, where the need is
identified by the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
(c) Rehabilitation of the Old Pedestrian Bridge over the railroad
tracks connecting Kingsland Point Park with Devries Field.
(d) Provision of improvements to Devries Field, Barnhart Park and
the Village riverfront property along River Street, as identified
by the Village.
(e) Provision of improvements, including streetlighting, plantings
and reconstruction.
(f) Provision of public fishing areas with fully equipped fishcleaning
stations.
(2) Funds may be provided by the applicant to a Riverfront Trust Fund.
The Riverfront Trust Fund shall be administered by the Village of
Sleepy Hollow. This trust fund shall be restricted to the use of such
funds only for the specific purpose for which they are provided, for
one or more of the following:
(a) Improvements to Devries Field, Barnhart Park and the Village
riverfront property along River Street, as identified by the
Village.
(b) National Register of Historic Places nomination work for
properties within the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
(c) Rehabilitation of the Old Pedestrian Bridge over the railroad
tracks connecting Kingsland Point Park with Devries Field.
(d) Streetscape/Landscape improvements in the form of
streetlighting, plantings, sidewalk improvements, benches and
other similar streetscape/landscape amenities for the Village's
downtown commercial/residential areas.
(e) Construction of facilities associated with a riverfront
aquarium, museum or similar facility.
(f) Construction of erosion control structures, such as
bulkheading and rip-rap along the Hudson River shoreline, as
needed.
(g) Maintenance and enhancement of existing public properties,
including public access easements.
(h) Improvements to the "inner village area" (namely census tract
116), which area has been found to have acute needs.
§ 450-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-19
1:783
(3) In determining the specific amount of building bulk incentive
increase that may be granted, if any, the Mayor and Village Board
of Trustees, in each case, shall take into consideration the
following:
(a) The maximum floor area ratio and/or building height increase
shall not exceed 10% as compared to that otherwise permitted
in the Riverfront Development Zoning District.
(b) Consideration shall be given to the number, extent and
combination of incentive features to be provided.
(c) The need for such incentive features in the Village at the time
of the application.
(d) The degree of compatibility of such incentive features with the
neighborhood in which they are located, taking into
consideration the potential effects of noise, traffic, fumes,
vibrations or other such characteristics on surrounding streets
and properties; the visual impact of the resultant building bulk
increase and/or incentive feature applied for and the impact of
the proposed development upon access to light, air and vistas
known to be important to the Village.
(e) The quality of design of the proposed development as
determined by the Mayor and Village Board of Trustees in
accordance with its review under the provisions of the RF
Riverfront Development Zoning District. In considering the
quality of design of projects, the Village Board will include
consideration of the following factors:
[1] The quality and extent of view from the adjacent streets
through the property to the Hudson River.
[2] The design and relationship of the development to the
waterfront as viewed from the water.
[3] The design and function of any public access easement or
other access provided to the shoreline, including new
bulkheading or docking facilities.
(f) To assist the Mayor and Village Board of Trustees in
determining the appropriate amount of building bulk increase,
if any, to grant as an incentive for the applicant's provision of
the proposed public benefit feature(s), the applicant shall
submit an estimate of the cost of providing the proposed
feature(s) and the value of the building bulk increase
requested. The Mayor and Village Board of Trustees may also
engage its own independent experts to either separately
prepare such analysis or to review those prepared by the
applicant. The reasonable cost of such expert assistance shall
be reimbursed to the Village by the applicant.
§ 450-19 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-19
1:784
§ 450-20. Height and setback restrictions.
(g) No incentive building bulk increase will be granted for
construction of any improvement or provision of funds to the
Village Riverfront Trust Fund which would otherwise be
provided or required by any law other than a local law enacted
by the Village subsequent to the enactment of these
regulations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that a
law which is other than a local law requires a public
improvement or provision for funds to any public trust fund
which the Board of Trustees, in its sole discretion, determines
makes a substantial negative impact on a development such
that the financial feasibility of the project becomes seriously
compromised, then an incentive building bulk increase will be
granted for the construction of any improvement or provision
of funds to such public trust fund.
(h) In addition to the foregoing guidelines, the Mayor and Village
Board of Trustees may take into account other considerations
bearing upon the purposes and objectives of any building bulk
increase being sought.
A. Building height and setback for land area south of Beekman Avenue.
[For purposes hereof, the definition of "Beekman Avenue" shall be the
center line of Beekman Avenue extended in a westerly direction from its
intersection with the railroad right-of-way to the Hudson River
shoreline (mean high tide).]
(1) No portion of a building or structure shall be erected within 25 feet
of the Hudson River except for a marina building, marine fuel
service building or dock, a marina service building, requiring direct
connection to the waterfront to service boats or other similar
water-dependent uses as listed in §§ 450-10 and 450-11A. Such
buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
(2) Beyond 25 feet from the Hudson River, no portion of a building or
structure shall be erected to a height in excess of 35 feet. For
buildings with structural parking provided within the building,
building height may be increased to a height of 42 feet above
grade.
B. Building height and setback for land area north of Beekman Avenue.
[For purposes hereof, the definition of "Beekman Avenue" shall be the
center line of Beekman Avenue extended in a westerly direction from its
intersection with the railroad right-of-way to the Hudson River
shoreline (mean high tide).]
(1) No portion of a building or structure shall be erected within 25 feet
of the Hudson River except for a marina building, marine fuel
service building or dock, a marina service building requiring direct
connection to the waterfront to service boats or other similar
§ 450-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-20
1:785
§ 450-21. General development requirements. [Amended 2-22-2000
by L.L. No. 7-2000]
The following shall be general development requirements in the RF
District:1
Type Requirement
Minimum lot size 20 acres2
Maximum building coverage of gross
development area
35%
Maximum floor area ratio3 (of gross development
area, including residential and other uses)
0.8
Maximum impervious surface coverage of gross
development area
70%
water-dependent uses as listed in §§ 450-10 and 450-11A. Such
buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
(2) No portion of a building or structure shall be erected from 25 feet
to 100 feet of the Hudson River except for a marina building
requiring direct connection to the waterfront to service boats or
other similar water-dependent uses as listed in §§ 450-10 and
450-11A. Such building shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
(3) No portion of a building or structure shall be erected to a height in
excess of 45 feet from 100 feet to 200 feet of the Hudson River.
(4) No portion of a building or structure shall be erected to a height in
excess of 65 feet from 200 feet of the Hudson River to 300 feet west
of the west side of the Metro-North Railroad property.
(5) No portion of a building or structure shall be erected to a height in
excess of 42 feet between the west side of the Metro-North
Railroad property and 300 feet west of the same.
(6) No portion of a building or structure shall be erected to a height in
excess of 65 feet to the east of the east side of the Metro-North
Railroad property.
(7) With respect to the areas to which Subsection B(4) and (6)
immediately above apply, and notwithstanding the provision of said
subsections, the Mayor and Village Board of Trustees, during the
concept plan review process, may grant an increase in building
length in excess of 65 feet where said Board finds that such
increase would be consistent with the intent and purposes of the
Village's Local Waterfront Revitalization Program and would not
result in adverse impacts to view corridors, nearby landmarks or
adjacent land uses. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 450-20 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-21
1:786
Type Requirement
Maximum height 35 feet (except as
provided in § 450-20)4
Minimum gross development area per dwelling
unit
2,200 square feet5
Minimum frontage on public right-of-way 100 feet
Minimum perimeter buffer 75 feet6
Minimum open space7 of gross development area 15%
NOTES:
1 A lot or parcel situated in the RF District existing prior to the date of
the adoption of these sections and which does not meet the general
development requirements set forth in this section shall be subject
to the general development requirements established by the Mayor
and Village Board of Trustees. As part of its review, the Mayor and
Village Board of Trustees shall consider the proposed application and
its appropriateness and compatibility with surrounding land uses and
neighborhood character.
2 The owner of less than 20 acres of gross development area within
the RF Riverfront Development Zoning District may apply for approval
of a riverfront development project as part of the overall riverfront
development where such land is adjacent to a proposed, approved or
constructed riverfront development project. Similarly, the owner of an
RF Riverfront Development Zoning District acreage which adjoins such
adjacent land may also apply for approval of a riverfront development
project as part of the overall riverfront development. The minimum lot
size of 20 acres does not apply to riverfront development projects, but
rather applies to the other permitted principal uses and special permit
uses.
3 When a FAR applies to construction within this district, the area devoted
to structured parking within a building shall not be regarded as
contributing to total floor area.
4 Building height shall be measured from the final grade. All habitable
stories must be elevated above the one-hundred-year floodplain level.
The area below the elevated first habitable story of the building may,
but need not, be used for parking.
5 This shall be calculated by dividing the gross development area by
the number of residential dwelling units in the particular waterfront
development project.
6 Such buffer area shall not apply to areas along Beekman Avenue, River
Street and the Hudson River and shall be vegetated and/or landscaped
to the satisfaction of the Planning Board, except for permanent
entrances/exits, signage and, where deemed necessary, utilities.
§ 450-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-21
1:787
NOTES:
7 Open space shall be exclusive of all areas devoted to perimeter buffer,
buildings, parking, streets, utilities and wetland/watercourse areas (but
not wetland or watercourse buffers) as defined by Chapter 418,
Wetlands and Watercourses, of the Village Code.
§ 450-21 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-21
1:788
ARTICLE V
Southern Riverfront Overlay District
[Added 12-22-2009 by L.L. No. 9-2009]
§ 450-22. Findings and purpose.
Within the Village of Sleepy Hollow Riverfront Development District there
exist parcels which are generally less than two acres in size, that if
appropriately redeveloped would advance the purposes of the RF Riverfront
Development District. The RF Riverfront Development District generally
contemplates minimum lot sizes of 20 acres for redevelopment purposes
and allows for smaller parcels adjacent to a riverfront project to apply
for a riverfront development project. The development of Horans Landing
Park effectively separates the southernmost parcels west of River Street
from the redevelopment activity to the north. The parcels located between
River Street to the west and Hudson Street to the east are generally
less than two acres in lot area (with most lots much less than one acre
in area). Recognizing the purpose of the RF District and public purpose
served by Horans Landing, which is zoned P Parks, a Southern Riverfront
Overlay District (SRF District) will address the redevelopment challenges of
the remaining parcels along the Village's southern waterfront area, while
adhering to the purpose of the RF District. Within the SRF Overlay District,
the authority, purpose, definitions, permitted principal uses and accessory
uses, special permit uses and application fees remain the same as the
underlying zoning (§§ 450-7, 450-8, 450-9, 450-10 and 450-11A). The
proposed overlay district promotes and is not inconsistent with the policies
set forth in the Village of Sleepy Hollow Local Waterfront Revitalization
Program.
§ 450-23. Location.
The boundary of the SRF Overlay District is west of the center line of
Hudson Street from the Tarrytown municipal boundary, north to the
southernmost property line of the General Motors redevelopment site
southern parcel (Lot 933, Section 16-2-4) crossing River Street to include
Horans Landing and parcels south of this municipal park to the Tarrytown
municipal boundary to the south and the Hudson River to the west.
§ 450-24. Applicable regulations.
All riverfront development projects, with or without frontage on the Hudson
River, in the SRF Overlay District shall comply with the regulations set
forth in the underlying zoning unless otherwise regulated herein. All special
permit uses shall require the issuance of a special permit by the Village
Board of Trustees.
§ 450-25. Procedure for submission and review of special permit
uses.
§ 450-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-25
1:789
§ 450-26. Review and approval process.
A. Each special permit use, including riverfront development project
proposals, shall require the following two sequential review and
approval phases:
(1) Phase I: special permit and southern riverfront area development
concept plan approval by the Village Board of Trustees; and
(2) Phase II: site plan approval and subdivision approval as
appropriate by the Village Planning Board as described in § 450-16.
B. Village Board of Trustees review of special permit and southern
riverfront area development shall also include the review of a southern
riverfront development concept plan which contains all information
described in §§ 450-13B and 450-15.
A. Board of Trustees review of special permit and southern riverfront
development concept plan application.
(1) Environmental compliance. The approval of a special permit for a
southern riverfront development project is an action under the
State Environmental Quality Review (SEQR) process, and
proceedings to such project shall comply with the applicable
requirements of SEQR.
(2) Upon receipt of an application for a special permit and southern
riverfront development concept plan, the Village Board of Trustees
shall commence a coordinated review under SEQR and institute
lead agency procedures after identifying all involved and interested
agencies, as provided by law.
(3) At a minimum, an environmental assessment form (EAF) and
supplemental studies, as may be required, shall be submitted to the
Village Board for its consideration in making a determination of
significance.
B. Village Board of Trustees referrals. The Village Board of Trustees shall
comply with the applicable provisions of General Municipal Law
§§ 239-1 and 239-m. Where the Village Board of Trustees is serving as
lead agency under SEQR, it may refer the application to any other
Village board, department, organization, consultant or professional it
deems appropriate, in addition to any referrals and circulation which
may be required by law.
C. Village Board of Trustees public hearing. The Village Board of Trustees
shall hold at least one public hearing, with the same notice required by
law for zoning amendments, on the application for a special permit and
concept plan in the Southern Riverfront Development Overlay District.
Where the Village Board of Trustees is serving as lead agency under
SEQR and determines to hold a SEQR hearing, the SEQR hearing shall
be conducted jointly with the public hearing, if practical.
§ 450-25 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-26
1:790
§ 450-27. Design standards.
Southern Riverfront Development concept plans shall meet the design
standards set forth in § 450-18.
§ 450-28. Application fees.
Phase I application fees to the Village Board of Trustees and Phase II
application fees to the Planning Board shall be set as described in § 450-14.
D. Village Board of Trustees decision on special permit and southern
riverfront development concept plan.
(1) Concept plan approval process. Prior to granting any special permit
for a riverfront development project in the SRF Overlay District,
the Village Board of Trustees shall review a riverfront development
concept plan which contains a proposed designation of appropriate
land uses or a range of land uses for the overall development of the
area with the SRF Overlay District. The Village Board of Trustees
shall render a decision on the application for riverfront
development concept plan approvals and for a special permit after
it has held the required public hearing, completed the SEQR
process and made the requisite SEQR declarations and made the
consistency determination as required under Chapter 414,
Waterfront Consistency Review, of the Village Code.
(2) Concept plan approval. The Village Board of Trustees shall approve
the concept plan upon finding that it:
(a) Will substantially fulfill the purposes of the Southern
Riverfront Development Overlay District and the underlying
zoning;
(b) Will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly
development of the Village's waterfront areas; and
(c) Will not be inconsistent with the policies and purposes of the
Village's Local Waterfront Revitalization Program.
(3) Special permit approval. The Village Board of Trustees may
authorize the issuance of a special permit for a southern riverfront
development project or special use project, provided that it meets
the conditions and standards set forth in § 450-15E(3)(a) through
(g).
E. Conditions. In approving any southern riverfront development concept
plan and special permit, the Village Board of Trustees may attach such
conditions, safeguards and mitigation measures as it deems necessary
or appropriate to assure continual conformance to all applicable
standards and requirements to fulfill the intent and purposes of the SRF
Overlay District and underlying zoning.
§ 450-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-29
1:791
§ 450-29. Time periods for concept plan and special permit
approval.
The approval of a southern riverfront development concept plan or special
permit shall remain valid for a time period specified by the Village Board of
Trustees. In addition, at the time of approving a special permit, the Village
Board of Trustees may set forth the time period in which construction
is to begin and be completed. The Village Board of Trustees may, at its
discretion, extend any time period it has previously set where it finds that
changing market conditions or other circumstances have acted to prevent
the timely commencement or completion of work and that the developer has
proceeded with reasonable diligence in an effort to assure completion of the
work within the permitted time period. The extension of these time periods
shall not require the holding of a new public hearing.
§ 450-30. Revisions to concept plan and special permit.
After approval of a southern riverfront development concept plan or special
permit, any proposed revisions shall be submitted to the Village Board of
Trustees. The Village Board of Trustees, in its discretion, shall determine
the appropriate procedures for consideration of the proposed revisions and
whether such revision is material enough to require further environmental
analysis, further project review and/or further hearings, as it may deem
appropriate.
§ 450-31. Site plan approval.
After approval of the riverfront development plan and special permit, the
Village Planning Board may grant site plan approval consistent with
§§ 450-15F and 450-16B.
§ 450-32. Height and setback regulations.
A. No portion of a building or structure shall be erected within 25 feet of
the Hudson River except for a marina building, marine fuel service
building or dock, a marina service building requiring direct connection
to the waterfront to service boats, or other similar water-dependent
uses as listed in §§ 450-10 and 450-11A. Such buildings shall not exceed
15 feet in height and shall be designed to complement surrounding
structures and the waterfront as a whole.
B. Beyond 25 feet from the Hudson River, no principal building shall
exceed 42 feet in height. The height shall be calculated as the vertical
distance measured at each point along the base of the building from the
finished grade at that point to the highest point of a flat roof directly
above or to the midpoint of a pitched roof directly above. Any proposal
that exceeds the above-referenced height up to a height not to exceed
65 feet must apply to the Mayor and Board of Trustees for a special
permit. The Mayor and Board of Trustees will take into account the
compatibility of the proposed increase in building height with the
surrounding residential neighborhood. In consideration for granting
§ 450-29 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-32
1:792
§ 450-33. General development guidelines.
Recognizing that flexibility in design may encourage development that
enhances the Village's waterfront and promotes the LWRP, the following
are established as guidelines that can be modified by the Village Board of
Trustees as set forth in the following table to promote development of the
waterfront that best reflects the Village's goals and vision:
Type Requirement
Minimum lot size 1 acre
Maximum building coverage of gross
development area
35%
Maximum floor area ratio1 (of gross development
area, including residential and all other uses)
(FAR)
0.85
Maximum impervious surface coverage of gross
development area
70%
Maximum height 42 feet2
Minimum gross development area per dwelling
unit
2,200 square feet3, 6
Minimum frontage on a public right-of-way 100 feet
Minimum open space of gross development area4 15%
the special permit, the Village Board may take into account the
requirements of § 450-19A, B(1) and (2), and (3)(b) through (h). In
addition to § 450-19B(3)(b) through (h) described above, the following
may also be considered by the Board of Trustees: conversion of an
active, substantial, nonconforming and/or industrial use to a use that
conforms with the objectives and requirements of the SRF District;
installation of street improvements, curbs, sidewalks, decorative
streetlights, landscaping and other street amenities along River Street
and/or Hudson Street; dedication of a pier in a condition suitable for
public use; creation of public/private boat slips proximate to Horan's
Landing; stabilization of the Hudson River waterfront; enhanced
pedestrian access from River Street to the public walkway along the
Hudson River; use of construction methods and materials consistent
with maximizing energy conservation and sustainability. Any applicant
seeking to increase the height of structures beyond that permitted by
the underlying zoning must provide appropriate drawings, renderings
and cross sections for review and consideration.
§ 450-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-33
1:793
NOTES:
1 When a FAR applies to construction within this district, the area
devoted to structured parking within a building shall not be regarded
as contributing to total floor area.
2 Building height shall be calculated as the vertical distance measured
at each point along the base of the building from the finished grade
at that point to the highest point of a flat roof directly above or to the
midpoint of a pitched roof directly above. All habitable stories must be
elevated at a minimum one foot above the one-hundred-year floodplain
level. The area below the elevated habitable story of the building may,
but need not be used for parking. Pursuant to § 450-32B, any proposal
that exceeds 42 feet must apply to the Mayor and Board of Trustees for
a special permit.
3 This shall be calculated by dividing the gross development area by
the number of residential dwelling units in the particular southern
waterfront development project.
4 Open space shall be exclusive of all gross area devoted to buildings,
parking, streets, utilities and wetland/watercourse areas (but not
wetland/watercourse buffers) as defined by Chapter 418, Wetlands and
Watercourses, of the Village Code.
5 Any request for an increase in FAR, not to exceed an FAR of 1.5,
shall require the issuance of a special permit by the Village Board of
Trustees consistent with § 450-19A, B(1) and (2), and (3)(b) through
(h). In addition to § 450-19B(3)(b) through (h) described above, the
following may also be considered by the Board of Trustees: conversion
of an active, substantial, nonconforming and/or industrial use to a use
that conforms with the objectives and requirements of the SRF District;
installation of street improvements, curbs, sidewalks, decorative
streetlights, landscaping and other street amenities along River Street
and/or Hudson Street; dedication of a pier in a condition suitable for
public use; creation of public/private boat slips proximate to Horan's
Landing; stabilization of the Hudson River waterfront; enhanced
pedestrian access from River Street to the public walkway along the
Hudson River; use of construction methods and materials consistent
with maximizing energy conservation and sustainability.
§ 450-33 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-33
1:794
NOTES:
6 Any request for an increase in minimum gross development area per
dwelling unit, not to exceed 1,000 square feet, shall require the
issuance of a special permit by the Village Board of Trustees consistent
with § 450-19A, B(1) and (2), and (3)(b) through (h). In addition to
§ 450-19B(3)(b) through (h) described above, the following may also
be considered by the Board of Trustees: conversion of an active,
substantial, nonconforming and/or industrial use to a use that conforms
with the objectives and requirements of the SRF District; installation
of street improvements, curbs, sidewalks, decorative streetlights,
landscaping and other street amenities along River Street and/or
Hudson Street; dedication of a pier in a condition suitable for public
use; creation of public/private boat slips proximate to Horan's Landing;
stabilization of the Hudson River waterfront; enhanced pedestrian
access from River Street to the public walkway along the Hudson River;
use of construction methods and materials consistent with maximizing
energy conservation and sustainability.
§ 450-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-33
1:795

ARTICLE VI
Regulations
§ 450-34. Applicability of regulations.
§ 450-35. Schedule of Regulations.
The regulations applying to the use of buildings and land, the bulk and
arrangement of buildings, the area of lots, the open spaces or yards to
be preserved and the provisions for off-street parking are set forth in the
attached Schedule of Regulations, included at the end of this chapter. Such
schedule is an integral part of this chapter and may be amended in the same
manner as any other part of this chapter.
A. The regulations set forth in this chapter for each district shall be
minimum regulations which shall apply uniformly to each class of
structure or land within the district, except as hereinafter provided.
B. No building shall hereafter be erected and no existing building shall be
moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land or building or
portion of a building be used, designed or arranged to be used for any
purpose unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified
for the district in which it is located.
C. Every principal building shall be located on a lot as defined in this
chapter. Except for planned development groups complying with all the
regulations applying thereto as prescribed by this chapter, no more
than one principal residential building and its accessory buildings shall
hereafter be erected on any one lot.
§ 450-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-35
1:797

ARTICLE VII
Supplementary Regulations
§ 450-36. General.
The regulations set forth in the Schedule of Regulations (§ 450-34B above)
shall be deemed to be supplemented or modified by the regulations and
provisions of this section, in the same manner as if they were set forth in
full in said schedule.
A. Access to streets. In order that buildings hereafter erected shall be
located with reference to an orderly system of streets giving access
thereto, no permit shall be issued for the erection of a building on any
lot unless such lot abuts either an existing public street, a street shown
on a recorded subdivision plat; or a street delineated in the Master Plan
of the Village, and unless such street has been improved to the
satisfaction of the Building Inspector in a manner adequate to provide
such vehicular access to the building as may be appropriate to the use
and the circumstances of the location, considering, among other things,
safety of access and access of fire-fighting equipment.
B. Drainage of lots. No building shall be erected on any land and no
change shall be made in the existing contours of any land, including any
change in the course, width or elevation of any natural or other
drainage channel, in any manner that will obstruct, interfere with or
change the drainage of such land, taking into account land development
that may take place in the vicinity under the provisions of this chapter,
without providing adequate drainage in connection therewith.
C. Buffer area. A buffer area shall be provided on every lot in a C-1 or C-2
District that abuts a residence district and as specified in connection
with certain other uses. This buffer strip shall extend along all side and
rear lines abutting residence district properties, but shall not be
required in any front yard. This buffer strip shall more particularly be
provided and maintained as follows: [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
(1) The width of the buffer strip shall be five feet.
(2) This strip shall be in addition to any side or rear yard
measurements.
(3) This strip shall contain no sidewalks, driveways, parking areas,
drying yards, trash stations, playgrounds or construction of any
sort.
(4) A five-foot-high solid fence shall be erected on the inner edge of the
strip; the buffer strip shall be landscaped with shrubs, trees and
lawns so arranged and grouped as to screen all service and activity
areas. The fence and planting will be subject to approval by the
Planning Board in a site plan which will be submitted.
§ 450-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-36
1:799
(5) This strip shall be maintained as a landscaped area and kept free of
storage, litter, etc., at all times.
D. Floor area regulations. The distinctive character of the different
residential neighborhoods in the Village of Sleepy Hollow is based on
the diversity in the style and design of homes as well as the general
uniformity in the scale of homes located on similarly sized lots in the
different neighborhoods throughout the community. The potential for
tearing down existing homes and replacing them with substantially
larger homes or building large additions to existing homes threatens
the appearance of the Village of Sleepy Hollow and has potentially
adverse impacts upon the health, safety, welfare and quality of life for
its residents. [Added 10-18-2002 by L.L. No. 12-2002]
(1) The maximum floor area ratios (FAR) for houses in one-family
residential districts (R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-4 and R-4A or any
subsequently created one-family districts) shall be as follows:
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Table 450-36D(1)
Illustrative Table of Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
Lot Size
(square feet) FAR
Maximum Building Site
(square feet)
Less than 80,000 0.125 10,000
70,000 0.13 9,100
60,000 0.135 8,100
50,000 0.14 7,000
43,560 0.15 6,534
30,000 0.19 5,700
20,000 0.25 5,000
15,000 0.27 4,050
10,000 0.38 3,800
5,000 0.46 2,300
4,000 0.48 1,920
3,000 0.50 1,500
(2) For lot sizes that fall between those illustrated in the "Lot Size"
column of Table 450-36D(1), sizes shall be proportionately
interpolated.
E. Special permit for land consolidation and development in residential
districts. In all residential districts, a special permit shall be required
when two or more building lots are combined for the purpose of
constructing a residential building or buildings. [Added 10-18-2002
by L.L. No. 12-2002]
§ 450-36 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-36
1:800
§ 450-37. Uses not permitted as accessory uses. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
The following uses are not permitted as accessory uses:
§ 450-38. Height exceptions. [Amended 11-2-1998 by L.L. No.
11-1998]
The height provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the erection of
church spires, belfries, towers designed exclusively for ornamental
purposes; flagstaffs, chimneys, flues or gas holders, standpipes, stage
towers or scenery lofts. The height provisions of this chapter shall,
moreover, not apply to bulkheads, elevator enclosures or water tanks
occupying in the aggregate less than 10% of the area of the roof on which
they are located, and provided further that no such exception shall be used:
(1) Special permit approval. The Planning Board may authorize the
issuance of a special permit for the merging of one or more lots in a
residential district for the purpose of constructing a residential
building(s), after a public hearing, and provided that it shall find
that the following conditions and standards have been met:
(a) The proposed building shall relate to the surrounding
neighborhood by way of a quality of building and overall site
design that will enhance and protect the character and
property values of the adjacent neighborhood. In assessing the
conformity of the proposal with these conditions and
standards, the Planning Board shall evaluate bulk, dimensions,
materials, location on the site and in relation to development
on adjoining properties, the natural terrain and vegetation,
where applicable.
(b) The proposed building shall not have a striking dissimilarity,
visual discord or inappropriateness with respect to other
structures located or proposed to be located within the same
residential neighborhood.
(2) The Planning Board may, during the course of the special permit
review, seek input from other appropriate Village boards,
committees or agencies.
A. Advertising signs.
B. A fence or other structure deemed by the Building Inspector to be
designed solely to cause annoyance or damage to an adjoining property
owner, subsequent to the filing of a complaint.
C. A driveway or walk in a residence district, used for access to a
commercial or business use.
D. A junkyard.
§ 450-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-38
1:801
§ 450-39. Area.
§ 450-40. Coverage and open space.
A. For sleeping or housekeeping purposes.
B. For any commercial or business purposes other than such as may be
incidental to the permitted use of the main building. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. Reduction of required lot area or space. The area or dimensions of any
lot, yard, parking area or other space shall not be reduced to less than
the minimum required by this chapter.
B. Nonconforming lots. In any R District, only a single-family detached
dwelling may be erected on a nonconforming lot, provided that the
front, side and rear yards of any such lot shall comply with the normal
requirements for the district within which the lot is located.
A. Through lots. Where a lot extends from a street to an alley or another
street, the widest street shall be deemed the street upon which the
property fronts.
B. Front yards.
(1) Front yard requirements. No building shall be erected or shall be
reconstructed or altered so as to project in any way beyond the
average setback line observed by the buildings existing on the
same side of the street within the block at the time of the passage
of this chapter.
(2) Variance of front yard requirements. When a vacant lot is situated
between two improved lots, each having a principal building within
25 feet of any side lot line of such unimproved lot, the front yard
may be reduced to the greatest depth of the front yard of the such
adjoining improved lots, but shall not be less than 10 feet;
provided, however, that where any lot shall front on a right-of-way
which is proposed on the Official Map of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow to be widened, the front yard of such lot shall be as required
in the district where such lot is located and shall be measured from
such proposed future right-of-way.
(3) The space in a required front yard shall be open and unobstructed
except:
(a) An unroofed balcony or terrace, projecting not more than eight
feet.
(b) Steps giving access to a porch or first floor.
(4) Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed
except for retaining walls and for accessory buildings in a rear
yard.
§ 450-38 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-40
1:802
(5) Cornices and eaves shall not project more than 18 inches.
(6) Open or lattice enclosed fireproof fire escapes or stairways,
required by law, may project into a yard not more than four feet.
C. Variance of side yard width. Where a side lot line is irregular, the
average width of the side yard shall not be less than the required
minimum width, provided that such side yard shall not be narrower at
any point than 1/2 the required minimum width.
D. Corner lots.
(1) Side yard requirements of a corner lot. The side street setback line
of any corner lot plotted on the Village's tax maps, as the lot existed
at the time of adoption of this chapter, or any corner lot shown on
any subdivision plat which received final approval prior to the
adoption of this chapter, shall not be less than 1/2 of the depth of
the minimum front yard required on any adjoining lot; however, a
lot delineated by subdivision after the adoption of this chapter shall
provide a side street setback line which shall not be less than the
minimum front yard required on any adjoining lot fronting on a side
street. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(2) Visual obstruction of corner lots.
(a) On every corner lot in an R, C, CEM, P or PP District, there
shall be no obstruction to vision within a triangle formed by the
street lines of such lot and a line drawn between points on such
street lines at a distance of 10 feet from the point of
intersection thereof. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
(b) No wall or fence or other structure shall be erected to a height
in excess of three feet; and no vehicle, object or any other
obstruction of a height in excess of three feet shall be parked
or placed; and no hedge, shrub or other growth shall be
maintained at a height in excess of three feet, except that trees
whose branches are trimmed to a height of at least 10 feet
above curb level shall be permitted.
E. Location of accessory uses in residence districts.
(1) An accessory use or structure attached to a principal building shall
comply in all respects with the yard requirements for such principal
building.
(2) An accessory structure not attached to a principal building shall
comply with the following requirements:
(a) No accessory use shall be located in a required front yard.
(b) No accessory building or structure shall be located closer than
10 feet to a principal building.
§ 450-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-40
1:803
§ 450-41. Off-street parking and loading space.
(c) An accessory use or uses may occupy no more than 30% of the
area of a required rear yard, with a maximum permitted height
of 15 feet.
(d) The side of a rear yard for a detached accessory use shall be 1/
2 the required side yard for a principal building in the district
in which it is located, but in no case shall it be less than three
feet, unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
(e) On an interior lot that runs through a block and faces on two
streets, an accessory use in a rear yard shall conform to the
average setback of buildings on the two adjacent lots.
(f) On a corner lot, an accessory building or structure shall
observe the same requirements as a principal building, except
that when a rear lot line of a corner lot forms part of the side
lot line of an adjacent lot, an accessory use shall be located not
less than five feet from such lot line and shall observe the
setback line of the principal building on the adjacent lot.
F. Fences and walls. [Amended 7-8-1974]
(1) Except as otherwise provided, no wall or open or solid fence in
excess of three feet shall be erected in the front yard of any
residential district.
(2) Except as otherwise provided, no wall or open or solid fence in
excess of five feet in height shall be erected along the side yards
and rear yards in any residential district. In all side yards, the fivefoot
fence height shall be permitted, but not forward of a required
front yard.
(3) Except as otherwise provided, no wall or open or solid fence in
excess of six feet in height shall be erected in any business,
commercial, cemetery, park or public parking area. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(4) The Building Inspector shall be permitted to grant building permits
pertaining to fences and walls, solid and open, to the nearest
metric measurement of the fence-wall height in this chapter.
[Added 9-25-1978]
A. In all districts, in connection with every use therein, there shall be
provided, at the time any structure is erected, enlarged or increased in
capacity, off-street parking and loading space and access thereto in
accordance with the requirements set forth below: [Amended
8-16-1994 by L.L. No. 11-1994]
(1) The dimensions of stalls for all required off-street parking spaces
shall be not less than nine feet wide, measured at right angles to
§ 450-40 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-41
1:804
the direction of the stall, and 18 feet long, measured parallel to the
direction of the stall, except as provided in Subsection A(2) and (3).
Full-size parking stalls shall be striped using white traffic pavement
marking paint.
(2) Off-street loading spaces shall have a minimum area of 350 square
feet, exclusive of access roads, with a minimum width of 10 feet
and a clear height of 14 feet.
(3) Stalls may be provided for nontransient parking, for office use only,
when the total number of parking spaces required by zoning is in
excess of 20. Nontransient stalls may be 8 1/2 feet wide, measured
at right angles to the direction of the stall, and 18 feet long,
measured parallel to the direction of the stall. Nontransient spaces
shall be striped with white traffic pavement marking paint. When
incorporating a mix of transient and nontransient spaces, the
transient spaces shall be signed for visitors and the number of
nontransient spaces may not exceed 20% of the total number of
spaces required. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(4) Stalls may be provided for small-size cars, provided that a parking
layout provides for not less than 60% of spaces required under this
chapter for full-size parking. All additional parking may be for
small-size cars. Small car spaces shall be provided in continuous
bays and shall be not less than 7 1/2 feet wide, measured at right
angles to the direction of the stall, and 15 feet long, measured
parallel to the direction of the stall. The rear boundary of any small
car space shall be striped so as to define the exact limits for
parking. Small car spaces shall be striped with yellow traffic
pavement marking paint. Signing shall be placed in appropriate
locations throughout the facility indicating YELLOW PARKING
SPACES FOR COMPACT CARS ONLY. Cars using compact spaces
must not extend over pavement markings.
B. Location.
(1) General. Any off-street parking space and any off-street loading
space required by this chapter shall be provided on the same lot as
the use to which it is appurtenant, and shall comply with the
regulations for the location of accessory uses and structures as
described above.
(2) In R Districts. The required off-street parking space for more than
two vehicles may not be located in a required front yard. On a
corner lot, this restriction shall also apply to the space between the
side street right-of-way line and the side building line.
(3) In C Districts. Required off-street loading spaces may occupy all or
part of a required rear yard, except when abutting a residence
district, where a buffer strip is to be maintained as provided in
§ 450-36C.
§ 450-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-41
1:805
(4) Off-site parking in a commercial district. Where there are practical
difficulties in the way of the location of parking space or if the
public safety or the public convenience or both would be better
served by the location of such parking space other than on the
same lot with the use to which it is appurtenant, the Board of
Appeals, on specific application, may authorize such alternative
required parking space as will adequately serve the public interest,
subject to stated conditions, as described in § 450-53. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(5) Joint facilities for parking or loading. Off-street parking and loading
facilities for separate uses may be provided jointly if the total
number of spaces so provided is not less than 60% of the aggregate
total of the separate requirements for each use and provided that
all regulations governing the location of accessory spaces in
relating to the uses served are adhered to. No accessory parking or
loading spaces or portion thereof shall serve as a required space
for more than one use unless approved by the Board of Appeals in
accordance with the purposes and procedures set forth herein,
after submission of a site plan to the Planning Board as provided in
Article X.
C. Access.
(1) All off-street parking space and off-street loading space shall be
provided with safe and convenient access to a street. Access drives
or driveways shall not be less than 10 feet in width. If such space is
located contiguous to a street, the street side thereof shall be
curbed, and ingress and egress shall be provided only through
driveway openings through the curb not exceeding 25 feet in width
and located and constructed in accordance with specifications
prescribed by the Building Inspector.
(2) No access drive or driveway in any R District shall be used to
provide access to uses other than those permitted in such R
Districts.
D. Development and maintenance of parking and loading areas. Any public
or private parking or loading area for three or more vehicles, including
a commercial parking lot, shall be developed and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements. Plans for such areas shall
be reviewed by the Building Inspector to ensure compliance with these
regulations.
(1) Screening and landscaping. Off-street parking areas for three or
more vehicles and off-street loading areas shall be effectively
screened by a fence or hedge as provided in § 450-36C. The
screening shall be on the side or sides which adjoin or face
premises situated in any R District or institutional premises.
§ 450-41 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-41
1:806
(2) Minimum distances and setbacks. No off-street loading area or part
thereof for three or more vehicles shall be closer than 10 feet to
any dwelling, school, hospital or other institution for human care
located on an adjoining lot.
(3) Surfacing. Except as provided for the RF District in § 450-18L(6),
any off-street loading area and any off-street parking area for three
or more vehicles shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or portland
cement concrete pavement or similar durable dustless surface. All
areas shall be marked so as to provide for the orderly and safe
loading, parking and storage of motor vehicles. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(4) Lighting.
(a) Off-street parking facilities for residence structures containing
three or more families and off-street parking facilities for all
commercial and business uses shall be adequately lighted.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(b) Any equipment used to illuminate any off-street parking or
loading area shall be so arranged as to prevent light and glare
on adjoining premises.
(5) Drainage. Any off-street parking area and off-street loading area
shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water
without detriment to surrounding uses.
E. Required parking spaces. Except as provided for uses in the RF District
in § 450-18L above, the number of off-street parking spaces required
shall be as set forth in the following schedule: [Amended 12-1-1987
by L.L. No. 16-1987; 7-17-2001 by L.L. No. 10-2001; 1-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
Use Minimum Required Spaces
Auditoriums, houses of worship
and other places of assembly
1 for each 8 permanent seats or 1
for each 150 square feet of floor
area
Bowling alleys 2 for each alley
Commercial recreation facilities 1 for each 200 square feet of floor
area, or, where the facility contains
a basketball, volleyball or other
similar use, that portion shall be
required to provide 5 per court.
Where accessory uses exist, such
as locker rooms and administrative
offices, parking for that portion of
such facility dedicated to such uses
shall be calculated at 1 space per
400 square feet.
§ 450-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-41
1:807
Use Minimum Required Spaces
Community buildings, clubs,
social halls, lodges and fraternal
organizations, including boat,
swim and country clubs
1 for each 200 square feet of area
occupied by all principal uses or
structures
Hospitals 2 for each patient bed
Hotels, motels, tourist homes and
rooming houses
1 for each rentable unit
General commercial uses not
otherwise specified
1 for each 1,000 square feet of
floor area or 1 for each 2
employees on maximum shift,
whichever is greater
Nursing and convalescent homes 1 for each 2 beds
Continuing-care retirement
communities
See § 450-57F
Senior residence communities See § 450-58N
Office uses in commercial or
residential buildings
1 for each 300 square feet of floor
area
Residences, one- or two-family 1 for each dwelling unit
Residences, multifamily 1 per dwelling unit, plus 1/2 for
each bedroom or sleeping room
Restaurants, bars, diners and
other eating places
1 for each 5 seats
Retail shops and stores, including
group development
1 for each 200 square feet of floor
area
Schools:
Senior high 1 for each 10 students
accommodated
Junior high 1 for each 15 students
accommodated
Elementary 1 for each 20 students
accommodated
Nursery 1 for each 10 students
accommodated
Undertaking establishments 12 for each parlor or chapel
Wholesale establishments or
warehouses
1 for each 1,500 square feet of
floor area
F. Required loading spaces. The number of off-street loading spaces
required shall be as set forth in the following schedule. In the case of
any use not specifically mentioned herein, the Board of Appeals shall
determine the number of loading spaces required. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 450-41 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-41
1:808
§ 450-42. Signs. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Signs shall be regulated in accordance with Chapter 338, Signs, of the Code
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 450-43. Performance standards. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Use
Square Feet of Total
Floor Area or Other Unit
of Measurement
Required Off-
Street Loading
Berths
Schools For the first 15,000 square
feet
1
For each additional 20,000
square feet
1
Hospitals, in addition
to space for
ambulances
For each 50 beds 1
For each additional 75
beds or major fraction
thereof
1
Undertaking
establishments
For the first 5,000 square
feet
1
For each additional 10,000
square feet or major
fraction thereof
1
Offices, hotels, retail,
commercial, wholesale,
storage and
miscellaneous uses
Under 20,000 square feet 1
20,000 to 50,000 square
feet
2
More than 50,000 to
100,000 square feet
3
For each additional 50,000
square feet or major
fraction thereof
1
A. Fire and explosion hazards. All activities shall be carried on only in
buildings in conformance with the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, and shall be conducted in such a manner
and with such precautions against fire and explosion hazards as to
produce no explosion hazard to a use on an adjacent property. Safety
devices and fire-suppression equipment shall also conform to the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Construction Code.
Burning of waste material in open fires is prohibited.
§ 450-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-43
1:809
§ 450-44. Special use permit approval. [Added 1-28-1997 by L.L. No.
8-1997]
B. Atmospheric pollution. There shall be no emission of smoke, gas, dust,
fumes, fly ash or any other atmospheric pollutant which will
disseminate beyond the boundaries of the lot occupied by the sources.
C. Liquid or solid waste. There shall be no discharge of any kind of waste
into a reservoir or river. The discharge of untreated waste into a stream
or river is prohibited. All methods of industrial waste treatment shall be
approved by the county health agency. Effluent from treatment plants
shall at all times comply with the following standards:
(1) Maximum five-day biochemical oxygen demand: five parts per
million.
(2) Maximum quantity of effluent: 10% of minimum daily stream or
river flow.
(3) Maximum five-day biochemical oxygen demand after dilution (BOD
of effluent multiplied by quantity of effluent divided by quantity of
stream flow): 0:25 parts per million.
(4) Maximum phenol: 0:01 parts per million. No effluent shall contain
other acids, oils, dust, toxic metals, corrosive or other toxic
substance in solution or suspension which would create odors,
discoloration, poison or otherwise pollute the stream or river in any
way.
D. Vibration. There shall be no vibration which is discernible to the human
sense of feeling beyond the boundaries of the lot on which the source is
located.
E. Noise. There shall be no noise which will be audible to normal human
hearing beyond the boundaries of the lot on which the source is located
in violation of the restrictions set forth in Chapter 272, Noise, of the
Village Code.
F. Glare. There shall be no direct or sky-reflected glare exceeding 1 1/2
footcandles measured at the boundaries of the lot on which the source
is located. This regulation shall not apply to lights which are used solely
for the illumination of entrances or exits of driveways leading to a
parking lot.
G. Odors. There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous
matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable without
instruments at the property lines of the lot from which they are emitted.
H. Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. There shall be no emission of
dangerous radioactivity or electrical disturbance adversely affecting
the operation of any equipment other than that of the creator of such
disturbance. All applicable federal regulations shall be complied with.
§ 450-43 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-44
1:810
A. Special use permit approval by the Mayor and Board of Trustees for
certain uses within the RF Riverfront Development Zoning District. The
Village of Sleepy Hollow Mayor and Board of Trustees are hereby
authorized to review and approve applications for special use permits
for the specific uses for which a special use permit is required as
specified in the RF Riverfront Development Zoning District, Article IV of
this chapter. The procedures and standards for review of such special
uses are provided for in the RF Riverfront Development Zoning District,
Article IV of this chapter. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. The Village of Sleepy Hollow Planning Board is hereby authorized to
review and approve applications for special use permits for the
accessory uses as defined and regulated in Article VIII, § 450-56, of this
chapter. The procedures and standards for review of such special uses
are provided in Article VIII, § 450-56 herein. [Added 11-2-1998 by
L.L. No. 12-1998]
§ 450-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-44
1:811

ARTICLE VIII
Supplementary Regulations Applicable to Specific Uses
§ 450-45. Swimming pools.
§ 450-46. Limited retail and service uses.
A. Permits. A separate building permit and certificate of occupancy shall
be obtained for each swimming pool, whether of permanent or
temporary construction. A site plan shall be submitted for review by the
Planning Board under the provisions of § 450-66. Such site plan shall
show, among other things, the location of the pool, its relationship to
any residences on abutting properties, and provisions for drainage and
for required fencing.
B. Location. No swimming pool shall be constructed or erected within 25
feet of a side or rear lot line in an R-1 District, or within 10 feet of a side
or rear lot line in any other district in which permitted, nor within a
required front yard in any district.
C. Safety requirements. Every swimming pool shall be enclosed by a fence
or wall at least four feet high, with a gate or other device that can be
securely locked. Such fence or wall may enclose all or part of the lot on
which a pool is located, except the required front yard. Such fence, to
provide security, shall be solid or chain link type. Swimming pools shall
comply with all requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
A. Limited retail and service uses accessory to a church, hospital, school
or similar institution.
(1) Such uses shall be conducted solely for the convenience of patients,
students, resident staff or other inhabitants of such institution and
shall be clearly subordinate and incidental to the principal use.
(2) Such use shall be located entirely within the principal building or
an accessory structure and shall have no sign, display or other
external evidence of its existence visible from any lot line.
(3) Such uses shall be limited to the sale of newspapers, periodicals,
books, tobacco, drugs, cosmetics, flowers, candy, religious articles,
gifts and similar items; the furnishing of personal services such as
by laundries, dry cleaners, barbers, beauty shops and the like; and
the purveying of beverages and meals for consumption on the
premises. All of the above shall be as appropriate to the principal
use and may be sold over the counter or through vending machines.
B. Limited retail and service uses accessory to industrial operations.
§ 450-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-46
1:813
§ 450-47. Gasoline service stations.
§ 450-48. Sale of new or used automobiles.
(1) Such uses shall be conducted solely for the convenience of staff and
employees of an industrial activity in the absence of any existing
retail establishments on or within 200 feet of such site.
(2) Such uses shall be limited to sale over the counter or through
vending machines of food, beverages, candy, tobacco and similar
convenience items for consumption on the premises; and to
banking or check-cashing service.
A. Location. No portion of the property used for a gasoline service station
shall lie within 400 feet in a straight line of any lot or parcel that is used
for a public or private school, a public library, a museum, a civic center,
a hospital, a church or other place of worship, a public park or
playground, a fire station or another gasoline service station.
[Amended 2-15-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
B. Placement of equipment and storage tanks.
(1) All lifts, grease racks, mechanical washing apparatus and other
equipment for servicing automobiles shall be located and operated
within a building.
(2) Fuel storage tanks shall be located underground, not less than 25
feet from any street line and not less than 15 feet from any side or
rear lot line.
(3) Fuel pumps shall be located not less than 15 feet from a street line,
in such a manner that vehicles being serviced do not encroach upon
a public right-of-way.
C. Sewer connection. No floor or area drains of a gasoline service station
shall be connected to a public sanitary sewer, nor shall surface drainage
contaminated by petroleum products be permitted to drain into any
natural watercourse in the Village.
D. Site plan. A site plan and map showing the arrangement of equipment
and of drainage and the relationship to other public or quasi-public uses
shall be submitted to the Planning Board as provided in § 450-66.
A. Location. No portion of the property used for the sale of new or used
automobiles shall lie within 400 feet in a straight line of any lot or
parcel that is used for a public or private school, a public library, a
museum, a civic center, a hospital, a church or other place of worship, a
public park or playground, a fire station or another establishment for
the sale of new or used automobiles. [Amended 2-15-1994 by L.L.
No. 1-1994]
B. Development.
§ 450-46 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-48
1:814
§ 450-49. Restaurants, delicatessens, food service establishments,
taverns, bars and drinking establishments. [Added 7-18-1989 by
L.L. No. 12-1989]
No portion of the property used for a restaurant or food service
establishment or delicatessen or tavern or bar shall lie within 200 feet in
a straight line from any lot or parcel that is used for another restaurant or
food service establishment or delicatessen or tavern or bar.
§ 450-50. Motor vehicle repair shops. [Added 2-15-1994 by L.L. No.
1-1994]
No portion of the property used for a motor vehicle repair shop shall lie
within 400 feet in a straight line of any lot or parcel that is used for a public
or private school, a public library, a museum, a civic center, a hospital, a
church or other place of worship, a public park or playground, a fire station
or another motor vehicle repair shop.
§ 450-51. Mixed-use (commercial and residential) developments.
[Added 2-15-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
Dwelling units may be permitted on the upper (non-first-story) levels of
buildings in accordance with the following conditions:
(1) Any lot or parcel used for the sale of new or used automobiles shall
be paved with asphaltic concrete or other durable dustless surface
and shall be provided with a landscaped buffer strip at the side and
rear lot lines, as described in § 450-36C, and along the street line,
between any access and exit driveways.
(2) An on-site sales office shall be provided on every lot used for the
sale of new or used cars. Such sales office and any other activities
incidental to the operation of the use shall be housed in fixed
structures; the use of trailers for such purpose is expressly
prohibited.
C. Site plan. A site plan and map showing the arrangement of structures
and of drainage and the relationship to other public or quasi-public uses
shall be submitted to the Planning Board as provided in § 450-66.
A. Mixed-use developments shall only be permitted in buildings which
conform to the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code for the proposed mixed use.
B. The nonresidential use of a mixed-use building must be a permitted
principal use in the zoning district in which it is located.
C. The nonresidential use of a mixed-use building shall be limited to the
first story level.
D. The residential and nonresidential uses of the mixed-use building shall
have separate means of access (that is, the entrance/exit for the
§ 450-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-51
1:815
§ 450-52. Car washes. [Added 2-15-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
No portion of the property used for a car wash shall lie within 400 feet in a
straight line of any lot or parcel that is used for a public or private school, a
public library, a museum, a civic center, a hospital, a church or other place
of worship, a public park or playground, a fire station or another car wash.
§ 450-53. Off-site parking areas.
§ 450-54. Vehicular access to commercial uses. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
The following standards of design and location shall apply to the means
of vehicular ingress and egress pertaining to any lot or parcel used for
commercial purposes:
residential use shall not be through the nonresidential use of the
building and vice versa), except that the Planning Board may, at its
discretion, approve the use of a common lobby or plaza.
E. All utility, storage, service and parking areas on the site of the mixeduse
building shall be screened by means of landscaping and/or fencing
to the extent deemed necessary and practical by the Planning Board to
minimize the impact of these areas upon the residential use of the
building.
F. Mixed-use developments shall not be permitted where the
nonresidential use of the building includes manufacturing or where the
nonresidential use is automotive in nature.
A. Ownership of site. An off-site parking area, as described in
§ 450-41B(4), shall be located on land in the same ownership or
leasehold as that of the land on which is located the use to which it is
appurtenant.
B. Location. An off-site parking area shall be so located that its pedestrian
access shall be within 250 feet from the effective entrance to the use
which it serves.
C. Safety and neighborhood impact. An off-site parking area shall be
conveniently usable without causing hazard to pedestrians or to
vehicular traffic; traffic congestion, such as due to turning movements;
detriment to the appropriate use of other property in the immediate
vicinity; or detriment to any residential neighborhood.
D. Site plan. A site plan and map indicating the location of a proposed offsite
parking area, its relationship to the principal use to which it is
appurtenant and to public and quasi-public uses within 300 feet, and
provisions for signs, for drainage and for access shall be submitted to
the Planning Board as provided in § 450-66.
§ 450-51 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-54
1:816
§ 450-55. Adult entertainment use businesses. [Added 3-16-1994 by
L.L. No. 2-1994]
A. Width at the property line. Entrance and exit driveways shall be not less
than 15 feet nor more than 25 feet in width, measured along the street
line.
B. Location with respect to a side lot line. Entrance and exit driveways
shall be located not less than 15 feet from a side lot line, measured
along the street line.
C. Location with respect to intersecting streets. Entrance and exit
driveways shall be located not less than 25 feet from the corner of
intersection streets, measured along the street lines.
A. Purpose.
(1) In the development and execution of this section, it is recognized
that there are some uses which, because of their very nature, are
recognized as having serious objectionable operational
characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated
under certain circumstances, thereby having a deleterious effect
upon the use and enjoyment of adjacent areas. Special regulation of
these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not
contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding
neighborhood. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose
of preventing a concentration of these uses in any one area.
(2) The unrestrained proliferation of such businesses is inconsistent
with existing development and future plans for the Village of Sleepy
Hollow in that they often result in influences on the community
which increase the crime rate and undermine the economic, moral
and social welfare of the community. The deleterious effects of
these businesses change the economic, social and moral character
of the existing community and adversely affect existing businesses
and community and family life. As business activity drops off and
the quality of life deteriorates, merchants and families move away
from the area, leaving it in a vacant and depressed state.
(3) It is further declared that the location of these uses in regard to
areas where our youth may regularly assemble and the general
atmosphere encompassing their operation is of great concern to
the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
(4) Adult entertainment use businesses exhibit such characteristics.
Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these
adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading
of the surrounding neighborhoods or land uses. In order to prevent
the unrestricted proliferation of such businesses and to ensure that
those effects will not adversely affect the health, safety and
economic well-being of the community, the Village Board of
§ 450-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-55
1:817
Trustees of Sleepy Hollow finds it in the public interest to enact
these standards which regulate the placement, construction and/or
permitting of adult entertainment use businesses in the Village of
Sleepy Hollow.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following phrases and
words shall have the meanings assigned below, except in those
instances when the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment, whether retail or wholesale,
that has as a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines,
recordings, periodicals, films, videotapes/cassettes or other viewing
materials for sale or viewing on or off the premises which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to sexual activities or sexual anatomical areas.
For the purpose of this definition only, "substantial" shall mean
comprising an area that is 10% or more of the total floor area available
to patrons.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A public or private
establishment which presents topless or nude dancers, strippers, male
or female impersonators or exotic dancers or other similar
entertainments.[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE — Any use constituting an adult
bookstore, adult motion-picture theater, adult entertainment cabaret,
adult motel, massage establishment or peep show as those terms are
defined herein.
ADULT MOTEL — A motel which is open to the public generally but
excludes minors by reason of age or which makes available to its
patrons in their rooms films, slide shows or videotapes which, if
presented in a public movie theater, would be open to the public
generally but would exclude any minor by reason of age.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed or unenclosed
building, structure or any portion thereof used for presenting materials
distinguished or characterized by primary emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities or sexual
anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
BUSINESS — Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or
other entity, whether for-profit or not-for-profit.
MASSAGE — A method of treating the external parts of the human body
by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or vibrating with the hand or
any instrument.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed place
of business where massages are administered for pay, including but
not limited to massage parlors, sauna baths and steam baths. This
definition shall not be construed to include a hospital, nursing home,
medical clinic or the office of any health care practitioner duly licensed
by the State of New York, nor barber shops or beauty salons in which
§ 450-55 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-55
1:818
massages are administered only to the scalp, face, neck or shoulder(s).
This definition shall not include a volunteer fire department, a volunteer
rescue squad or a nonprofit organization operating a community center,
swimming pool, tennis court or other educational, cultural, recreational
or athletic facilities for the welfare of the residents of the area.
MASSAGE TECHNICIAN — Any individual who administers a massage
to another individual at a massage establishment. This definition shall
not include any health care practitioner duly licensed by the State of
New York.
PEEP SHOWS — A theater which presents materials distinguished or
characterized by primary emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to sexual activities or sexual anatomical areas, in the form of
live shows, films or videotapes, viewed from an individual enclosure, for
which a fee is charged.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, club,
association or legal representative, acting individually or jointly.
SCHOOL — Any facility, public or private, which offers classes or
provides other educational services for minors.
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any act of masturbation, fellatio,
sadomasochism, sexual intercourse or physical contact with a person's
clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or breasts.
C. No business or person shall construct, establish or be issued a
certificate of occupancy for any adult entertainment use business
within the Village of Sleepy Hollow unless such use meets the following
standards:
(1) No more than one adult entertainment use as defined above shall
be located on any individual lot.
(2) No adult entertainment use shall be established or permitted in any
building of which any part is used for residential purposes, or vice
versa, including nonconforming residential uses.
(3) No adult entertainment use shall be closer than 500 feet to any lot
line of any other lot on which there is another adult entertainment
use.
(4) No adult entertainment use shall be established on a lot, or a
portion thereof, that is closer than 500 feet to any residential
district or nonresidential district which permits a residential use.
(5) No adult entertainment use shall be established closer than 200
feet to the lot line of any church, community center, funeral home,
school, day-care center, hospital, alcoholism center or drug
treatment center, counseling or psychiatric treatment facility or
public park.
§ 450-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-55
1:819
§ 450-56. Wireless communications towers, antennas and satellite
dishes. [Added 11-2-1998 by L.L. No. 13-1998]
(6) No adult entertainment use shall be established unless the
provisions of this chapter related to parking requirements and the
provisions of Chapter 338, Signs, related to signage, and all other
applicable regulations of the Village of Sleepy Hollow have been
met. Where there is a conflict between the regulations as provided
in this section and any other law, rule or regulation, etc., of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow, the most restrictive law, rule or
regulation, etc., shall apply.77
A. Purpose and goals.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish general
guidelines for the siting of wireless communications towers and
antennas and satellite dishes.
(2) Goals.
(a) The goals of this section are:
[1] To establish clear standards for the siting of wireless
communications facilities, buildings and structures,
equipment, communications towers, antenna towers and
monopoles.
[2] To promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of Sleepy Hollow through the establishment of
minimum standards to reduce the adverse visual effect of
communications facilities, including, but not limited to,
transmission towers and antennas, through the use of
advanced technology, careful design, siting and screening
and buffering.
[3] To protect residential areas and land uses and property
values from potential adverse impacts of towers and
antennas.
[4] To encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them,
to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact
on the community is minimal.
[5] To require users of communications towers and antennas
to configure them in a way that minimizes adverse visual,
aesthetic and community character intrusion impacts
caused by the installation and view of communications
towers and antennas, through careful design, siting,
landscape screening and buffering, sufficient setbacks to
77.Editor's Note: Original Subsection (7), Nonconformity, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013.
§ 450-55 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-56
1:820
reduce visual impacts to adjacent property and innovative
camouflaging techniques such as alternative tower
structures, thereby protecting the physical appearance of
the community and preserving its scenic and natural
beauty.
[6] To enhance the ability of the providers of
telecommunications services to provide such services to
the community quickly, effectively and efficiently.
[7] To minimize the total number of communications facilities
and communications towers throughout the community.
[8] To encourage the joint use of new and existing
communications tower sites as a primary option rather
than construction of additional single-use communications
towers, while recognizing that collocation on higher
towers is not always preferable to two less visible, less
obtrusive shorter towers; thereby maximizing the use of
existing communications towers or alternative antenna
host sites; however not unreasonably limiting competition
among communications providers nor unreasonably
limiting reception of receive-only antennas.
[9] To assure the integrity and financial soundness of any
communications facility firm seeking to build a wireless
communications facility in the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
[10] To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from
tower failure through engineering and careful siting of
tower structures.
(b) In furtherance of these goals, the Village of Sleepy Hollow shall
give due consideration to the Village's Master Plan, Zoning
Map, existing land uses and environmentally sensitive areas in
approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers,
bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or
towers.
ANTENNA — A device that converts radio frequency electrical energy
to radiated electromagnetic energy and vice versa for television, radio,
data, imagery, telephone or other forms of telecommunications,
including receiving and transmitting antennas and satellite dish
antennas.
ANTENNA TOWER — A tower supported by guy wires or a freestanding
lattice-type antenna support structure.
§ 450-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-56
1:821
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's tower/cell
sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices and/or longdistance
providers or the public switched telephone network.
COLLOCATION — The siting and/or mounting of multiple
communications facilities used by the same provider, or by two or more
competing providers, on the same property and/or antenna support
structure or communications tower.
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Any site containing a
communications tower, associated buildings, structures and equipment;
and/or receiving and/or transmitting antenna, and monopoles, but
excluding a satellite dish antenna less than one meter in maximum
diameter in a residential district or less than two meters in maximum
diameter in a nonresidential district that does not produce or
contribute to the production of emission levels exceeding the emission
standards adopted from time to time by the Federal Communications
Commission, based on the maximum equipment output.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure, including antenna towers
and monopoles, on which an antenna, or other communications device
and equipment, is or has been located for television, radio, data,
imagery, telephone or other forms of telecommunications. All
communications towers shall be considered a building for the purposes
of this chapter.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on
the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antennas.
C. Applicability.
(1) New installations.
(a) Satellite dish antennas more than 18 inches in maximum
diameter but not more than 48 inches in maximum diameter
and antennas more than 12 feet in height but not more than 18
feet in height in a residential district, which do not exceed the
maximum permissible exposure limits as recommended by the
FCC, from time to time, shall be subject to the locational siting
requirements set forth in Subsection E.
(b) Satellite dish antennas more than 60 inches in maximum
diameter and antennas, antenna towers, communications
towers, monopoles, associated buildings, structures and
equipment more than 25 feet in height in the H, C-1 and C-2
Districts shall be subject to the requirements set forth in this
section.
§ 450-56 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-56
1:822
(c) Satellite dish antennas greater than 48 inches in maximum
diameter and antennas greater than 18 feet in height shall not
be permitted in a residential district.
(2) "Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas" means any tower or
antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been
properly issued prior to the effective date of this section, including
permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed,
so long as such approval is current and not expired.
D. Regulatory compliance.
(1) Enabling authority. The Planning Board of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow is hereby authorized to review and approve, approve with
modifications, or disapprove special use permits and site plans
under this chapter consistent with Village Law § 7-725-a and
§ 7-725-b. [Added 1-25-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
(2) No communications facility shall be located, constructed or
maintained on any lot, structure or land area, except in conformity
with this chapter.
(3) All communications facilities, equipment and devices shall be
securely mounted to withstand the wind loads for the place of
installation in accordance with the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
(4) All communications facilities shall be constructed and maintained
in conformance with all building, electrical, fire prevention and
other applicable codes adopted by the Village.
(5) All communications facilities shall be in conformity with any other
construction or performance standards, including approved
fastening devices and techniques that ensure proper mounting,
approved materials and methods for electrical connections,
adequate structural support, etc. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
(6) All communications facilities shall be in conformance with the rules
and regulations of any governmental entity having jurisdiction over
such communications facilities and uses, antenna and/or
supporting structures and towers, including, without limitation, the
FCC and the FAA.
(7) All communications facilities shall be operated and maintained by
an FCC licensee only.
(8) All communications facilities shall be shown to be necessary to
provide coverage to an area of the Village which currently is proven
to include inadequate coverage and that any related
communications tower or antenna is proposed at the minimum
height and aesthetic intrusion possible to provide that necessary
§ 450-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-56
1:823
coverage. The applicant seeking to locate a communications facility
in the Village of Sleepy Hollow shall demonstrate the need for new
or additional antennas or communications towers.
(9) All communications facilities, if proposed for placement on a lot
that abuts a residential district, shall prove that adequate coverage
cannot be achieved by siting the facility on a lot which does not
abut a residential district.
(10) All communications facilities must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other
agency of the state or federal government with the authority to
regulate communications towers and antennas. If such standards
and regulations are revised or amended, then the owners of the
communications facility governed by this chapter shall have 30
days to bring such communications facility into compliance with
such revised or amended standards and regulations. Failure to
bring the communications facility into compliance with such
revised or amended standards and regulations in the time frame
specified shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
E. Communications facility siting.
(1) No installation shall be permitted in, or to project into, any
required landscape buffer area required by this chapter.
(2) The siting of a communications facility on property owned by the
Village of Sleepy Hollow shall be encouraged.
(3) The collocation and sharing of existing or proposed
communications facilities and communications towers for
mounting of antennas or related equipment is encouraged and shall
be preferred to the construction of new communications facilities
and communications towers. When an applicant proposes
collocation of proposed antennas and communications facilities on
an existing communications tower, building or structure, the
applicant must demonstrate and certify that the existing
communications tower, building or structure will be properly
adapted to the placement of additional antennas. The applicant
shall identify the capacity of the communications tower, building or
structure to accommodate additional antennas and shall address
necessary screening and buffering, landscaping and additional
safety measures necessitated by collocation. Any communications
facility which is not collocated shall present and certify evidence as
to why collocation is not possible, including evidence such as the
following:
(a) Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/
or tower shall provide to the Building Inspector an inventory of
its existing towers and antennas, or sites approved for towers
or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the
§ 450-56 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-56
1:824
Village of Sleepy Hollow or within one mile of the border
thereof, including specific information about the location,
height and design of each tower. The Building Inspector may
share such information with other applicants applying for
administrative approvals or special use permits under this
section or other organizations seeking to locate antennas
within the jurisdiction of the Village of Sleepy Hollow;
provided, however, that the Building Inspector is not, by
sharing such information, in any way representing or
warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
(b) Evidence that no feasible host sites or existing communications
facilities, communications towers and buildings or structures
are located within the geographic area which meet the
applicant's engineering system and service requirements.
(c) Evidence that existing communications facilities,
communications towers and buildings or structures are not of
sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering system
and service requirements.
(d) Evidence that existing communications facilities,
communications towers and buildings or structures do not
have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's
proposed communications facility equipment or antenna.
(e) Evidence that there is an inability to use existing sites in a
technologically feasible manner consistent with the applicant's
engineering system and service requirements.
(f) Evidence that the applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with any antenna on the existing
communications towers, buildings or structures, or the
antenna on the existing communications towers or structures
would cause interference with the applicant's antenna.
(g) Evidence that the fees, costs or contractual provisions required
by the owner in order to share an existing communications
tower, building or structure or to adapt existing
communications towers, buildings or structures for purposes
of collocation and sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding
new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.
(h) Evidence that the applicant has demonstrated that there are
other limiting factors that render existing communications
towers, buildings or structures unsuitable.
(i) Evidence that the applicant has demonstrated that alternative
technology or communications facilities which do not require
the use of towers are unsuitable. Costs of such alternative
technology or communications facilities which exceed new
tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render
§ 450-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-56
1:825
the alternative technology or communications facilities
unsuitable.
(4) All antennas shall be mounted in the rear yard or on the roof of a
principal building, unless reception is proven to be inhibited or
where visibility would be increased, and shall comply with the
following, in descending order:
(a) Unless wall-mounted on an existing roof-mounted mechanical
enclosure or similar appurtenance, any antenna mounted on a
roof shall be located to the rear of the roof center line so that
visibility of the installation is limited to the greatest extent
practicable when viewed from the front yard, but in no case
shall the height of the antenna exceed the height of the roof at
the point of installation by more than seven feet in a residential
district or 15 feet in a nonresidential district. An antenna
which is wall-mounted on a roof-mounted mechanical
enclosure or similar appurtenance shall not exceed the height
of the appurtenance at the point of installation.
(b) An antenna located in the rear yard shall be mounted on a
secure supporting structure and shall not exceed 18 feet in
total height in a residential district and 25 feet in height in a
nonresidential district, unless the support structure abuts the
principal structure, in which case the total height shall not
exceed the height of the roof at the point of installation by
more than seven feet in a residential district and 15 feet in a
nonresidential district.
(c) If roof installation or rear yard installation is proven to inhibit
reception, wall mounting shall be permitted in the side yards at
least 15 feet from the front yard, provided that the height of
the antenna shall not exceed the height of the roofline at the
point of installation by more than seven feet in a residential
district or 15 feet in a nonresidential district. Wall mounting in
the front yard, and in the side yard within 15 of the front yard,
shall be permitted, provided that the height of the antenna
does not exceed the height of the roof or parapet. A wallmounted
antenna shall be at least 20 feet above ground level
and shall not project more than two feet into the front yard.
(d) If the above provisions are proven to inhibit reception and/or
transmission, a monopole or antenna tower may be considered,
subject to the design requirements set forth in Subsection F.
No new communications tower shall be permitted unless the
applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Planning Board that no existing tower, structure or alternative
technology that does not require the use of towers or
structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna.
§ 450-56 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-56
1:826
F. Design requirements for all communications towers, antenna towers or
monopoles.
(1) Height and service coverage. Any proposal for a communications
tower, antenna tower or monopole shall prove that the height is the
minimum necessary for adequate reception and transmission to
meet the applicant's service coverage needs and does not exceed
80 feet.
(2) Alternatives. No fewer than three alternatives for providing
effective service coverage shall be presented. Proposals that
incorporate use of existing towers, structures or existing utility
lines shall be considered a collocated facility, as set forth in
Subsection E(3). Any proposal which minimizes visual impacts shall
be considered a preferred alternative. An applicant shall have the
responsibility to prove that an alternative which reduces impacts is
not feasible.
(3) Provision for additional antennas. The approving agency may
require that a communications tower, antenna tower or monopole
be designed structurally, electrically and in all respects to
accommodate both the applicant's antenna and comparable
antennas for at least two additional users or service providers. All
such communications towers must be designed to allow for future
rearrangement of the antennas located upon the tower and to
accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
(4) Setbacks. All communications towers, antenna towers or
monopoles shall be located within the setbacks and separated from
all boundary lines of the lot on which they are located as required
by the Schedule of Regulations.78 The separation area shall be
landscaped to provide effective all-season screening and buffering
which reduces visual, aesthetic and community character intrusion
impacts on adjacent properties, the surrounding neighborhood and
on distant viewsheds and scenic areas. Alternative tower structures
shall be utilized where possible and shall be preferred to typical
tower installations.
(5) Security and safety fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security
fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped
with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, that
the Planning Board may waive such requirements, as it deems
appropriate. In any event, security and safety fencing shall be
located around all communications towers, equipment and related
facilities to restrict unauthorized access. Access to all structures
shall be through a locked gate or principal building. Fencing shall
be designed to minimize visual and aesthetic impacts and shall be
equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices. Failure to
maintain said security and safety fencing in an appropriate manner
78.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Regulations is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 450-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-56
1:827
shall be grounds for immediate revocation of all permits and
certificates of use by the Building Inspector. In addition:
(a) All communications towers, antenna towers, monopoles and
other supporting structures shall be made inaccessible to
nonauthorized persons, particularly children, and shall be
constructed or shielded in such a manner that they cannot be
climbed.
(b) All transmitter controls that could cause the transmitter to
deviate from its authorized operating parameters shall be
designed and installed in such a manner that they are readily
accessible only to persons authorized by the licensee to
operate or service.
(c) All transmitters used with in-building radiation systems shall
be designed in such a manner that, in the event that an
unauthorized person does gain access, that person cannot
cause the transmitter to deviate from its authorized operating
parameters in such a way as to cause interference to other
stations.
(d) All transmitters (other than hand-carried or pack-carried
mobile transmitters) and control points shall be equipped with
a visual means of indicating when the control circuitry has
been put in a condition that should cause the transmitter to
radiate.
(e) All transmitters shall be designed in such a manner that they
can be turned off independently of any remote-control circuits.
(6) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which a special use permit is
required; provided, however, that the Planning Board may waive
such requirements if the goals of this section would be better
served thereby. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(a) All communications facilities shall be located and designed to
have the least possible adverse visual and aesthetic effect on
the environment. The installation shall be landscaped with a
buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the
installation from property used for residences. The area
surrounding the installation, other than the area necessary to
maintain a clear line of sight to the signal source, shall be
landscaped and maintained with trees, shrubs and ground
cover to maximize screening and visual buffering. An existing
natural vegetative buffer which meets or exceeds the above
requirements may be substituted or enhanced for said
requirements. The standard buffer shall consist of a
landscaped strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter
of the compound.
§ 450-56 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-56
1:828
(b) The outside of security fencing shall be screened with
evergreen shrubs, trees or climbing evergreen material on the
fencing.
(c) The base of any communications tower and any accessory
structure shall be effectively screened using primarily
vegetative screening, including a continuous evergreen screen
planted in a natural setting and consisting of native plant
species. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the
maximum extent practicable. Additional plantings shall be
required, as necessary, to screen and buffer all structures from
nearby properties or important viewsheds or scenic areas.
(d) All landscaping shall be properly maintained to ensure
continued screening and buffering.
(7) Coloring and marking.
(a) Unless otherwise required by the FAA or FCC, all
communications facilities, including antenna and
communications towers, shall be colored, camouflaged and/or
shielded to blend with surrounding areas, provided that such
coloring, camouflage or shielding does not inhibit their
effectiveness. They shall either maintain a galvanized steel
finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or
FCC, be painted a neutral color or any other color
recommended by the Architectural Review Board so as to
reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(b) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening and landscaping that will blend them into
the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
(c) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment
must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to
make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
(8) Signals and lights. No communications tower, antenna tower or
monopole shall include any signals, lights or illumination unless
required by the FAA or other applicable authority. The applicant
shall provide evidence mandating any requirement for lighting. If
lighting is required, said lighting shall be shown to cause the least
disturbance to surrounding properties and views. Any lighting
necessary for accessory structures or buildings shall be minimized
and shall be properly shielded to prevent light emission and glare
onto adjacent properties.
§ 450-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-56
1:829
(9) Signage. No signs, including advertising signs, shall be permitted
on any antenna communications tower, antenna tower or monopole
or antenna support structure, except as follows:
(a) Signs specifically required by a federal, state or local agency.
(b) Each site shall include a sign containing the name of the owner
and operator of any antenna present, including an emergency
phone number. In addition, any door having access to a roofmounted
antenna and all entrances to the fence enclosure shall
be similarly signed.
(c) Any signage permitted above shall comply with Chapter 338,
Signs, of the Village Code. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
G. Operational certification.
(1) Within 45 days of initial operation or modification of a
communications facility, communications tower, antenna tower or
monopole, the owner or operator shall submit to the Building
Inspector a written certification by a professional engineer, with
the qualifications set forth in Subsection M(8), that the operating
facility is in compliance with the application submitted, any
conditions imposed and all other provisions of this chapter, in order
to continue operations past the forty-five-day period.
(2) The Village may confirm and periodically reconfirm compliance as
necessary to ensure that the provisions of this chapter, including
nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) level thresholds, are
in compliance.
(3) If any approved communications facility is found not to be in
compliance, said communications facility shall immediately cease
operation.
(4) A yearly inspection report on emissions and structural soundness
shall be submitted in writing to the Building Inspector. Failure to
submit such report shall be grounds for the Building Inspector to
cause the operations of the facility to cease.
H. Interference.
(1) No permit shall be issued for any transmitting antenna which
interferes with the reception or transmission of any preexisting
FCC-approved communications device or antenna which complies
with current FCC standards and requirements.
(2) If interference results from the operation of any newly approved
transmitting antenna, the owner or operator of that most recently
installed antenna shall immediately eliminate the interference or
cease operation of the facility.
§ 450-56 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-56
1:830
(3) Failure to correct or eliminate the interference shall be subject to
the immediate revocation of any and all special permits, as issued
by the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
I. State and federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of
the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers
and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the
owners of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring
such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations within six months of the effective date of such
standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is
mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring
towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
J. Alterations. Alteration of an existing facility, shall be subject to the
same procedure, rules and regulations applicable to an original
application. Alterations shall include replacing or changing of an
antenna(s) or related equipment; increasing the electromagnetic
emission of an antenna(s), or change in site conditions or facility
location. [Amended 1-25-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
K. Registration.
(1) The Village of Sleepy Hollow Building Department shall maintain a
list of the names and addresses of all operators and the type and
maximum emissions of all communications facilities and all other
antennas granted a special permit or variance.
(2) If the name or address of the owner or operator of any
communications facility or communications tower is changed, the
Building Department shall be notified of the change, in writing, by
the operator within 30 days of said change.
L. Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local
building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Alliance, as amended from time
to time. If, upon inspection, the Building Inspector concludes that a
tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a
danger to persons or property, then, upon notice being provided to the
owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower
into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into
compliance within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal
of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
M. Application requirements.
§ 450-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-56
1:831
(1) A full environmental assessment form (EAF), including a visual EAF
addendum, shall be provided. Following review of the EAF and
visual EAF addendum, a visual impact analysis study may be
required by the approving agency to further assess the potential
visual and aesthetic impacts incurred by implementation of the
proposed action. The methodology and scope of study for any visual
analysis shall be approved by the approving agency and shall
address potential impacts on nearby viewsheds, ridgelines, scenic
features, historic sites and structures and community compatibility
issues with nearby land uses.
(2) A service coverage map and report shall be provided. The service
coverage map shall show and describe all existing and proposed
areas of service coverage relating to the proposed communications
facility. The service coverage map shall locate all existing sites in
the Village and in bordering communities which contain
communications towers or related facilities. A detailed report shall
accompany the service coverage map and shall indicate why the
proposed communications tower, equipment and facility are
necessary. The report shall identify locations within the proposed
project site service coverage area which are not, and could not be,
served by either existing facilities, by collocation or by other
development alternatives such as development of facilities on
Village-owned properties or utilization of alternative technology or
an alternative tower structure.
(3) A long-range communications facilities plan shall be provided,
evidencing that the proposed location of the communications
facility and supporting buildings and equipment has been planned
to result in the fewest number of communications transmission
tower locations within the Village of Sleepy Hollow. The plan shall
indicate how the applicant intends to provide service throughout
the Village and how the applicant plans to coordinate with all other
providers of wireless communications services in the Village of
Sleepy Hollow. The plan shall address the applicant's planned and
possible location of additional tower sites, additional antennas,
related service area coverage and alternative long-range plan
scenarios that illustrate the potential effects of multiple towers and
tower height, community intrusion impacts and visual and
aesthetic impacts.
(4) Documentation, sufficient to demonstrate that the proposed
communications tower height and bulk is the minimum height and
bulk necessary to provide licensed communications services to
locations within the Village of Sleepy Hollow which the applicant is
not able to serve with existing facilities in the project site area,
shall be provided, including evidence that visual, aesthetic and
community character intrusion impacts have been minimized to the
greatest extent practicable. Documentation regarding height and
bulk should address any variations in height and bulk necessary to
§ 450-56 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-56
1:832
accommodate collocation of additional antennas and related
equipment and facilities.
(5) In addition to all other applicable site plan requirements specified
in this chapter, all applications shall include the following:
(a) A scaled site plan, including elevations and construction
details, showing existing and proposed communications
facilities, buildings and structures.
(b) Height, width, depth, location and configuration of
communications towers and any supporting guy wires or other
supporting or anchoring devices.
(c) Material types, colors and light.
(d) Number and type of antennas, including receiving and/or
transmitting equipment.
(e) Legal description of the subject property or lot and that of any
leased parcel.
(f) Information about collocated or future communications
facilities, equipment, buildings and structures or other related
facilities, including the relationship of the height of the
communications tower to the feasibility of collocation of
additional communications facilities.
(6) A written description of the existing setting and how the elements
of the proposed communications facility, communications tower
and antenna are blended into that setting; the design of buildings
and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures,
screening and landscaping which blend them into the existing
natural setting and surrounding buildings and structures.
(7) A structural engineering safety and compliance report and
certification, prepared by a New York State licensed professional
engineer specializing in structural engineering, shall be provided.
The report shall certify the structural integrity of the proposed
communications tower, antenna and related equipment and
facilities. The report shall demonstrate the compliance of all
structures with all applicable standards and requirements and shall
describe the capacity of that structure, including wind load and the
number and type of antennas it can accommodate. Illustrations
shall be utilized as necessary. In the case of antennas being
mounted on an existing tower or structure, the equivalent of the
above-required information shall be provided about the existing
tower or structure.
(8) An emissions safety and compliance report and certification,
prepared by a New York State licensed professional engineer
specializing in electrical engineering with expertise in radio and
§ 450-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-56
1:833
cellular telecommunications regulations, technology and facilities,
shall be provided. The report shall certify the safety of all emissions
of the proposed facility and shall include documentation to address
the following:
(a) Evidence of an FCC license/permit to grantee/applicant,
including information regarding all related permitting
standards and specifications.
(b) A copy of the Village of Sleepy Hollow application form.
(c) The location of the nearest residential structures adjacent to
the property line.
(d) The location of the nearest occupied structures adjacent to
each property line.
(e) The location, size, height, construction and operating
specifications of all proposed and existing communications
uses and facilities, including:
[1] The quantity, type (make, model and manufacturer) and
design of any antenna proposed and the basis for the
calculations of capacity.
[2] The frequency, modulation and class of service of all
communications equipment.
[3] Transmission and maximum effective radiated power of
any antenna.
[4] Direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation of
any antenna.
[5] A description of the proposed antenna and all related
fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus,
including height above grade, materials, color and light.
[6] A map depicting and listing all existing sites in the Village
and bordering communities containing transmitting
antennas used by the operator, owner or applicant.
[7] Elevation drawings depicting the front, side and rear of
the property, illustrating any proposed antenna, mounting
device and supporting or related structure and building, if
any, on which said antenna is to be mounted or sited.
(f) Certification that the NIER levels are within threshold levels
adopted by the FCC or any subsequent superseding emission
standard adopted by the FCC, based on the maximum
equipment output.
(g) Certification that any antenna will not cause interference with
existing communications devices.
§ 450-56 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-56
1:834
(h) An industry-approved propagation model using applicable
contour biases.
(i) If collocation is not proposed, certification that collocation is
not feasible as set forth in Subsection E(3).
(9) The location and configuration of all existing and proposed site
access driveways, including construction details indicating the
length, width, grading, drainage and driveway profile and proposed
surface material, shall be described and mapped. Any fence or gate
related to the site access driveway shall be shown, including
provision for police, fire or emergency vehicle access to the site
and facilities.
(10) A detailed landscape plan shall be provided showing existing and
proposed vegetation, including areas to remain undisturbed;
specimen trees; height of the surrounding tree line; vegetation to
be removed; walls and fences; the location, quantity, type (scientific
and common name), installation size and root conditions of
proposed plantings; and installation details of all proposed
plantings. The landscape plan shall illustrate how proposed
plantings, fences and walls will provide required screening and
buffering.
(11) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the
tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned
or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
N. General requirements. The following provisions shall govern the
issuance of special use permits for towers or antennas by the Planning
Board:
(1) In granting a special use permit, the Planning Board may impose
conditions to the extent that the Planning Board concludes such
conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the
proposed tower on adjoining properties.
(2) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical or electrical, shall be certified
by a licensed professional engineer.
(3) Expiration of special permit. Unless otherwise specified in the
resolution of the Planning Board, all special permits issued under
this section shall expire five years after they are issued. A special
permit issued under this section shall be deemed to authorize only
the particular use or uses specified in the permit and shall expire
upon termination of the use. Upon expiration of the special permit,
the applicant shall be required to file a new application for a special
permit and shall be subject to the same procedure, rules and
regulations applicable in an original application. [Amended
1-25-2005 by L.L. No. 1-200579]
§ 450-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-56
1:835
O. Bond required. As a condition of granting any special permit for the
construction of a tower or monopole under this chapter, the Planning
Board shall require the applicant to post a bond, in the amount
determined by the Planning Board, based on engineering estimates, to
cover the cost of removing and disposing of the tower or monopole. The
bond shall be maintained for so long as the tower or monopole remains
in place. From time to time the Planning Board may adjust the amount
of the bond and require the submission of a new or modified bond,
based on engineering estimates of the cost of removing and disposing of
the tower or monopole.
P. Fees. The applicant for a special use permit under this section shall pay
to the Village a fee with the filing of the application as set forth in the
fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200, Fees. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Q. Escrow account. The applicant shall provide funds to an escrow
account, in an amount as established for site plan review, to allow the
Village to retain such technical experts as may be necessary to review
the proposal, including, but not limited to, the review of financial and
technical aspects of the proposal and of the financial and technical
practicability of alternatives that may be available to the applicant.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
R. Removal.
(1) Any antenna, communications facility, communications tower,
antenna tower or monopole, including any supporting structure
and related appurtenances, or part thereof, that is not used for a
period of six months in any twelve-month period shall be removed
by, and at the expense of, the owner of the property or the operator
of said facility.
(2) An extension of an additional six months may be granted by the
Building Inspector upon submittal of a written request for said
extension, including proof as determined reasonable by the
Building Inspector that the owner is actively engaged in marketing
the property for sale or rent.
S. Exemptions. The following devices and sources of nonionizing
electromagnetic radiation are exempt from the above provisions and
shall be permitted in all residential and nonresidential zones:
(1) Machines and equipment designed and marketed as consumer
products, such as walkie-talkies, remote-control toys and cellular
telephones.
79.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Subsection N(4), Architectural Review
Board, which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 450-56 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-56
1:836
(2) Hand-held, mobile, marine and portable radio communications
transmitters and/or receivers. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
(3) Two-way radios utilized for temporary or emergency service
communications.
(4) Two-way radios utilized for governmental service communications.
(5) Maintenance or repair of a conforming or legal nonconforming
antenna, provided that such action is in compliance with this
chapter.
(6) Backup wireless transmitters connected to an alarm monitoring
service that transmits to a remote monitoring center in the event of
an emergency when the telephone lines are inoperable.
(7) Towers and antennas for amateur radio services, state and Village
of Sleepy Hollow Police and Highway Department, and Village
emergency services, fire and ambulance, which are constructed,
installed and in service at the time of the adoption of these
regulations. Any modification to said installations shall be subject
to the provisions set forth herein.
T. Preexisting installations.
(1) The current operator of any communications facility or
communications tower, antenna tower or monopole, existing at the
time that these regulations take effect, shall be permitted to remain
in operation, provided that the operator submits proof within six
months of the enactment of these regulations that a valid building
permit was issued for the facility and that said facility complies
with current emission standards as recommended by the FCC, as
certified by a professional engineer with the qualifications set forth
in Subsection M(8). Any facility for which emission and security
compliance documentation is not received shall cease operation
within six months of the enactment of these regulations and shall
be immediately removed thereafter.
(2) Any legal nonconforming communications facility or
communications tower shall be permitted to remain until such time
as said use and/or facility is altered as defined in Subsection J.
U. Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities or private utilities.
V. Franchises.
(1) Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify that all
franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation of
a wireless communications system in the Village of Sleepy Hollow
§ 450-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-56
1:837
§ 450-57. Continuing-care retirement communities. [Added
7-17-2001 by L.L. No. 11-2001]
have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises
with the Building Inspector.
(2) Applicants for towers and monopoles are required to disclose
whose wires will connect their antennas together or to provide any
other information required by the Planning Board to evaluate
whether the entity owning the wires needs a separate telephone
franchise.
W. Public notice. In addition to the notice required pursuant to Village Law
§ 7-725-b, the applicant shall give notice to all property owners within
400 feet of the proposed wireless communications facility. Should a
multiple dwelling unit containing renters be within 400 feet of the
proposed installation, notice of the public hearing shall be given to the
owner of the multiple dwelling and shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the multiple dwelling building and the applicant shall provide
an affidavit to the Planning Board prior to the public hearing verifying
that the applicant has complied with the notice provisions set forth
herein. [Amended 1-25-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
X. Effect on inconsistent state law. Pursuant to New York Municipal Home
Rule Law § 22, the provisions of this section are intended to supersede
any inconsistent provision of New York Village Law.
Y. Effect on other provisions of Village Code. The provisions of this section
are intended to supersede any inconsistent provision of the Village
Code of the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
A. Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this section to permit
the development of residential communities which serve a diverse
senior population having a wide range of abilities and needs. A
continuing-care retirement community (CCRC) provides a continuum of
care for residents through a variety of living environments and support
services for older persons primarily 65 years or older, which may
include independent housing for which residential support services are
available, enriched housing units for which different levels of
associated personal care and daily living support are provided, and
resident-care facilities, including nursing-care facilities. Common
dining, social and recreational facilities may also be made available.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth below:
CONTINUING-CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY (CCRC) — A facility
designed and established to provide a comprehensive continuum of
care for older persons and oriented to the enhancement of the quality
of life. A continuing-care retirement community shall provide a variety
of living arrangements suited especially to the needs of older persons,
including independent-living units, enriched housing units, skilled
§ 450-56 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-57
1:838
nursing beds, and common dining, social and recreational facilities. A
continuing-care retirement community shall provide a range of resident
care and social services and may include nursing care facilities.
Dwelling units in a continuing-care retirement community may be
provided in any combination of one-family dwellings, attached
dwellings, and multiple dwellings. Accessory uses may be provided
in any combination of principal buildings or accessory buildings or
structures.
ENRICHED HOUSING UNIT (EHU) — A dwelling unit in a CCRC
established and operated for the purpose of providing long-term
residential care for persons primarily 65 years of age or older. It may
include limited kitchen facilities and is designed, intended and operated
for older persons needing assistance in daily care, including
housekeeping, personal-care services, and supervision. Limited parttime
ambulatory health-care services and common dining, social and
recreational facilities may be made available.
INDEPENDENT LIVING UNIT (ILU) — A dwelling unit in a CCRC
containing a kitchen or kitchenette and bathrooms, which is designed
and intended for occupancy by older persons and for which
housekeeping service and common dining, social and recreational
facilities may be made available.
SKILLED NURSING BED (SNB) — A bed in a CCRC facility which
provides regular nursing care services, both temporary and long-term.
C. Special permit uses. A continuing-care retirement community (CCRC) is
hereby established as a special permit use within the H (Hospital)
Zoning District as set forth in the attached Schedule of Regulations.80
D. Accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses within a
CCRC:
(1) Illuminated identification and directional signs.
(2) Off-street parking, including structured parking.
(3) Medical offices, limited to use by residents of the CCRC.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(4) Pool, physical therapy and exercise rooms.
(5) Limited retail and service uses, including banking, in accordance
with § 450-46.
(6) Common kitchen and dining facilities.
(7) Common recreational facilities for the use of residents and visitors.
(8) Common library, educational and social facilities for the use of
residents and visitors.
80.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Regulations is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 450-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-57
1:839
(9) Common laundry facilities.
(10) Other customary accessory uses incidental to the principal use.
E. Permitted density. The maximum permitted density of a continuing-care
retirement community shall be one EHU, ILU or SNB per 9,160 square
feet of lot area, in any combination.
F. Off-street parking and loading.
(1) Off-street parking may be provided in any combination of parking
structures or on-grade areas, and the minimum number of required
off-street parking spaces shall be as follows:
(a) Independent-living unit:
[1] One bedroom: 1.25 per unit.
[2] Two or more bedrooms: 1.5 per unit.
(b) Enriched-housing unit: 0.4 per unit.
(c) Skilled nursing bed: 0.4 per unit.
(2) The minimum number of required off-street loading spaces shall be
as follows:
(a) For each 250 ILU (or major fraction thereof): 1.0.
(b) For each 50 EHU (or major fraction thereof): 1.0.
(c) For each 50 SNB (or major fraction thereof): 1.0.
G. Special permit approval. The Village Board may authorize the issuance
of a special permit for a CCRC project, after a public hearing, provided
that it shall find that the following conditions and standards have been
met:
(1) The CCRC use shall be of such character, intensity, size and
location that it will be in harmony with the orderly development of
the neighborhood in which the property is situated and will not be
detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent districts.
(2) Traffic involved in or conducted in connection with the CCRC, the
size of the site in relation to it, and the location of the site with
respect to the type, arrangement and capacity of streets giving
access to it are such that it will be in harmony with the appropriate
and orderly development of the neighborhood in which it is located.
(3) The location, nature and height of building, walls and fences, and
the nature and extent of the landscaping and screening on the site,
as existing or proposed, are such that the use will not hinder or
discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land
and buildings.
§ 450-57 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-57
1:840
§ 450-58. Senior housing (affordable). [Added 11-23-2004 by L.L.
No. 12-2004]
(4) Operations in connection with a CCRC use will not be more
objectionable to nearby properties by reason of noise, fumes,
vibrations, lighting or flashing of lights than would be the
operations of any permitted use not requiring a special permit.
(5) Parking areas will be of adequate size for the CCRC use, properly
located and suitably screened from any adjoining residential uses,
and the entrance and exit drives shall be laid out so as to achieve
maximum safety.
(6) The CCRC use shall be so located on the lot involved that it shall
not impair the use and enjoyment of adjacent residential
properties.
A. Purpose and intent. Pursuant to the public purpose of providing
specialized affordable housing facilities for senior citizens to meet the
special housing, health care, social and recreational needs of this
segment of the population, the Mayor and Board of Trustees establishes
a special permit use, senior housing (affordable) (SH), that permits the
development of multifamily senior housing as specified herein.
B. The SH special permit use is allowed in the R-5 Multiple Residence,
Moderate Density (R-5), R-6 Multiple Residence, High Density (R-6) and
C-2 Central Commercial (C-2) Districts, subject to the following
standards and requirements. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth below:
AFFORDABLE SENIOR CITIZEN FACILITY — A residential dwelling
unit made available for sale or rent such that the shelter portion of
the housing cost is below the market price of such units as determined
in accordance with Subsection P below.[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L.
No. 1-2013]
SENIOR DAY-CARE FACILITY — A facility with limited operating hours
where specialized care-giving and supervision are provided for three
or more adults who may have difficulties with one or more essential
activities of daily living, such as feeding or mobility, away from their
own homes for fewer than 24 hours per day.
SENIOR INDEPENDENT-LIVING FACILITY — A building, portion of
a building or group of buildings containing dwelling units with full
kitchens specially designed for use and occupancy by the elderly which
may have common amenities but no common dining and whose
occupancy is restricted to persons 62 years of age or older or couples
where one member is 62 years of age or older.
§ 450-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-58
1:841
D. Special permit uses. An affordable senior housing community
consisting of a building or buildings erected, altered or used for senior
independent living shall be permitted as a special permit use within the
R-5, R-6 and C-2 Districts as set forth in the Schedule of Regulations.81
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
E. Accessory uses. Senior housing floating districts may contain or provide
uses necessary to and customarily incidental to such facilities where
such uses are limited to use by residents, their guests and employees as
follows:
(1) Community meeting rooms.
(2) Senior day-care centers.
(3) Medical offices, limited to use by residents, with no visible sign
announcing their presence.
(4) Physical therapy and exercise rooms, limited to use by residents.
(5) Outdoor active and passive recreation space.
F. Height.
(1) No principal building shall exceed four stories or 50 feet in height.
The height shall be calculated as the vertical distance measured at
each point along the base of the building from the finished grade at
that point to the highest point of a flat roof directly above or to the
midpoint of a pitched roof directly above. Any proposal that
exceeds the above-referenced height must apply to the Mayor and
Board of Trustees for a special permit. The Mayor and Board of
Trustees will take into account the compatibility of the proposed
increase in building height with the surrounding residential
neighborhood.
(2) No accessory building shall exceed one story or 12 feet in height.
G. Plot area; frontage; density of population.
(1) Every project under this section shall occupy a plot of not less than
0.4 acre. There shall be a minimum of 100 feet of frontage. The
maximum allowable density for the SH use shall be calculated
based on the following density:
Type of Facility Maximum Units/Acre
Senior independent living 100
(2) In the event that a proposal for a senior housing development or an
expansion of an existing senior housing development exceeds the
density as outlined in this section, a special permit must be first be
81.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Regulations is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 450-58 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-58
1:842
granted by the Mayor and Board of Trustees consistent with
Subsection T.
H. Building area. In the case of SH developments, the maximum coverage
of land by principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 80% of the
lot area.
I. Floor area.
(1) Buildings containing the following senior citizen facilities shall
have the following minimum and maximum gross habitable floor
areas per unit: [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
Type of Facility
Minimum Floor
Area/Unit
(square feet)
Maximum Floor
Area/Unit
(square feet)
Senior independent
living
600 1,600
(2) For senior independent facilities, a minimum of 40% of the dwelling
units shall be one-bedroom units. No dwelling unit shall contain
more than two bedrooms.
(3) No basement apartments shall be permitted in any senior citizen
facility, other than one such apartment for the use of a
superintendent, custodian or other person in charge of the
maintenance of such dwelling.
J. Required yards and perimeter buffer areas.
(1) The minimum required yard areas for an SH use shall be as follows:
(a) Front yard: 20 feet.
(b) Side yards: 10 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 20 feet.
(2) There shall be a minimum perimeter buffer of 10 feet around all SH
communities, suitably landscaped and permanently maintained
with planting of trees and shrubs in accordance with specifications
of an approved site plan.
(3) The Board of Trustees may, in its discretion, modify these yard and
perimeter buffer area requirements when issuing a special permit
for an affordable senior housing project or expansion of an existing
affordable senior housing project. The Board of Trustees will
consider whether modified yard and buffer area requirements will
adversely affect adjoining properties and the surrounding
neighborhood. [Added 8-22-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006]
K. Separation of buildings.
§ 450-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-58
1:843
(1) There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet between any two
main buildings on the same lot within the SH development.
(2) All buildings shall be situated in such a manner as to provide
adequate light and air.
L. Open space and amenity space. A minimum of 25 square feet per
dwelling unit of indoor common amenity space other than dining space
shall be provided. A minimum of 50 square feet of common outdoor
active and passive recreation and open space shall be provided per
dwelling unit.
M. Design features.
(1) All senior citizen facilities shall be designed to meet the special
needs of senior citizens and at a minimum shall contain the
following:
(a) A call button monitoring or equivalent system within each
dwelling unit for emergency calls to on- or off-site emergency
personnel.
(b) Exterior access, at a minimum of two locations, without steps.
(c) Grab bars in all tub and shower stalls.
(d) Corridor length and design to facilitate wayfinding.
(e) Elevators required for access to all units above the first story,
suitably designed to accommodate the needs of emergency
service personnel.
(f) Nonskid floors.
(g) Handle-type spigots and doorknobs.
(h) In all rooms, doors of sufficient width to accommodate
wheelchairs.
(i) Separation of vehicular circulation drive from pedestrian
walks.
(j) Changes in grade on walk systems to be accomplished by
ramps.
(k) Passenger drop-off for occupants and visitors near entrance
and elevator halls of buildings.
(2) All design features shall be subject to and in conformity with all
applicable regulations related to the Americans with Disabilities
Act.
N. Parking requirements.
§ 450-58 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-58
1:844
(1) Off-street parking for senior residence communities shall be
calculated based upon the total of the parking requirements of the
individual components which comprise the SH where such
requirements are set forth, with the exception that a reduction of
up to 10% in the requirement may be applied for and granted by
the Mayor and Board of Trustees based on a demonstration that a
sharing of personnel between facilities would effectively reduce the
required parking.
(2) Off-street parking will be provided in any combination of parking
structures or on-grade areas, and have the minimum number of
required off-street parking spaces as follows unless modified by
Subsection N(1):
(a) Independent-living units:
[1] One-bedroom: 0.5 per unit. (Note: Where there is a finding
by the Mayor and Board of Trustees that there is adequate
mass transit convenient to the SH development, the
parking ratio may be adjusted to a figure not less than 0.33
space per unit.)
[2] Two-bedroom: 0.7 per unit.
(b) Elder day care: 1.0 space per employee.
O. Age restrictions.
(1) Occupancy of dwelling units within an SH development shall be
restricted to persons 62 years of age or older, or couples, one of
whose members is 62 years of age or older. Persons less than 18
years of age shall not be permanent residents under any
circumstances, subject to all applicable laws and regulations. The
foregoing restrictions shall not apply to one on-site caretaker/
administrator, if so proposed as part of the SH application, whose
full-time job shall be the maintenance and/or management of the
SH development.
(2) Restrictions relating to age and occupancy shall be set forth in a
covenant, acceptable as to form by the Village Attorney of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow. Said covenant shall be recorded in the
County Clerk's office and shall run with the land and shall bind all
owners of the property.
P. Affordable units.
(1) For owner-occupied units, the affordable units shall be sold at a
price not to exceed 3.3 times 80% of the median household income
for Westchester County, as established annually by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development. A covenant
shall be recorded in the County Clerk's office, which shall provide
that resale of any affordable housing units may not sell for a price
§ 450-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-58
1:845
exceeding 3.3 times 80% of the median household income for
Westchester County, as established annually by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(2) For rental units, the maximum monthly rent for the affordable units
shall not exceed 30% times 80% of the median household income
for Westchester County, as established annually by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development, divided by
12 months. Said amount shall include utilities and common
charges, if any.
Q. Selection of occupants of affordable housing units. The Village of Sleepy
Hollow shall develop procedures to guide in the solicitation of
applications and the selection of potential occupants for the affordable
units, with preference given to residents of the Village of Sleepy Hollow
as permissible by law and the New York State Division of Housing and
Community Renewal. The maximum household income for affordable
units shall be 80% of the median household income for Westchester
County families as established annually by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
R. Location of affordable units in market-rate developments. Affordable
units, when provided as part of a market-rate development, shall be
physically integrated and interspersed into the design of the
development in a manner satisfactory to the Village Board, avoiding
designated affordable units being located adjacent to one another. The
affordable units shall be distributed among various proposed bedroomsized
units in the same proportion as the overall development.
S. Common property. The ownership, maintenance and preservation of
common property shall be permanently assured to the satisfaction of
the Village Attorney by the filing of appropriate easements, covenants
and restrictions, as necessary. For ownership projects, the formation
and incorporation of a homeowner or condominium association shall be
required to maintain common property. Such association shall be
empowered to levy assessments against property owners to defray the
cost of maintenance and to acquire liens, where necessary, against
property owners for unpaid charges or assessments in accordance with
the laws of the State of New York. In the event that the homeowner or
condominium association fails to perform the necessary maintenance
operations, the Village of Sleepy Hollow shall be authorized, but not
obligated, to enter on such premises for the purpose of performing such
operations and to assess the cost of so doing among all affected
property owners.
T. Procedures.
(1) Application for a special permit for senior housing shall be made to
the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The special permit application
shall be in a form sufficient to enable the Village of Sleepy Hollow
to evaluate the applicant's proposal and its consistency with the
§ 450-58 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-58
1:846
intent, purposes and general design standards expressed herein.
The petition for a special permit shall also be accompanied by the
following:
(a) A written description of the proposed development.
(b) A concept plan including all the items listed below:
[1] The disposition of various land uses and the areas covered
by each, in acres.
[2] A sketch of the interior road system with all existing and
proposed rights-of-way and easements, whether public or
private.
[3] Delineation of the various residential areas, indicating the
number of dwelling units, square footage and bedrooms by
each housing type and square footage for accessory uses.
The plans shall show the density, in dwelling units per
acre, for the entire development. Sample floor plans shall
be provided for each unit type.
[4] The open space system and proposed recreation facilities,
and a statement as to how said system is to be preserved
as such throughout the life of the development and how it
is to be owned and maintained.
[5] An illustrative site plan, indicating the relationship
between the proposed road system, parking lots,
buildings, open spaces and other physical features.
[6] Schematic water, sanitary sewer and stormwater
management systems and how they are proposed to be
connected to the system in adjoining areas, or be built on
the site.
[7] Physical characteristics of the site, including topography,
areas of slope in excess of 15%, soils, rock outcrops,
streams, wetlands, lakes, ponds and floodplains and all
proposed alterations of said physical characteristics.
[8] Estimates of peak-hour traffic generation derived from
recognized traffic engineering source material or actual
field counts, and its relation to surrounding development,
including surrounding roads and intersections, including
methods developed for mitigating any demonstrated
adverse traffic impacts.
[9] Analysis of market demand for the proposed senior
development, based upon demographic factors and
existing housing supply. Such analysis shall include a
review and conclusion concerning the anticipated number
of occupants or purchasers of the specific proposed
§ 450-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-58
1:847
development who shall be existing residents of the Village
of Sleepy Hollow. Such analysis shall be based upon a
specific evaluation of individual market demand.
[10] Comparison of the proposed development under SH to the
likely development yield under existing zoning in terms of
traffic, taxes and aesthetic issues.
[11] If the development is to be staged, a clear indication of
how the staging is to proceed. The plan shall show each
stage of development, with the approximate time required
for anticipated commencement and completion.
(2) The Village Board may retain professional consultants deemed
necessary in order to review any proposed SH concept plans, with
funding for said consultants provided by the prospective applicant
for the SH development through the establishment of an escrow
account. The amount of said escrow shall be determined by the
Village Board in consultation with the applicant.
(3) Concurrent site plan and/or subdivision review. An applicant may
submit a detailed site plan and/or subdivision concurrently with the
special permit petition, subject to site plan and/or subdivision
review procedures for the Village of Sleepy Hollow, including
Planning Board review and approval of said plans and related
documentation. Approval of a site plan and/or subdivision may not,
however, occur until the issuance of the special permit.
(4) Village Board action on the application for a special permit.
(a) The Village Board shall refer the petition for special permit and
all accompanying maps, plans and reports to the Village
Planning Board, the County Planning Department and other
boards and agencies in accordance with applicable laws and
regulations. Said boards, agencies and departments shall be
provided a period of 30 days to report back to the Village Board
prior to a decision being made on the application.
(b) Following the required public hearing(s) (which shall be held
on notice which shall be furnished and accomplished by the
applicant, at the sole cost and expense of the applicant, by
mailing at least seven days in advance to all property owners of
properties located within 250 feet of any boundary of the
property under consideration) and project review under the
State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA), the Village
Board may approve or disapprove the special permit petition in
accordance with the provisions of applicable law.
(5) Special permit approval. The Village Board may authorize the
issuance of a special permit for an SH project, after a public
hearing and provided that it shall have met the following conditions
and standards:
§ 450-58 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-58
1:848
§ 450-59. Fireworks. [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(a) The SH use shall be of such character, intensity, size and
location that in general it will be in harmony with the orderly
development of the neighborhood in which it is situated and
will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent
districts.
(b) The likely marketability of the proposed units in relation to
previously approved SH developments throughout the Village
and the potential saturation of SH units in any given
neighborhood.
(c) The suitability of the site for the senior population in terms of
vehicular access, walkability for pedestrians and overall traffic
concerns.
(d) The compatibility of the SH site within its environment,
including surrounding land uses and landscaped buffers, and
in the case of redevelopment sites or conversions, with the
contextual development of surrounding buildings and uses.
(6) The Mayor and Board of Trustees, at their discretion, may attach
any reasonable conditions on an approval of an SH development as
necessary to assure conformance with the intent and purposes of
the Village's Local Waterfront Revitalization Plan and the SH
regulations, as specified herein. The conditions of approval shall
specify all relevant procedures for unit sale or rental, reoccupancy,
income verification and related costs.
A. Sale of fireworks prohibited. No person, partnership or corporation
shall sell, give away or expose for sale, within the corporate limits of the
Village of Sleepy Hollow, New York, any fireworks, firearms, cannon,
gun, pistol or other pyrotechnics of any nature or description
whatsoever or other device used for the discharge of fireworks,
firearms or other forms of pyrotechnics.
B. Exception and permit for firework display. No fireworks, firearms or
other form of pyrotechnics shall at any time be discharged within the
corporate limits of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, except that a public
display of fireworks may be permitted under proper and sufficient
supervision, by written permit from the Board of Trustees. Permit fees
shall be in a sum to be established and determined by the Board of
Trustees from time to time and set forth in the fee schedule included at
the end of Chapter 200, Fees.
C. Aerial bombs prohibited. No aerial bombs or bombs of any description
shall be discharged within the corporate limits of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow, New York, even though a permit has been issued for the
discharge of a public display of fireworks, and any person who so
§ 450-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-59
1:849
discharges any such bombs shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter
and subject to the penalties hereunder.
§ 450-59 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-59
1:850
ARTICLE IX
Nonconforming Uses
§ 450-60. Continuation.
§ 450-61. Repair or reconstruction.
§ 450-62. Alteration or extension.
§ 450-63. Construction under permit granted prior to passage.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction
or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been
heretofore issued and the construction of which shall have been diligently
prosecuted within three months of the date of such permit and the groundstory
framework of which, including the second tier of beams, shall have
been completed within six months of the date of such permit and which
entire building shall be completed according to such filed plans within one
year from the effective date of this chapter.
A. A use or structure existing at the effective date of this chapter which
shall be made nonconforming by the passage of this chapter or of any
amendments thereto may be continued, subject to the conditions
enumerated in this article.
B. The provisions regarding nonconformity shall apply only to a use,
building or structure legally established or erected, but not to any use
established or building or structure erected in violation of law,
regardless of the time of establishment or erection.
A. A nonconforming use or structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by
a proper authority may be restored to a safe condition.
B. A nonconforming use or structure damaged by fire or other causes to
the extent of less than 50% of its theoretical full value (based on
application of the state equalization rate to the current assessed value)
may be repaired or restored to its original condition.
C. A nonconforming use or structure damaged by fire or other causes to
the extent of 50% or more of its theoretical full value (based on
application of the state equalization rate to the current assessed value)
shall not be repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the
regulations of this chapter.
A. A nonconforming use or building may not be structurally altered during
its life to an extent exceeding in aggregate cost 25% of the assessed
value of the building, unless such building is changed to a conforming
use.
B. A nonconforming use shall not be extended in any way, shape or manner
to displace a conforming use on the same lot or on adjoining lots.
§ 450-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-64
1:851
§ 450-64. Changes in or discontinuance of use.
A. A nonconforming use that has been discontinued for a period of one
year shall be considered to have been abandoned and shall not
thereafter be reestablished. Any future use shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter.
B. A nonconforming use may not be changed to another nonconforming
use.
C. A nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use, but
thereafter it shall not be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use.
§ 450-64 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-64
1:852
ARTICLE X
Site Plan Review
[Amended 2-2-1988 by L.L. No. 1-1988; 7-18-1989 by L.L. No.
10-1989; 7-7-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992; 8-16-1994 by L.L. No.
11-1994; 6-18-1996 by L.L. No. 3-1996; 7-17-2001 by L.L. No.
11-2001; 9-21-2004 by L.L. No. 9-2004]
§ 450-65. Purpose. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
The changing scale of development for residential and commercial purposes
and the creation of unique problems of traffic, circulation and other areas
of public health, safety and welfare require the Village of Sleepy Hollow
to exercise greater control over such development. To that end, it is found
desirable to require that proposals for certain development be reviewed and
approved by the Village of Sleepy Hollow Planning Board.
§ 450-66. Required submissions.
A. Approval required. No building permit shall be issued, no structure or
use shall be established, no use shall be changed to another use, and on
lots located in nonresidential districts, no existing grades shall be
altered without prior conformity with the site plan approval procedures
set forth in this article. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
B. A site plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the Planning
Board in each of the following instances:
(1) The construction of all new buildings, homes, and detached
garages built next to an existing dwelling, exceeding 250 square
feet of space. For purposes of this section, an addition costing more
than 50% of current fair market value of the building (excluding
land) or adding more than 50% in floor area shall be deemed to be
construction of a new building. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013; 2-3-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
(2) Any change of use from residential to nonresidential.
(3) All proposed subdivisions of land, with the exception of lot line
adjustments three feet or less. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
(4) Any change which would result in a change of the contour of the lot
greater than 10% or result in a change in the slope grade of the lot
greater than 10%.
C. The Planning Board, upon the submittal of a complete application as
determined by the Department of Architecture, Land Use Development,
Buildings and Building Compliance (hereinafter the "Department"),
shall have the authority to review and render a decision regarding site
plan and subdivision applications in the interest of the general welfare
and to minimize any potential adverse impact to the community and the
§ 450-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-66
1:853
neighborhood. Prior to the approval of a site plan or subdivision
application, the Planning Board must, when required, refer the site
plan to the Waterfront Advisory Committee for a consistency finding
regarding the Village of Sleepy Hollow Local Waterfront Revitalization
Program, and the Architectural Review Board for preliminary
comments as per Chapter 9, Architectural Review Board, § 9-10.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
D. In all cases where any amendment of an approved site plan (the "plan")
is proposed, the applicant shall secure the approval of the amendment
by the Planning Board. No building permit may be issued for any
building within the development plan or amendment of any such plan
until an approved and duly executed site plan has been secured by the
applicant and presented to the Department. No certificate of occupancy
may be issued for or use of land within the purview of this section
unless the building is constructed or used, or the land is developed or
used, in conformity with an approved site plan and/or an amendment of
any such plan. Prior to review and approval by the Planning Board, the
Department shall certify on each site plan whether or not the plan
meets the requirement of the local law other than those enumerated in
this section of this article regarding site plan approval. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
E. The continued validity of a certificate of occupancy shall be subject to
continued conformance with an approved site plan and conditions of
approval.
F. A site plan shall comprise a general development plan for the entire
project, showing use or uses, dimensions and location of proposed and
existing structures and of areas to be reserved for vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, parking, areas reserved for park or recreational
use, landscaping and other spaces, together with such architectural
sketches and drawings as may be necessary to demonstrate the nature
and character of the proposed uses, the physical relationship of such
uses and such other information as may be required for the Planning
Board to make its determinations. The site plan shall be prepared by a
licensed professional engineer, surveyor, or registered architect as per
the New York State Education Law.
G. General submission requirements.
(1) A submitted plan shall comprise a general development plan for the
entire project, showing all of the below items, together with such
architectural sketches and drawings as may be necessary to
demonstrate the nature and character of the proposed and existing
uses, the physical relationship of such uses and such other
information as may be required for the Planning Board to make its
determination. All maps, grading plans, surveys and site plans,
building plans and elevations shall be submitted drawn to scale (no
smaller than one inch equals 20 feet unless otherwise requested by
the Department), and shall be signed and sealed by an architect,
§ 450-66 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-66
1:854
engineer, or surveyor who is duly licensed by New York State.
Elevations and floor plans are to be drawn at a clearly legible and
standard architectural scale. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
(2) For placement on the Planning Board agenda, all applicants shall
submit to the Department, at the Village Hall of the Village of
Sleepy Hollow, during normal business hours, no less than 14 days
prior to a meeting of the Planning Board at which the applicant
proposes to appear before the Board, a complete application.
(a) A complete application shall include, at a minimum, the
following:
[1] A cover sheet setting forth the name, address, phone
number, e-mail address of the project's applicant, owner,
location, project name, and designated planning,
engineering, architectural, surveying, environmental,
historic, and/or any other consultants by name and
address, and legal counsel, if any, by name and address. A
checklist constituting a table of contents of all documents
shall be attached to the cover sheet. A written narrative
statement describing the existing and proposed project,
including the type, hours and manner of the use of the
building or land, traffic and parking conditions in the area,
and other salient features shall also be attached to the
cover sheet.
[2] The environmental assessment form (EAF) as required by
the State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
[3] A coastal assessment form.
[4] The name, address, and endorsement of the owner of
record, or written permission from the owner(s) of record
to apply. Such permission shall include an acceptance by
the owner of record of responsibility for all filing and
review and other fees required in connection with the
submission.
[5] The names of all owners of record within 200 feet of each
corner of the property line.
[6] A property boundary survey.
[7] An area map showing all streets and property within 1,000
feet of the applicant's property, at a scale of one inch
equals 400 feet. All property owned by the applicant shall
be clearly identified.
[8] The location of all existing structures and other man-made
features of the site, as well as those on adjacent
§ 450-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-66
1:855
properties, including existing utility lines (water, sewer,
gas, and electric). The proposed structure(s) and/or manmade
feature(s) shall reflect adequate provision for water,
sewage and other utilities, parking, curb cuts, and other
applicable provisions as determined by local, state, or
federal regulations and a determination by the Village's
consulting engineer. The location and design of the
proposed project's water supply, sewage disposal, and
stormwater drainage systems, including the locations,
sizes, invert and rim elevations, to the existing water
supply, sewage disposal, and stormwater drainage systems
shall also be included. All proposals shall include
projections for estimating and accommodating storm
runoff volumes at least that of the one-hundred-year flood.
Where determined to be necessary by the Planning Board
during its review of a submitted application, a proposal
shall project Hudson River estuary high, low, and mean
tide levels based on levels at three feet (or one meter)
higher than the present recorded levels.
[9] The location of the nearest fire hydrants and the widths of
streets and avenues encompassing the site. All proposals
shall reflect adequate access for emergency access for fire
protection and emergency medical services, reflecting the
advice of the Department of Architecture, Land Use
Development, Buildings and Building Compliance, and
shall include flow and pressure requirements for the fire
sprinkler system and backflow preventer. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
[10] An existing and proposed topography map of the
subdivision and/or site plan, extending at least 20 feet
beyond the site boundaries with contour intervals not
greater than two feet and referenced to USGS or another
approved benchmark and scale.
[11] The nature and location of all other existing site features,
including wetlands, watercourses, wooded areas, and rock
outcrops.
[12] Proposed use or uses.
[13] Tree survey.
[14] Dimensions and location of proposed structures, signs,
lighting, curbing, walls, roadways, erosion control and
detail sheets.
[15] Dimensions and location of areas to be reserved for
vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and areas
reserved to park.
§ 450-66 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-66
1:856
[16] Dimensions and location of areas to be reserved for
recreational use, landscaping, and other open spaces. All
landscape plans, including tree conservation measures
and proposed new plantings, shall show the quantity and
placement of each plant on site, including a planting
schedule indicating the plant species with both English
and Latin names, plant dimensions at the time of planting,
full growth height/width ranges, and projected maturation
time for each plant.
[17] All proposals shall set forth any historic structure or land
uses and/or natural configurations of the parcel(s) and
identify any historic or prehistoric objects, sites, or
features on, under or about the site, where applicable.
[18] The name, address, and professional seal of the licensed
professional engineer, surveyor, or registered architect (as
per the New York State Education Law) preparing the
application.
[19] All applicable fees and deposits, and a completed fee
agreement form.
[20] A completed application form.
[21] A stormwater pollution prevention plan consistent with the
requirements of Chapter 358, Stormwater Management
and Erosion and Sediment Control, and Article XVII,
Stormwater Control, of this chapter. The SWPPP shall
meet the performance and design criteria and standards in
Article XVII, Stormwater Control, of this chapter. The
approved site plan shall be consistent with the provisions
of this article. [Added 1-25-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
(b) Applications shall also specify whether any further
recommendations and/or approvals are required from the
Village Board of Trustees, Architectural Review Board, Tree
Commission, Waterfront Advisory Committee, Historic
Resource Evaluation Committee, or the Zoning Board of
Appeals for a related variance. Upon receiving any necessary
permits from such other Village boards or committees, the
applicant shall submit copies of such approvals or permits to
the Planning Board, together with any necessary application to
amend any prior approvals of the Planning Board in order to
conform to the findings of the other boards.
(c) An applicant may petition the Planning Board to waive certain
of the above requirements if it is determined by the Board that
the requirement is not applicable to the review of the
applicant's site plan.
§ 450-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-66
1:857
§ 450-67. Action by Planning Board.
(d) An applicant shall provide 11 complete packages (one original
and 10 copies) of all materials submitted for consideration by
the Planning Board. Each package shall be submitted to the
Department not less than 14 days before the Planning Board
meeting at which the matter could be considered. Receipt of
the above information does not, however, guarantee placement
on the Planning Board agenda, since the materials must be
reviewed and accepted for completeness by Village staff and its
applicable consultants. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
(3) An applicant shall also provide evidence that it has given notice of
its application to the public schools of the Tarrytowns, to the public
schools of Pocantico Hills (if the project lies within the school
district), to the Village of Tarrytown, Village of Briarcliff Manor,
Town of Mount Pleasant and Town of Greenburgh, and the County
of Westchester, and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, the New York State Department of
Transportation, and the New York State Department of Parks,
Recreation and Historic Preservation, and any other interested
state agencies or interested agencies of the government of the
United States of America, when required.
H. An applicant may petition the Planning Board to waive certain of the
above requirements if it is determined by the Board that said
requirement is not applicable to the review of the applicant's site plan.
A. The Planning Board's review of the site plan shall include, as the
Planning Board deems appropriate, but shall not be limited to the
following general considerations:
(1) The location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress to
and egress from the site in relation to streets giving access to the
site and in relation to pedestrian traffic, taking into account
§ 450-36A, 450-41C, and 450-54.
(2) The traffic circulation features within the site and the location of
automobile parking areas and loading areas, taking into account
§ 450-41.
(3) The location, arrangement, size and general site compatibility, of
main and accessory buildings, lighting and signs on the site and in
relation to one another, taking into account § 450-66.
(4) The location and type of signs in relation to traffic control devices,
taking into account Chapter 338, Signs, of the Village Code.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(5) The degree of uniformity, dissimilarity, inappropriateness, or poor
quality of design in the exterior appearance of buildings and the
§ 450-66 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-67
1:858
degree to which any such uniformity, dissimilarity,
inappropriateness, or poor quality of design adversely affects the
desirability of the immediate area and neighboring areas for
residential, business or other purposes and by so doing impairs the
benefits of occupancy of existing property in such areas, impairs
the stability and value of both improved and unimproved real
property in such areas, prevents the most appropriate development
and use of such areas, contributes to the degeneration of property
in such areas, with attendant deterioration of conditions affecting
the health, safety and general welfare of the community, and
contributes to the diminution of the taxable value of real property
in such areas and its ability to support the municipal services
provided thereof, taking into account and applying the review
criteria and standards of Chapter 9, Architectural Review Board, of
the Village Code. [Added 12-8-2015 by L.L. No. 9-2015]
B. With respect to the foregoing matters, the Planning Board may make
such requirements in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter as will
assure:
(1) The safety and convenience of vehicular traffic within the site and
in relation to access streets.
(2) The safety and convenience of pedestrian traffic within the site and
on the public streets giving access to the site.
(3) Harmonious and beneficial relations among the buildings and uses
within the site.
(4) Satisfactory and harmonious relations between the development on
the site and the existing and prospective development of
contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods.
(5) Satisfactory and harmonious relations between the development on
the site and the goals and objectives of the Village of Sleepy Hollow
Local Waterfront Revitalization Program.
(6) The reservation and designation of parkland and open space on
areas considered for development; although, where this objective is
considered impracticable, the Planning Board may require a fee as
set forth in the fee schedule included at the end of Chapter 200,
Fees, in lieu of such designation and reservation per residential lot
or dwelling unit in the case of multifamily housing (condominiums
or apartments) or per theoretical residential lot in commercial
developments. However, in the case of multifamily developments or
continuing-care retirement communities (CCRCs), the Planning
Board may adjust the recreation fee in relation to the recreational
facilities provided within the subject development. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 450-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-67
1:859
(7) Full compliance with the requirements of the New York State
Environmental Quality Review Act and all other applicable laws
and regulations.
(8) Location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of off-street
parking and loading.
(9) Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access and
circulation, walkway structures, control of intersections with
vehicular traffic and overall pedestrian convenience.
(10) Adequacy of stormwater and drainage facility.
(11) Adequacy of water supply and sewage disposal facilities.
(12) Adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and other
landscaping constituting a visual and/or noise buffer between the
applicant's and adjoining lands, including the maximum retention
of existing vegetation.
(13) Adequacy of fire lanes and other emergency zones and the
provision of fire hydrants.
(14) Special attention to the adequacy and impact of structures,
roadways and landscaping in areas with susceptibility to ponding,
flooding and/or erosion.
(15) Consultation with Village, county, state and federal officials and
other public and private consultants as deemed appropriate.
C. In pursuance of the above-stated objectives, the Planning Board may
require landscaping, fences, and walls of the nature described in
§ 450-36C, and the same shall be provided and maintained as a
condition of the establishment and the continued maintenance of the
use to which they are appurtenant.
D. The Planning Board may also require that the applicant obtain the
written approval of the Village of Sleepy Hollow Tree Commission in
accordance with Chapter 385, Trees, of the Village Code for
landscaping, including the designation, planting, and initial care of
trees for a site, before the Planning Board takes action on the
application.
E. No site plan and/or amendment to a site plan shall be approved by the
Planning Board until the same has been reviewed and approved by the
Village Engineer with respect to the adequacy of proposed facilities for
sewerage and for the drainage of stormwater.
F. Approval of a site plan and/or amendment to a site plan by the Planning
Board under the provisions of this section shall expire one year after the
date thereof unless a building permit or permits have been obtained for
construction in accordance with such approved plan.
§ 450-67 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-67
1:860
§ 450-68. Approval or disapproval.
G. The Planning Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of a site
plan review, amendment to a site plan, or subdivision application or
other matter subject to the jurisdiction of the Board, giving due notice
thereof to the applicant. Said applicant shall, for site plan review,
amendment to a site plan, and all subdivision applications other than
one-lot subdivisions, at least 20 days prior to the time appointed for said
hearing, give personal notice to all owners of property situated within
or without the Village of Sleepy Hollow within 200 feet of the property
affected by said application. Such notice shall be given by certified mail,
return receipt requested, with return receipts provided to the
Department the week prior to the holding of the public hearing. In the
case of a one-lot subdivision review, the applicant shall, at least 20 days
prior to the time appointed for said hearing, give personal notice to all
owners of property situated within or without the Village of Sleepy
Hollow adjacent to and directly across the public thoroughfare or street
of the subject property. Such notice shall be given by certified mail,
return receipt requested, with return receipts provided to the
Department the week prior to the holding of the public hearing.
H. Notice of public hearings on applications. In addition to the distribution
of written notice of any hearing on an application sent by use of the
United States Postal Service, and in addition to the posting of the
written notice in a public place in Village Hall, a prominent sign shall be
posted two weeks prior to the hearing at the edge of the property
wherever it abuts a public street, in a clear and visible location, giving
notice of the public hearing and any continuation and its subject, and
the location of the hearing and its time and date. This shall be
performed by the applicant and an affidavit of posting submitted to the
Department the Friday before the meeting at which it is to be heard.
The applicant shall maintain the sign until the public hearing is closed.
A. The Planning Board shall decide whether to approve or deny the
application for site plan based upon the factors listed in § 450-67. Upon
completion of the SEQR process, the Planning Board may approve,
approve with modifications and/or conditions or disapprove the site
plan. Such decision as to approval, disapproval or conditional approval
shall be made within 62 days after the closing of the public hearing. The
time within which a decision must be rendered may be extended by
mutual consent of the applicant and the Planning Board.
B. Upon approval of the site plan with or without modifications and/or
conditions and payment by the applicant of all fees and reimbursable
costs due to the Village, the Planning Board shall endorse its approval
on a copy of the final site plan and shall forward a copy to the applicant
and the Building Inspector and file same with the Village Clerk.
C. Upon disapproval of a site plan, the Planning Board shall so inform the
Building Inspector, and the Building Inspector shall deny a building
permit to the applicant. The Planning Board shall also notify the
§ 450-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-68
1:861
§ 450-69. Issuance of permits and certificates of occupancy.
§ 450-70. Reimbursable costs. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Costs incurred by the Village for consultation fees, including legal fees,
traffic and planning studies and environmental review pursuant to SEQR or
other expenses in connection with the review of a proposed site plan shall
be charged to the applicant. The Department may require that an amount
sufficient to pay said costs be deposited with the Village. The applicant shall
also pay to the Village the cost of publication of the notice of public hearing.
Upon the failure of the applicant to pay such costs, the Department shall
certify the costs to the Assessors of the Village, and thereupon such costs
shall become and be a lien upon the land involved and shall be added to and
become a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such land
and shall bear interest at the same rate as, and be collected and enforced
in the same manner as, taxes. The provisions of this section with respect to
costs shall be in addition to any penalty imposed by this chapter for violation
of or noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.
applicant in writing of its decision and its reason for disapproval. Such
disapproval shall be filed with the Village Clerk. [Amended 1-22-2013
by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. No permit shall be issued for any building in any area covered by a site
plan and/or site plan amendment required under the provisions of this
chapter except in conformity with such site plan or a subsequent
amendment thereof adopted as in the first instance.
B. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any such building unless
the same conforms in all respects to such site plan and/or site plan
amendment and unless all automobile parking spaces and all other
features included in such site plan and/or site plan amendment have
been installed in accordance therewith. Conformity to the site plan and/
or a subsequent adopted amendment to the site plan shall be
determined by site inspection(s) performed by the Department or a
representative thereof.
C. If the proposed building is intended for use as a house in any residence
R District, such plans shall also show the exact cubic footage contained
in the house, separately stating the cubic content of any cellar, porch,
breezeway and garage, and with respect to the attic, separately stating
the attic space deemed qualified as livable, if any, and the nonlivable
attic space. Such plans should also show the proposed layout of the
livable attic space deemed qualified.
§ 450-68 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-70
1:862
ARTICLE XI
Administration
[Amended 9-10-1973; 7-7-1987 by L.L. No. 7-1987; 6-16-1980 by
L.L. No. 3-1980; 7-3-1990 by L.L. No. 6-1990; 7-7-1992 by L.L. No.
4-1992; 8-16-1994 by L.L. No. 11-1994; 3-23-2010 by L.L. No.
6-2010]
§ 450-71. Enforcement.
§ 450-72. Building Inspector.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector, who shall be
appointed by the Village Board of Trustees. No building permit or
certificate of occupancy shall be issued by him except where all
provisions of this chapter have been complied with.
B. No other officer, board, agency, or employee of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow shall issue, grant, or approve any permit, certificate or other
authorization for any erection of any building, structure or for any use
of any land or building, except special permits issued by the Mayor and
Board of Trustees in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any
such permit, certificate or other authorization issued, granted or
approved in violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be null and
void and of no effect, without the necessity of any proceedings for
revocation or nullification thereof, and any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to any such permit, certificate or authorization
shall be unlawful, and no action shall be taken by any officer, board,
agency or employee of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, including the Board
of Appeals, to validate any such violations. [Amended 1-22-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. Powers and duties. The Building Inspector is hereby given the duty,
power and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. He shall
examine all applications for permits and shall issue permits for the
construction, alteration, enlargement and occupancy of all uses which
are in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and for
nonconforming uses and buildings existing at the time of passage of this
chapter.
B. Records to be kept. The Building Inspector shall maintain files of all
applications and plans to him and of all permits and certificates of
occupancy issued by him and shall maintain records of all actions taken
by him pursuant to such applications. He shall keep a record of every
identifiable complaint of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter and of the action taken consequent on such complaint.
C. Reports. The Building Inspector shall report to the governing body
annually, summarizing for the period since his last previous report all
applications approved by him all permits and certificates of occupancy
issued by him and all complaints of violation made to him and the action
§ 450-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-72
1:863
§ 450-73. Building permits.
In addition to the requirements of Chapter 145, Building Construction,
§ 145-20, of this Code, no person shall erect, alter or convert any structure
or building or part thereof, or alter the use of any land, subsequent to the
adoption of this chapter, until a building permit has been issued by the
Building Inspector.
§ 450-74. Certificates of occupancy.
taken by him thereon. A copy of each such report shall be filed with
the Planning Board at the same time that it is filed with the governing
body. The Building Inspector shall also make such reports to the Board
of Appeals and the Planning Board as may be required.
A. The procedures and requirements for filing and obtaining a building
permit shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 145, Building
Construction, § 145-20, of this Code.
B. Denial of permits. If the Building Inspector determines that the plans as
submitted fail to satisfy the requirements of this chapter, he shall refuse
to issue a building permit. The applicant may then apply to the Board of
Appeals for the reversal of the decision of the Building Inspector as
provided in Article XIII of this chapter.
C. Revocation of permits. If it shall appear at any time to the Building
Inspector that the application or accompanying plan is in any respect
false or misleading or that work is being done upon the premises
differing materially from that called for in the application filed with him
under existing laws, he may forthwith revoke the building permit,
whereupon it shall be the duty of the person holding the same to
surrender it and all copies thereof to the Building Inspector. After the
building permit has been revoked, the Building Inspector may, in his
discretion, before issuing a new building permit, require the applicant
to file an indemnity bond in favor of the Village, with sufficient surety
conditioned for compliance with this chapter and all laws then in force
and in a sum to cover the cost of removing the structure if it does not so
comply.
A. Certificates of occupancy required.
(1) No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter
erected, altered or extended shall be occupied, used or changed in
use in whole or in part until a certificate of occupancy shall have
been issued by the Building Inspector, stating that the structure or
use complies with all the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Upon the sale or transfer of any improved real property, including
an individual condominium unit and an individual cooperative unit
which, for the purposes of this section, shall be considered a piece
of improved real property. An updated certificate of occupancy,
§ 450-72 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-74
1:864
§ 450-75. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is
not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to
impair or interfere with any existing provisions of the law or any rules,
regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, or which shall be
adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or
premises; nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate
or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties;
provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of premises or buildings, upon the height or bulk of buildings,
or requires larger yards, courts or other open spaces than are imposed or
issued no earlier than 60 days before closing, shall be required
before the premises or unit may be used or occupied. It shall be
the obligation of the seller to apply for and obtain the updated
certificate of occupancy. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
B. The procedures and requirements for filing and issuance of a certificate
of occupancy shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 145,
Building Construction, § 145-23, of this Code and:
(1) A certificate of occupancy shall be issued within 10 days after the
Building Inspector determines that the structure or use, as
completed, is in full conformity with the provisions of this chapter
and other applicable codes and laws, including but not limited to
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code,
Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Sanitary Code and Housing Code.
(2) Certificates of occupancy for nonconforming uses. A certificate of
occupancy shall be issued, upon application and after inspection, to
any nonconforming use which complies with the requirements of
other applicable codes and laws. However, no nonconforming use
shall be renewed, or extended, without a new certificate of
occupancy therefor having been issued by the Building Inspector.
C. Penalties for offenses. No prior written notice of violation or request to
cure shall be required to enforce the provisions of this section. For any
such violation, the owner, general agent or contractor of a building or
premises or part thereof where such violation has been committed or
shall exist, and the general agent, architect, builder, contractor or any
other person who commits, takes part or assists in such violation, shall
be subject to a penalty of not less than $5,000 nor more than $10,000
for the first day of each such violation and no less than $1,000 nor more
than $5,000 for each and every day that any such violation continues
thereafter to exist. In addition to the fines and penalties set forth
herein, a party convicted of a violation of this chapter shall pay all costs
and expenses incurred by the Village in determining such violation.
§ 450-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-75
1:865
required by such existing provisions of law, or by such rules, regulations or
permits or by such easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of
this chapter shall control.
§ 450-75 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-75
1:866
ARTICLE XII
Board of Appeals
§ 450-76. Establishment and continuation.
§ 450-77. Organization. [Amended 5-17-1988 by L.L. No. 6-1988]
The Board of Appeals shall consist of seven members, all of whom shall
be residents of the Village of Sleepy Hollow and who shall not hold any
position, elective or appointive, under the municipality.
§ 450-78. Employment of staff.
Within the limit of appropriations made available to it by the governing body
of the Village, the Board of Appeals may employ a secretary, legal counsel
and such other personnel as may be required for the conduct of its business.
§ 450-79. Rules of procedure.
The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and any others not inconsistent with the laws of
the State of New York.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of § 7-712 of the Village Law, a Board of
Appeals is hereby established in and for the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
B. Continuation in office of existing Board of Appeals. The Board of
Appeals heretofore established shall continue as the Board of Appeals
in and for the Village of Sleepy Hollow, with all the powers and duties
prescribed by law and as herein described. Members in office at the
time of adoption of this chapter shall remain in office until the normal
expiration of the term for which appointed.82
A. Appointment of members. Each member shall be appointed by the
Mayor for a term of three years. Vacancies on the Board shall be filled
by the Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term.
B. Removal of members. A member of the Board of Appeals may be
removed for cause upon written charges presented by the governing
body of the Village and after notice of such charges and a public
hearing thereon.
C. Compensation of members. No member of the Board of Appeals shall
receive any compensation for service on such Board.
A. Officers. The Board shall choose annually from among its membership,
at its first meeting in April, a Chairman and a Vice Chairman.
82.Editor's Note: Original § 62-36.1 of the 1965 Code, Alternate members, added 10-27-1986
by L.L. No. 3-1986, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 5-17-1988 by
L.L. No. 6-1988.
§ 450-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-79
1:867
§ 450-80. Powers and duties.
The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals pursuant to the laws of
the State of New York and shall have the following powers:
B. Meetings. Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of
the Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The
Chairman or the Acting Chairman at any meeting shall have the power
to issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses and the production
of records, and may issue oaths and take testimony. All regular
meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public.
C. Quorum and action. The concurring votes of at least four members of
the Board shall be required to effect any action of the Board or to
establish a quorum and to make technical corrections to the section.
[Amended 5-15-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
D. Minutes and records. Minutes shall be kept of the proceedings of the
Board of Appeals, and shall show the vote of each member on each
question. If a member is absent or refrains from voting, such fact shall
be recorded. Records shall be kept of all examinations and other official
actions. The minutes and records shall be public documents and shall
be filed with the office of the Board immediately after each meeting.
E. Annual report. The Board of Appeals shall report to the governing body
annually, summarizing all appeals and applications made to it since its
last previous report and summarizing its decisions on such appeals and
applications. At the same time that each such report is filed with the
governing body, copies thereof shall also be filed with the Mayor, the
Planning Board, the Building Inspector and the Village Attorney.83
A. Interpretation of Zoning Law and Official Zoning Map. The Board of
Appeals shall make a determination of the facts and/or an
interpretation of the provisions of this chapter or the Official Zoning
Map on receipt of:
(1) A request from the Building Inspector or any citizen for
clarification or interpretation of the provisions of this chapter or
contents of the Official Zoning Map.
(2) An allegation that the Building Inspector is in error in his refusal to
grant a building permit or certificate of occupancy as a result of his
misinterpretation of the meaning, intent or applicability of any part
of this chapter.
(3) An allegation that the Building Inspector is in error in his
determination of the exact location of a zone district boundary as
shown on the Official Zoning Map.
83.Editor's Note: Original Subsection F, Annual review of records by the Village Attorney,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013.
§ 450-79 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-80
1:868
B. Special permits. The Board shall have power to authorize an off-site
parking area or joint use of parking facilities subject to the provisions of
§ 450-53 as to location and design and of § 450-66 as the site plan
review by the Planning Board, the determination of the facts of each
case, and such other criteria, conditions and safeguards which may be
imposed by the Board of Appeals to secure the general objectives of this
chapter and to protect adjoining properties.
C. Variances. In cases where, by reason of extreme narrowness,
shallowness or shape of a specific lot, or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation
or condition pertaining to such lot, the strict application of the
regulations of this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional
practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon, the
owner of such lot, the Board may, after due notice and public hearing,
grant a variance from the strict application of this chapter. [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(1) Use variances. A use variance is the authorization by the Zoning
Board of Appeals for the use of land for a purpose which is
otherwise not allowed or is prohibited by the applicable zoning
regulations.
(a) The Board of Appeals, on appeal from the decision or
determination of the administrative officer, shall have the
power to grant use variances, as defined herein.
(b) No such variance shall be granted by the Board of Appeals
without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning
regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary
hardship. In order to prove such unnecessary hardship, the
applicant shall demonstrate to the Board of Appeals that for
each and every permitted use under the zoning regulations for
the particular district where the property is located:
[1] The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided
that lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by
competent financial evidence;
[2] The alleged hardship relating to the property is unique and
does not apply to a substantial portion of the district or
neighborhood;
[3] The requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
[4] The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(c) The Board of Appeals, in granting use variances, shall grant
the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate to address the unnecessary hardship proved by the
applicant, and at the same time preserve and protect the
§ 450-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-80
1:869
character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
(2) Area variances. An area variance is the authorization by the Zoning
Board of Appeals for the use of land in a manner which is not
allowed by the dimensional or physical requirements of the
applicable zoning regulations.
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power, upon an
appeal from a decision or determination of the administrative
official, to grant area variances as defined herein.
(b) In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
take into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the
variance is granted, as weighed against the detriment to the
health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or community
by such grant. In making such determination, the Board shall
also consider:
[1] Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area
variance;
[2] Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be
achieved by some method, feasible for the applicant to
pursue, other than an area variance;
[3] Whether the requested area variance is essential;
[4] Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect
or impact on the physical or environmental considerations
in the neighborhood or district; and
[5] Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Board
of Appeals, but shall not necessarily preclude the granting
of the area variance.
(c) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate and at the same time preserve and protect the
character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
(3) Imposition of conditions. The Board of Appeals shall, in the
granting of both use variances and area variances, have the
authority to impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions as
are directly related to and incidental to the proposed use of the
property. Such conditions shall be consistent with the spirit and
intent of this chapter, and shall be imposed for the purpose of
§ 450-80 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-80
1:870
minimizing any adverse impact such variance may have upon the
neighborhood or community.
D. Temporary uses. The Board of Appeals may, after due notice and public
hearing, permit temporary occupancy and use of a structure in any
district for a purpose that does not conform with the regulations for
that district. Such occupancy and use shall be subject to any reasonable
conditions and safeguards which the Board may impose to minimize any
injurious effect upon the neighborhood or to protect contiguous
property. Such approval and permit based thereon shall not be valid for
more than 12 months, but may be renewed not more than once for
another period of 12 months, upon application.
§ 450-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-80
1:871

ARTICLE XIII
Procedure for Appeals
§ 450-81. Who may appeal.
Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved,
or by his agent, or by an officer, board or bureau of the Village of Sleepy
Hollow affected by any decision of the Building Inspector. Such appeal shall
be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the Board of
Appeals by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with
the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The
officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board
of Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the appeal was
taken.
§ 450-82. Information to accompany appeal.
All appeals shall be in writing on forms prescribed by the Board of Appeals.
Every appeal shall refer to the specific provision of this chapter that is
involved, and shall fully set forth the circumstances of the case, the
interpretation that is claimed on an allegation of error, the variance that is
applied for and the grounds on which it is claimed that the same should be
granted or the special use for which the permit is sought or any other such
information that the rules of the Board may require.
§ 450-83. Stay of proceedings by appeal.
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect of
which the decision appealed from was made, unless the officer from whose
action the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Appeals, after the notice
of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of the facts stated
in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by the
State Supreme Court on application or notice to the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
§ 450-84. Hearing and notice. [Amended 1-19-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993; 2-16-1993 by L.L. No. 3-1993]
The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal or other matter subject to the jurisdiction of the Board, giving due
notice thereof to the appellant or applicant. Said appellant shall, at least
20 days prior to the time appointed for said hearing, give personal notice
to all owners of property situated within or without the Village of Sleepy
Hollow within 200 feet of the property to be affected by said appeal. Such
notice shall be given by certified mail, return receipt requested. In addition,
the Board of Appeals shall, at least 20 days prior to the time appointed for
said hearing, publish a notice of the time and place of such public hearing
in a local newspaper of general circulation in the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
§ 450-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-84
1:873
The appellant or applicant shall, by affidavit, present satisfactory proof to
the Board of Appeals at the time of the hearing that notices have been duly
mailed. Any party may appear at the hearing in person, by agent or by
attorney.
§ 450-85. Expiration of resolution.
Unless otherwise specified by the Board of Appeals, a decision on any
appeal or request for a variance or special use permit shall expire without
notice if the applicant fails to obtain any necessary building permit or
comply with the conditions of said authorized permit within one year from
the date of authorization thereof. However, an extension may be granted by
the Board of Appeals because of the occurrence of conditions unforeseen at
the time of the original action. Any application for extension shall be subject
to the same procedure as specified in this article for the original issuance of
the variance or use permit.
§ 450-86. Time frame for decision. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Whenever an appeal shall be taken to the Board of Appeals pursuant to
this article, said Board shall render its decision upon such appeal within 62
days from the date of the hearing on such appeal. The time within which
the Board of Appeals must render its decision may be extended by mutual
consent of the applicant and the Board.
§ 450-87. Repeated hearing. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
Whenever the Board of Appeals, after hearing all the evidence presented
upon an application or appeal under the provisions of this chapter, denies
the same, said Board shall refuse to hold further hearings on that or a
substantially similar application or appeal by the same applicant, successor
or assignee for a period of six months. If the Board determines from the
information supplied with a request for a rehearing that changed conditions
have occurred relating to the promotion of the public health, safety,
convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare, the appeal or
application may be reconsidered within said period. A motion for the Zoning
A. Notice for nonresident owners. Whenever said owners are nonresidents
of the Village of Sleepy Hollow, such notice may be given by sending
written notice thereof by registered mail to the last-known address of
the property owner or owners, as shown by the most recent tax lists of
the Village. Where the owner is a partnership, service upon any partner,
as above provided, shall be sufficient, and where owners are
corporations, service upon any officers, as above set forth, shall be
sufficient. The appellant shall, by affidavit, present satisfactory proof to
the Board of Appeals at the time of the hearing that said notices have
been duly served as aforesaid. Upon the hearing, any party may appear
in person, by agent or by attorney.
§ 450-84 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-87
1:874
Board of Appeals to hold a rehearing to review any order, decision or
determination of the Board not previously reheard may be made by any
member of the Board in accordance with Village Law § 7-712-a, Subdivision
12.
§ 450-88. Required action by Planning Board.
The Board of Appeals shall transmit to the Planning Board a copy of every
appeal or application made to the Board, and shall also notify the Planning
Board of the date of the hearing thereon. In addition, the Board of Appeals
shall refer to the Planning Board all applications for variances, for special
permits, and such other applications or appeals which in its opinion require
review by the Planning Board.
§ 450-89. Referral of actions to county planning agency and to
neighboring municipalities. [Added 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. Criteria for Planning Board review. Upon referral, the Planning Board
shall review such applications to ensure conformance with the intent of
the Comprehensive Development Plan and Official Map, unless
otherwise provided herein.
B. Report by the Planning Board to the Board of Appeals. The Planning
Board shall report its findings to the Board of Appeals within 30 days of
receipt of a request for review. Such report shall state all recommended
conditions and modifications and the reasons for recommending
approval or disapproval.
C. 84Annual report by Planning Board to the governing body. Following the
enactment of this chapter, the Planning Board shall prepare and file
with the governing body annually a report on the operation of this
chapter, including recommendations as to the enactment of
amendments, supplements or changes thereof. Copies shall be filed
with the Board of Appeals, the Building Inspector and the Village
Attorney.
A. Referral to neighboring municipalities. Pursuant to General Municipal
Law § 239-nn, for a use variance review under this chapter involving
property located within 500 feet of an adjacent municipality, notice of
any public hearing shall be given by mail or electronic transmission to
the clerk of the adjacent municipality not less than 10 days prior to the
date of said hearing.
B. Notice to Park Commission and County Planning Board. At least five
days before a hearing on an action or appeal, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall mail notices thereof to the Regional State Parks
Commission having jurisdiction over any state park or parkway within
500 feet of the property affected by such appeal and to the County
84.Editor's Note: Original Subsection C, Overruling of planning Board recommendation, was
repealed 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013.
§ 450-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-89
1:875
Planning Board as required by § 239-m of the General Municipal Law,
which notice shall be accompanied by a full statement of the matter
under consideration, as defined in Subdivision 1 of § 239-m of the
General Municipal Law.
§ 450-89 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-89
1:876
ARTICLE XIV
Violations and Penalties
§ 450-90. Complaints.
Any person may file a complaint if there is any reason to believe a violation
of this chapter exists. All such complaints must be in writing and shall
be filed with the Building Inspector, who shall record such complaint and
immediately investigate. Upon his becoming aware of any violation of any
provision of this chapter, the Building Inspector shall serve notice of such
violation on the person committing or permitting the same, and if such
violation has not ceased within such reasonable time as the Building
Inspector has specified in such notice, he shall institute such action as may
be necessary to terminate the violation.
§ 450-91. Procedure for abatement. [Amended 3-23-2010 by L.L.
No. 6-2010; 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
In the event that any structure is erected, altered, repaired, or any structure
or property is used in violation of this chapter, the Building Inspector,
in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate legal action
or proceedings in accordance with Chapter 145, Building Construction,
§ 145-31, of this Code, to prevent such unlawful construction, alteration or
repair, or abate such violation and to prevent the occupancy and use of said
structure or land.
§ 450-92. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-18-1990 by L.L. No.
11-1990; 3-23-2010 by L.L. No. 6-2010]
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to strictly enforce all of the
provisions of this chapter. The general agent, architect, builder, contractor,
owner or tenant or any other person who commits, takes part in or assists
in any violation of this chapter or who maintains any building or premises in
which any violation of this chapter shall exist shall, for each and every day
that such violation continues, be subject to a civil penalty of not less than
$250 nor more than $1,500, which fine shall be increased to not less than
$500 nor more than $2,500 for subsequent violations. The collection thereof
shall be prosecuted in the manner prescribed by law in the Village of Sleepy
Hollow.
§ 450-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-92
1:877

ARTICLE XV
Amendments
§ 450-93. Authority to amend.
The governing body may, from time to time, after public notice and hearing,
amend, supplement or change the regulations and districts herein
established.
§ 450-94. Procedure.
A. By whom initiated. Proceedings for an amendment may be initiated only
as follows:
(1) By the governing body by the introduction of an amending local
law.
(2) By the Planning Board by adoption of a resolution recommending
an amendment.
(3) By public petition when owners of more than 50% of the frontage
within a district or part of a district shall present to the governing
body a duly signed petition for the amendment, change or
modification of said district or part of district. The governing body
shall act upon said petition within 130 days after the filing of said
petition with the Village Clerk. Said petition shall be accompanied
by a map showing the lots, buildings and uses of property within
the area for which the change of district is requested as well as all
of the property within 100 feet therefrom, exclusive of street space.
Said petition shall, furthermore, set forth the grounds of or reasons
for the proposed change.
B. Referral to Planning Board.
(1) Every resolution of intention to amend adopted by the governing
body and every petition for an amendment shall be referred to the
Planning Board for a report and recommendations.
(2) Basis for recommendations. In recommending the adoption of any
proposed amendment, the Planning Board shall fully state its
reason for each recommendation, describing any change in
conditions justifying the amendment and the manner in which the
amendment would be in harmony with the Comprehensive
Development Plan. The Planning Board need not confine its
recommendation to the proposed amendment as set forth in the
petition or resolution but may revise the proposal if the Planning
Board is of the opinion that such revision is in accord with the
furtherance of the purposes of this chapter.
(3) Time limit for action. The Planning Board shall report to the
governing body its recommendations with respect to any proposed
amendment initiated by petition or resolution within a period of 45
§ 450-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-94
1:879
days from and after the initiation of proceedings therefor. Failure
to report within such period shall be deemed an approval of the
proposed amendment.
C. Public hearing. No amendment, supplement, change, modification or
repeal of any regulation, restriction or district boundary shall become
effective until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which the
parties at interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.
(1) Notice. At least 15 days' notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be published in an official paper or a paper of general
circulation in the Village.
(2) Modification of petition or resolution. The hearing by the governing
body on a proposed amendment or resolution shall be held on the
petition or resolution as filed. Any further proposal in respect to
any proposal made in connection therewith, or any addition or
modification of the content of the proposed amendment, shall be
made only in the form of an amended petition or resolution. The
filing of such amended petition or resolution shall terminate all
proceedings consequent on the original petition or resolution and
shall be deemed to be the initiation of new proceedings, which shall
be conducted in full conformity with the provisions of this article as
if the original petition or resolution had never been filed, except
that a protest filed against the amendment as originally proposed
shall be deemed to have been filed against the amendment as
proposed in the amended petition to the extent that it is pertinent
thereto.
D. Withdrawal of a petition. With the consent of the governing body, a
petition for an amendment may be withdrawn at any time by the filing
of a verified petition of withdrawal signed by a majority of the persons
who signed the original petition. Such withdrawal shall terminate the
proceedings initiated by the original petition. Any proceedings for an
amendment initiated by a resolution of the governing body or the
Planning Board may be terminated by the body that initiated the same
at any time that such proceedings are before said body. In any event,
any hearing upon which notice has been given shall be held.
E. Adoption of resolution.
(1) Before adopting any amendment, the governing body shall adopt a
resolution setting forth the findings upon which it determined such
amendment to be required by the public interest in furtherance of
the purposes of this chapter.
(2) Protest by 20% of property owners. If a protest is filed against a
proposed amendment involving a change of district boundaries,
signed by the owners of 20% or more either of the area of the lots
included in such proposed change, or of those immediately
adjacent or in the rear thereof extending 100 feet therefrom, or by
the owners of 20% of the land directly opposite thereto extending
§ 450-94 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-94
1:880
100 feet from the frontage of such opposite land, such amendment
shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of 3/4 of all
the members of the governing body.
F. Repeated petition. No petition for a change in district boundaries shall
be considered by the governing body within a period of one year from
its last consideration of any proposed change in district boundaries
applying to substantially the same land.85
85.Editor's Note: Original Art. XVI, Modification of Zoning in Connection with Other Review
Procedures, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013.
§ 450-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-94
1:881

ARTICLE XVI
Stormwater Control
[Added 1-25-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005]
§ 450-95. Definitions.
The terms used in this article or in documents prepared or reviewed under
this article86 shall have the meanings as set forth in this section:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land development activity.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls
and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual, most recent version, including applicable updates, that serves
as the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and
practices.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snow melt and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
86.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 358, Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment
Control.
§ 450-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-95
1:883
industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction activity, including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill, that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or activities
disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger
common plan of development or sale, even though multiple separate and
distinct land development activities may take place at different times on
different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Cold-water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, habitats for
threatened, endangered or special concern species.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (SPDES) issued to developers for construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more areas of land.
§ 450-95 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-95
1:884
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal
separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality
standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designated to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — An employee or officer
designated by the municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution
prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and
inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPs) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK —
Lakes, bays, sounds, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells,
rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic
Ocean within the territorial seas of the State of New York and all
other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal,
fresh or salt, public or private (except those private waters that do
not combine or effect a junction with natural surface or underground
waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering the state or
within its jurisdiction.
A.
§ 450-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-95
1:885
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 450-96. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
Storm sewers and waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds
or lagoons which also meet the criteria of this definition, are not waters
of the state. This exclusion applies only to man-made bodies of water
which neither were originally created in waters of the state (such as a
disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from impoundment of waters of
the state.
B.
A. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement. No application for
approval of a land development activity shall be reviewed until the
appropriate board has received a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) prepared in accordance with the specifications in this
article.87
B. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
(1) All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information
and erosion and sediment controls:
(a) Background information about the scope of the project,
including location, type and size of project.
(b) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map. At a minimum, the site map should show
the total site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance;
areas that will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site
and adjacent off-site surface water(s); wetlands and drainage
patterns that could be affected by the construction activity;
existing and final slopes; locations of off-site material, waste,
borrow or equipment storage areas; and location(s) of the
stormwater discharge(s);
(c) Description of the soil(s) present at the site;
(d) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing,
excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation
and any other activity at the site that results in soil
disturbance. Consistent with the New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Erosion
Control Manual), not more than five acres shall be disturbed at
any one time unless pursuant to an approved SWPPP;
87.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 358, Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment
Control.
§ 450-95 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-96
1:886
(e) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be
used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction
debris from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
(f) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on-site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials, including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response;
(g) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures
to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment
control for each stage of the project, from initial land clearing
and grubbing to project close-out;
(h) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control
practice;
(i) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting
and sizing of any temporary sediment basins;
(j) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent
control measures;
(k) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in
place;
(l) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice;
(m) Name(s) of the receiving water(s);
(n) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site;
(o) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows
from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and
the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to
the degree attainable; and
(p) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the
site.
(2) Land development activities as defined in § 450-95 of this article
and meeting Condition A, B, C or D below shall also include water
quantity and water quality controls (post-construction stormwater
runoff controls) as set forth in Subsection B(3) below as applicable.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 450-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-96
1:887
(a) Condition A: stormwater runoff from land development
activities discharging a pollutant of concern to either an
impaired water identified on the Department's 303(d) list of
impaired waters or a total maximum daily load (TMDL)
designated watershed for which pollutants in stormwater have
been identified as a source of the impairment.
(b) Condition B: stormwater runoff from land development
activities disturbing five or more acres.
(c) Condition C: stormwater runoff from land development activity
disturbing between one acre and five acres of land during the
course of the project, exclusive of the construction of singlefamily
residences with 25% or less impervious cover at total
build-out and construction activities at agricultural properties.
(d) Condition D: stormwater runoff from land development
activities disturbing between one acre and five acres of land
for a single-family residential subdivision that will result in
greater than 25% impervious cover at total build-out.
(3) SWPPP requirements for Conditions A, B, C and D: [Amended
1-22-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(a) All information in Subsection B(1) of this section.
(b) Description of each post-construction stormwater management
practice, including documentation of the five-step planning
process for stormwater management using green
infrastructure as outlined in the Design Manual using the
practices in Schedules A1, A2 and A3.88
(c) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific
location(s) and size(s) of each post-construction stormwater
management practice.
(d) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural
components of the stormwater management system for the
applicable design storms.
(e) Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff conditions
with pre-development conditions.
(f) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
each post-construction stormwater management practice.
(g) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each post-construction stormwater management
practice.
88.Editor's Note: Schedules A1, A2 and A3 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 450-96 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-96
1:888
§ 450-97. Performance and design criteria.
All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance
and design criteria:
(h) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection
and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall
remain in effect with transfer of title to the property.
(i) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all
subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater
management measures in accordance with § 450-100 of this
article.
C. Plan certification. The SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape
architect, certified professional or professional engineer and must be
signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that the
design of all stormwater management practices meet the requirements
in this article.89
D. Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other
applicable environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the
land development activity prior to approval of the final stormwater
design plan.
E. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who
will be involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management
practice installation shall sign and date a copy of the following
certification statement before undertaking any land development
activity: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand and agree
to comply with the terms and conditions of the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for
any person to cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made.
(3) The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for
the land development activity.
F. A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land
development activity during construction from the date of initiation of
construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
89.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 358, Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment
Control.
§ 450-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-97
1:889
§ 450-98. Maintenance and repair of stormwater facilities.
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this article,90 the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are
designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
article:
(1) The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation), most
current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the
"Design Manual."
(2) New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2004), most current version or its successor, hereafter
referred to as the "Erosion Control Manual."
B. Water quality standards. No land development activity shall cause an
increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to
natural conditions in surface waters of the State of New York.
A. Maintenance during construction. [Amended 1-22-2013 by L.L. No.
1-2013]
(1) The applicant or developer of the land development activity shall at
all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of
treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are
installed or used by the applicant or developer to achieve
compliance with the conditions of this article.91 Sediment shall be
removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever their
design capacity has been reduced by 50%.
(2) The applicant or developer or their representative, one of whom
must be a trained contractor, shall be on site at all times when
construction, grading or other soil-disturbing activity takes place
and shall inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices.
(3) For land development activities as defined in § 450-95 of this article
and meeting Condition A, B, C or D in § 450-96B(2), the applicant
shall have a qualified inspector conduct site inspections and
document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control
practices over seven days. Inspection reports shall be maintained
in a site log book.
90.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 358, Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment
Control.
91.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 358, Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment
Control.
§ 450-97 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-98
1:890
(4) Construction activities disturbing greater than five acres or more
at any one time shall be inspected by a qualified inspector twice
every seven days.
B. Maintenance easement(s). Prior to the issuance of any approval that
has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the
applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement
agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served
by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for
access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
Village of Sleepy Hollow to ensure that the facility is maintained in
proper working condition to meet design standards and any other
provisions established by this article.92 The easement shall be recorded
by the grantor in the office of the County Clerk after approval by the
counsel for the Village of Sleepy Hollow.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
article93 shall operate and maintain the stormwater management
practices to achieve the goals of this article. Proper operation and
maintenance also includes, at a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this article.94
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause
or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance
with § 450-97B.
D. Maintenance agreements. The Village of Sleepy Hollow shall approve a
formal maintenance agreement for stormwater management facilities
binding on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the office of the
County Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan
approval. The maintenance agreement shall be consistent with the
terms and conditions of Schedule B of this article, entitled Sample
Stormwater Control Facility Maintenance Agreement.95 The Village of
Sleepy Hollow, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion
may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater
management facility, provided such facility meets all the requirements
92.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 358, Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment
Control.
93.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 358, Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment
Control.
94.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 358, Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment
Control.
95.Editor's Note: A copy of the sample agreement is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 450-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-98
1:891
of this article96 and includes adequate and perpetual access and
sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular
maintenance.
96.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 358, Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment
Control.
§ 450-98 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-98
1:892
ARTICLE XVII
Strategic Property Redevelopment Floating Zone
[Added 2-4-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
§ 450-99. Statement of intent and objectives.
It is the intent of Strategic Property Redevelopment (SPR) Floating Zone
to enable the redevelopment of underutilized municipal properties so they
can be returned to the tax rolls for mixed use, affordable and market rate
housing and to provide criteria for the development of such uses.
§ 450-100. Development standards and general requirements for
SPR.
§ 450-101. Procedures.
A. Properties that satisfy the following siting criteria shall be eligible for
inclusion into the SPR Floating Zone:
(1) The property must be owned by the Village or its designated entity,
the Sleepy Hollow Local Development Corporation.
(2) The property must be located within 1/2 mile from a Metro-North
Train Station or within 1,000 linear feet from a dedicated bus stop.
(3) The property must be located within the Inner Village as illustrated
on Figure 7 of the Village of Sleepy Hollow Comprehensive Plan.
B. Bulk and dimensional standards for SPRs.
(1) Permitted uses as identified in the underlying zoning district shall
be applicable to the SPR Floating Zone. The Village Board, as part
of the adoption of the SPR Floating Zone, may allow for
nonresidential uses to occur on upper floors of mixed-use buildings
as part of a special permit.
(2) The minimum lot size, dimensions, FAR, coverage, minimum open
space and setback requirements from the underlying zone shall be
applicable to the SPR, unless otherwise regulated herein. Any
request to vary the underlying standards shall be included as part
of the issuance of a Special Permit by the Village Board of Trustees
consistent with § 450-101C, below.
(3) Off-street parking. Given that the SPR Floating Zone has a transit
oriented development aspect relative to distance and access to
mass transit, the underlying parking and loading requirements may
be modified by the Village Board as part of the issuance of a special
permit by the Village Board of Trustees.
A. Applications for inclusion of an eligible property into the SPR Floating
Zone shall require an amendment to the Village's Zoning Map and shall
be reviewed pursuant to the same procedures and standards for
§ 450-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-101
1:893
amendments to the Zoning Map, as found in Article XV, Amendments,
of the Village Code.
B. The application for an SPR Floating Zone shall be submitted to the
Mayor and Board of Trustees and shall consist of narrative text,
drawings and/or illustrations describing the proposed SPR Floating
Zone. Drawings shall be submitted approximately to scale but need not
be to the precision of a finished engineering drawing or a final site plan.
The application shall include the following:
(1) A written description of the SPR Floating Zone, a description of the
manner in which such proposal meets the purposes of the Village's
Comprehensive Plan and Local Waterfront Revitalization Program,
and a description of the manner in which the public interest would
be served by the proposed SPR, including a description of the
benefits to the Village as a whole and in the Inner Village
neighborhood in particular.
(2) An SPR Floating Zone concept plan showing the various proposed
land uses and their spatial arrangement, including the proposed
general location of buildings, parking areas, public, community
and/or recreational facilities, utility and maintenance facilities and
open space. The SPR Floating Zone concept plan shall also show
the relationship of the proposed project uses to existing and
proposed land uses adjacent to the site, particularly those on the
adjacent and nearby Village-owned and county-owned parcels.
(3) An indication of the approximate square footage of building(s) and
the approximate number of dwelling units (if applicable) of each
housing type and size.
(4) An indication of the appropriate number of parking and loading
spaces in relationship to their intended use, accompanied by a
description of any alternative means of parking to be utilized, such
as below-building parking or parking incorporated into one or more
floors of the building.
(5) An indication of the need for phasing of construction of the project.
(6) The configuration of any interior road system and connection/
access to the adjoining Village road systems.
(7) The general configuration of pedestrian circulation systems,
including the general location of any public access and the
connection of such pedestrian passageways to adjoining properties.
(8) Descriptions, sketches and elevations, if available during the
special permit review and approval process, showing the general
architectural treatment and design scheme contemplated for the
entire development and specifically for any public spaces or major
elements of the site plan.
§ 450-101 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-101
1:894
§ 450-102. Special permit approval.
Any application for an SPR Floating Zone development will require the
issuance of a special permit by the Mayor and Board of Trustees, provided
that they shall find the following conditions and standards have been met:
§ 450-103. Development incentives.
(9) Incentives offered and bulk increases sought.
(10) Such additional information as the Mayor and Board of Trustees
may deem necessary in order to properly evaluate the application.
A. The proposed SPR will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly
development of the Village's Inner Village neighborhood.
B. The proposed SPR will not hinder or discourage the appropriate
development and use of adjacent lands.
C. The proposed SPR is consistent with the policies and purposes of the
Village's Local Waterfront Revitalization Program and Comprehensive
Plan.
D. The proposed SPR is otherwise in the public interest.
A. Purposes. It is recognized that the SPR encompasses a unique resource
within the Village of Sleepy Hollow, containing both a significant
opportunity for achievement of public amenities and a major potential
for redevelopment. To provide an incentive which will further
encourage the most appropriate use and development of the Village's
various land holdings along with those of other government related
entities in a manner designed to achieve adopted planning objectives
and to further the policies and purposes of the Village's Comprehensive
Plan and Local Waterfront Revitalization Program, the Village may
allow, only by application for a special permit and following a public
hearing held on notice duly given in the same manner as required by
law for zoning amendments, an increased building bulk (i.e., floor area
ratio and/or building height), relief from required setbacks,
nonresidential uses on the upper floors of mixed use buildings, relief
from parking and loading requirements.
B. The incentive features and the general guidelines for the Mayor and
Board of Trustees consideration and action are described as follows:
(1) The specific public benefit feature for which an incentive bulk
increase is being sought must be closely associated with the impact
of the development and, to the extent possible, adjacent to or near
the project site (the Inner Village, namely Census Tract 116).
Further, the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall make the decision
on whether to accept any particular incentive feature being
proposed and shall have the authority to impose any and all
conditions on the acceptance of the incentive feature as deemed
§ 450-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-103
1:895
appropriate and in the best interest of the Village. The specific
public benefit features for which incentive bulk increases or
waivers from development standards may be granted include the
provision of funds, services or goods toward the following
objectives:
(a) Provision of affordable housing as defined by Westchester
County at a minimum of 10% of the total number of units.
(b) Provision of improvements to Barnhart Park, Reverend Sykes
Park, Margotta Courts and Horan's Landing, as identified by
the Village.
(c) Streetscape/landscape improvements in the form of
streetlighting, plantings, sidewalk improvements, benches and
other similar streetscape/landscape amenities for the Village's
downtown commercial/residential areas.
C. In determining the specific amount of building bulk incentive increase
or waivers from development standards that may be granted, if any, the
Mayor and Village Board of Trustees, in each case, shall take into
consideration the following:
(1) The maximum floor area ratio and/or building height increase shall
not exceed 20% as compared to that otherwise permitted in the
underlying district.
(2) Consideration shall be given to the number, extent and combination
of incentive features to be provided.
(3) The need for such incentive features in the Village at the time of the
application.
(4) The degree of compatibility of such incentive features with the
neighborhood in which they are located, taking into consideration
the potential effects of noise, traffic, fumes, vibrations or other
such characteristics on surrounding streets and properties, the
visual impact of the resultant building bulk increase and/or
incentive feature applied for, and the impact of the proposed
development upon access to light, air and vistas known to be
important to the Village.
(5) To assist the Mayor and Village Board of Trustees in determining
the appropriate amount of building bulk increase or waivers from
development standards, if any, to grant as an incentive for the
applicant's provision of the proposed public benefit feature(s), the
applicant shall submit an estimate of the cost of providing the
proposed feature(s) and the value of the building bulk increase
requested. The Mayor and Village Board of Trustees may also
engage its own independent experts to either separately prepare
such analysis or to review those prepared by the applicant. The
§ 450-103 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § 450-103
1:896
§ 450-104. Conditions of granting.
It shall be a condition of every granting of a SPR Floating Zone, whether
stated or not, that if an application for site plan approval certified as
complete is not presented to the Planning Board within 24 months of the
date of approval of the SPR Floating Zone the zoning of said parcel shall
revert back to the zoning of said parcel prior to its change to a SPR Floating
Zone.
reasonable cost of such expert assistance shall be reimbursed to
the Village by the applicant.
(6) In addition to the foregoing guidelines, the Mayor and Village
Board of Trustees may take into account other considerations
bearing upon the purposes and objectives of any building bulk
increase or waivers from development standards being sought.
§ 450-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-104
1:897
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1965 Code to 2013 Code.
Chapter/Title From 1965 Code Location in 2013 Code
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Art. I, Amendments to Code Ch. 1, Art. II
Ch. 2, Administrator, Village Ch. 5
Ch. 3, Alarm Systems Ch. 110
Ch. 4, Amusement Devices Ch. 119
Ch. 5, Animals NI
Ch. 6, Architectural Review Board See Ch. 9
Ch. 7, Bathing Suits NI
Ch. 8, Bazaars and Carnivals See Ch. 268
Ch. 9, Bicycles, In-Line Skates and
Skateboards
Art. I, Use Regulations Ch. 135, Art. I
Art. II, Helmets Ch. 135, Art. II
Ch. 10, Building Construction NI
Ch. 11, Buildings, Heating of NI
Ch. 11A, Buildings, Numbering of Ch. 151
Ch. 12, Coin-Operated Laundry and Car
Washing Equipment
Ch. 259
Ch. 12A, Constables NI
Ch. 13, Damage to Village Property Ch. 165
Ch. 14, Dance Halls and Dancing Ch. 167
Ch. 15, Demolition of Buildings Ch. 148
Ch. 16, Dogs Ch. 123, Art. I
Ch. 16A, Dumpsters Ch. 175
Ch. 17, Environmental Impact Assessment NI
Ch. 17A, Environmental Protection and
Abandoned Industrial Property Reclamation
Ch. 251
Ch. 17B, Excavation, Filling and Topsoil
Removal
Ch. 190
Ch. 17C, Explosives and Blasting Ch. 193
Ch. 18, Electrical Code Ch. 182
§ 450-104 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § DT-1
1:898
Chapter/Title From 1965 Code Location in 2013 Code
Ch. 19, Ethics, Code of Ch. 34
Ch. 19A, Fines Ch. 400, Art. XX
Ch. 19B, Fees Ch. 200
Ch. 19C, Filming See Ch. 208
Ch. 19D, Fire and Life Safety, Department of Ch. 11
Ch. 20, Fireworks NI
Ch. 20A, Fire Districts NI
Ch. 21, Fire Escapes Ch. 145, Art. I
Ch. 22, Fire Prevention Ch. 145, Art. III
Ch. 22A, Fishing Ch. 216
Ch. 23, Flood Damage Prevention Ch. 220
Ch. 24, Garbage Ch. 347, Art. II
Ch. 24A, Gardeners Ch. 225
Ch. 25, Gasoline Stations Ch. 229
Ch. 26, Graffiti NI
Ch. 28, Handbills and Posters Ch. 240
Ch. 29, Hawking, Peddling and Soliciting Ch. 299
Ch. 29A, Homestead Base Proportion Ch. 370, Art. II
Ch. 30, Housing Standards Ch. 245, Parts 1 and 2
Ch. 30A, Housing Standards, Supplemental Ch. 245, Part 3
Ch. 31, Indemnification of Employees Ch. 23
Ch. 32, Illegal Residential Occupancies and
Overcrowding in Dwellings
Ch. 319
Ch. 33, Liability of Village See Ch. 276
Ch. 34, Rooming Houses and Boardinghouses Ch. 139
Ch. 35, Mufflers NI
Ch. 36, Noise Ch. 272
Ch. 36A, Notification of Defects Ch. 276
Ch. 37, Nuisances
Part 1, Regulation of Nuisances
Art. I, Nuisances Prohibited NI
Art. II, Littering Ch. 263
Art. III, Open Burning NI
Art. IV, Pay Telephones NI
Art. V, Shopping Carts NI
Part 2, Nuisance Abatement Ch. 280
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:899
Chapter/Title From 1965 Code Location in 2013 Code
Ch. 38, Officers and Employees
Art. I, Residency Requirements Ch. 87
Ch. 39, Parks
Art. I, Closing Times Ch. 295, Art. I
Ch. 40, Peace and Good Order
Article I, Outdoor Public Meetings and
Gatherings
See Ch. 268
Article II, Parades See Ch. 268
Article III, Disorderly Conduct NI
Art. IV, Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited Ch. 114, Art. I
Ch. 40A, Police Assistance, Intermunicipal Ch. 71, Art. I
Ch. 40B, Police, Auxiliary
Art. I, Workers' Compensation NI
Ch. 41, Police Pension System NI
Ch. 41A, Property Maintenance Ch. 310, Art. I
Ch. 42, Publication and Posting of Ordinances NI
Ch. 43, Public Records, Access to Ch. 80
Ch. 44, Recreational Vehicles Ch. 405
Ch. 44A, Recreation Commission Ch. 83
Ch. 45, Sanitary Code
Arts. I - III Ch. 304
Arts. IV - VII Ch. 330
Ch. 46, Signs Ch. 338
Ch. 48, Slaughterhouses and Fat-Rendering
Establishments
Ch. 342
Ch. 48A, Solid Waste Disposal Ch. 347, Art. I
Ch. 48B, Sprinklers Ch. 145, Art. II
Ch. 49, Sounds and Sound-Making Devices NI
Ch. 49A, Street Festivals See Ch. 268
Ch. 50, Streets and Sidewalks
Art. I, General Provisions; Penalties Ch. 362, Art. I
Art. II, Street Openings and Excavations Ch. 362, Art. II
Art. III, Goods, Wares and Merchandise on
Sidewalks
NI
Art. IV, Snow and Ice Ch. 362, Art. III
Ch. 50A, Tattooing Ch. 367
§ DT-1 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § DT-1
1:900
Chapter/Title From 1965 Code Location in 2013 Code
Ch. 50B, Taxation
Art. I, Tax Abatement for Rent-Controlled
Properties Occupied by Senior Citizens
Ch. 370, Art. III
Art. II, Exemption for New Commercial,
Business or Industrial Projects
Ch. 370, Art. IV
Art. III, Collection of Property Taxes Ch. 370, Art. V
Art. IV, Capital Improvement Exemption Ch. 370, Art. VI
Art. V, Exemption for Veterans Ch. 370, Art. VII
Art. VI, Income and Expense Statement Ch. 370, Art. VIII
Ch. 51, Tax on Utilities Ch. 370, Art. I
Ch. 52, Taxicabs Ch. 373
Ch. 52A, Tree Conservation Ch. 385
Ch. 53, Trees and Shrubs See Ch. 385
Ch. 54, Trespassing NI
Ch. 55, Telecommunications Franchising and
Licensing
Ch. 377
Ch. 57, Vehicles and Traffic
Art. I, Words and Phrases Defined Ch. 400, Art. I
Art. II, One-Way Streets Ch. 400, Art. II
Art. III, Main Arteries; Stop and Yield
Intersections; Right Turns
Ch. 400, Art. III
Art. IV, Restricted Parking Ch. 400, Art. IV
Art. V, Parking Prohibited Ch. 400, Art. V
Art. VI, Overnight Parking Ch. 400, Art. VI
Art. VII, Off-Street Parking Ch. 400, Art. VII
Art. VIII, Parking Meters Ch. 400, Art. VIII
Art. IX, Heavy Truck Traffic Ch. 400, Art. IX
Art. X, Speed Limits Ch. 400, Art. X
Art. XI, Snow Removal Ch. 400, Art. XI
Art. XII, Traffic Violations Bureau Ch. 400, Art. XII
Art. XIII, Restricted Turns Ch. 400, Art. XIII
Art. XIV, Conduct of Automobile Businesses
on Village Streets
NI
Art. XV, Towing, Storage and Immobilization
of Vehicles
Ch. 400, Art. XIV
Art. XVI, Saturday Parking Ch. 400, Art. XV
Art. XVII, U-Turns Ch. 400, Art. XVI
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:901
Chapter/Title From 1965 Code Location in 2013 Code
Art. XVIII, Parking Limited Ch. 400, Art. XVII
Art. XIX, Parking for the Handicapped Ch. 400, Art. XVIII
Art. XX, Beekman Avenue Municipal Parking
Lot
Ch. 400, Art. XIX
Ch. 59, Water
Art. I, Water Emergency Regulations Ch. 411, Art. I
Art. II, Cross-Connection Program Ch. 411, Art. II
Art. III, Administration Ch. 411, Art. III
Ch. 59A, Waterfront Consistency Review Ch. 414
Ch. 60, Weeds and Grass Ch. 310, Art. II
Ch. 61, Wetland/Watercourse Protection Ch. 418
Ch. 62, Zoning Ch. 450
Ch. 75, Garbage and Refuse Collection Rules
and Regulations
NI
Ch. 76, Supplementary Information on
Excavations in the Sanitary Code
NI
Ch. 77, Police Department Rules and
Regulations
NI
Ch. 78, Subdivision Regulations Ch. 425
Ch. 79, Fee Schedule Ch. 200, Attachment 1
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2013 3-12-2013 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 200
1-2014 2-11-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
2-2014 2-11-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
3-2014 4-8-2014 Barber shops and beauty
salons
Ch. 133
4-2014 4-29-2014 Tax levy limit override 2014 NCM
§ DT-1 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § DL-1
1:902
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2015 2-3-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 450
2-2015 2-10-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
3-2015 4-28-2015 Tax levy limit override 2015 NCM
4-2015 6-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
5-2015 6-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
6-2015 7-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
7-2015 11-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
8-2015 11-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
9-2015 12-8-2015 Architectural Review Board
amendment; Zoning
amendment
Ch. 9; Ch. 450
1-2016 2-23-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
2-2016 2-23-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
3-2016 4-26-2016 Tax levy limit override 2016 NCM
4-2016 5-24-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
5-2016 5-24-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
6-2016 5-24-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
1-2017 2-14-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
2-2017 3-21-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
3-2017 4-25-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
4-2017 5-23-2017 Noise amendment Ch. 272
5-2017 6-13-2017 Solid waste: garbage and
recycling amendment
Ch. 347, Art. II
6-2017 6-27-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:903
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2017 8-8-2017 Solid Waste Amendment Ch. 347
8-2017 10-10-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 400
9-2017 10-17-2017 Streets and Sidewalks:
Snow and Ice Amendment;
Sidewalk Maintenance
Ch. 362, Art. III;
Ch. 362, Art. V
10-2017 10-24-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 400
11-2017 12-12-2017 Parks and Recreation
Areas: Prohibited Activities
Ch. 295, Art. II
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1-2018 1-2-2018 Taxation: Tax
Abatement for Rent-
Controlled and Rent-
Regulated
Properties Occupied
by Senior Citizens or
Disabled Individuals
Amendment
Ch. 370,
Art. III
10
2-2018 4-24-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 10
3-2018 4-24-2018 Community Choice
Aggregation
Program
Ch. 158 10
1-2019 2-19-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks: Cost
Sharing Program
Ch. 362,
Art. VI
10
2-2019 3-26-2019 Animals: Dogs
Amendment
Ch. 123,
Art. I
10
1-2020 2-4-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 450 11
2-2020 2-4-2020 Streets and
Sidewalks: Sidewalk
Sales, Displays and
Cafes Amendment
Ch. 362,
Art. IV
11
§ DL-1 SLEEPY HOLLOW CODE § DL-1
1:904

Zone standards 

District Mininum Lot Size Minimum Lot Width Maximum Lot Coverage Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Maximum Height 
R-1 1 acre 150 15 100 100 100 35
R-2 10,000 75 20 30 10 25 25 35
R-2a 15,000 100 20 30 10 25 25 35
R-3 5,000 50 30 20 5 15 25 35 
R-4 4,000 40 35 20 3 12 25 35
R-4a 4,000 40 35 20 3 12 25 35
R-5 4,000 40 30 20 10 15 25 45
R-6 500 100 25 20 10 20 25 100 