Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-12-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of Suffern
shall be known collectively as the "Code of the Village of Suffern," hereafter
termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions contained in the "Code of the Village of Suffern"
to any other local law, ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such
reference shall be changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number,
article number or section number appearing below, as if such local law,
ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern, and it is the
intention of said Board that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Village of Suffern in force on the date of the adoption of this local law
and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal.
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Suffern prior to the effective date
of this local law, or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article or part of this local
law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this Code now
or through supplementation, shall be adjudged by any court of competent
B. An offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of
Suffern, or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Village of Suffern.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Village of Suffern.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Suffern providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Village of Suffern or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Suffern appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Village of Suffern or other instruments or evidence of the Village's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries.
K. The Zoning Ordinance adopted 7-10-1949 and all amendments thereto,
including amendments to the Zoning Map.
L. All legislation regulating vehicles and traffic.
M. The Subdivision Ordinance adopted 7-26-1965 and all amendments
thereto.
N. The Site Development Plan Ordinance, adopted 7-24-1967 and all
amendments thereto.
O. Local Law No. 3-1977, adopted 4-25-1977, pertaining to fees and all
amendments thereto.
P. Any legislation adopted subsequent to July 18, 1988.
§ 1-4 SUFFERN CODE § 1-5
1:4
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate
the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, article or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Suffern and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and,
if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the
Village Clerk of the Village of Suffern by impressing thereon the Seal of the
Village of Suffern, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of
said Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times while the said Code is in effect. The enactment and
publication of this local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the
Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to
be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code
of the Village of Suffern," or any new local laws or resolutions, when
enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board
of Trustees to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Village of Suffern required to be filed
in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of Trustees
subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to indicate
the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code shall, when finally
enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local laws or
resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Village Clerk of the Village
of Suffern upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Board
of Trustees, which Board may also arrange by resolution for procedures for
the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Village of Suffern, or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of Suffern to be
misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other provision of this local
law, shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not
more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Village of Suffern, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have
been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition,
certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes
were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention
of the Board of Trustees that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this local law.
(Chapter and section number references are to the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear
in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-11B the following sections have been added or amended;
§§ 32-1, 36-2, 57-7, 73-1, 73-2, 73-3B, 96-10, 122-4, 127-4, 127-6, 127-8, 146-6E, F, G and
H, 146-7B, 158-7, 193-2, 193-3G and H, 193-4, 193-6A, 193-7, 224-2, 224-3, 224-4B and C,
224-5A, C and D, 231-2, 235-6, 235-9, 248-6, 261-11 and 261-13. The following chapters
have been added or amended: Chs. 89, 117, 137, 175, 181, 200 and 254. The following
original sections were deleted: §§ 13-2 and 13-3 of Ch. 13 of the 1971 Code and § 13A-3 of
Ch. 13A of the 1971 Code. The following fees sections were added or amended: §§ 77-2,
77-3B, 77-4, 146-7C, 220-7, 220-8, 220-20B(1), 224-4B, 226-3A, 226-8C, 231-13, 235-15,
248-7, 248-11B, 248-15B, 261-3B, 261-13, 261-24A and 261-25. The following penalty
sections were added or amended: §§ 73-6, 77-8, 81-4, 93-8A, 100-6, 113-5, 127-9, 141-8,
150-9, 154-6, 162-16, 168-16, 185-4, 189-6, 193-8, 197-4, 226-9, 231-14, 235-2, 235-10,
235-30, 248-32, 261-23A and 261-31. A complete description of these changes is on file in
the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 1-9 SUFFERN CODE § 1-12
1:6
§ 1-12. Penalties for offenses against Code provisions. [Amended
12-4-2017 by L.L. No. 8-2017]
Except where specifically provided elsewhere, any person found guilty of
a violation of any provision of the Code of the Village of Suffern shall,
upon conviction or a plea of guilt, be punished by a fine up to $2,500.
Any person found guilty of a second offense of the Code of the Village of
Suffern within 18 months of the date of the first conviction or plea of guilt
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $2,500 and not more than
$5,000. Any person found guilty or pleading guilty to a third offense of
any provision of the Code of the Village of Suffern within 18 months of the
date of the second conviction or plea of guilt shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $10,000 and not more than $15,000. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation hereunder. In the
Judge's discretion such violation shall be subject to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fines above described and
imprisonment.
§ 1-13. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Village of Suffern, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-14, inclusive.
§ 1-14. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
Chapter 5
ASSESSMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 244.
§ 5-1. Village to cease as assessing unit.
Upon the effective date of this chapter pursuant to Subdivision 3 of § 1402
of the Real Property Tax Law, the Village of Suffern shall cease to be an
Assessing Unit, as defined in § 102 of the Real Property Tax Law, and the
Village taxes shall thereafter be levied by the Village of Suffern on a copy of
the part of the Town of Ramapo assessment roll applicable to the Village of
Suffern.
§ 5-2. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon the expiration of 30 days after its
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern or, if it shall be
submitted as a referendum for approval by the electors, upon such approval.
§ 5-3. Provisions in effect until rescinded.
This chapter shall remain in full force and effect until rescinded by a
subsequent local law pursuant to Subdivision 3(b) of § 1402 of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York.
Chapter 9
CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT
§ 9-1. Legislative intent.
By enactment of this chapter, pursuant to Article 2-B of the Executive
Law, it is the intent of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern to
provide for the continuation of essential services and emergency services
in time of disaster, the coordination of state and local natural disaster and
emergency response functions and effective response to disaster situations
and to provide for continuation of effective government to provide for the
aforementioned and to protect the welfare of the citizens of Suffern.
§ 9-2. Authority of Deputy Mayor.
In the event of a disaster, as defined by § 20, Subdivision 2a, of the
Executive Law, during which time the Mayor is unable to discharge the
powers and duties of his office or is absent from the Village of Suffern
and unable to return thereto immediately, the Deputy Mayor is hereby
§ 1-14 SUFFERN CODE § 9-2
1:8
authorized to execute and perform all the duties and functions of the Mayor
until such time as the disability is removed or the absence terminated.
§ 9-3. Next in command.
In the event that the Deputy Mayor is also disabled or absent from the
Village and unable to immediately return, the individuals duly appointed
to the following positions shall execute the powers and duties of the office
of Mayor, in the following order of priority, until such time as the Mayor,
Deputy Mayor or individual higher on the following list terminates his
absence from the Village or his disability is removed: Police Chief; second
in command of Police Department.
Chapter 10
CHIEF OF POLICE, POWERS OF
§ 9-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-3
1:9

ARTICLE I
Authority of Request or Grant Police Assistance
[Adopted 3-15-2004 by L.L. No. 5-2004]
§ 10-1. Power and limitations.
The Chief of Police of the Village of Suffern, whenever he deems the public
interest requires it, may request the Chief Executive Officer of any other
local government to detail, assign, make available for duty and use in
the Village of Suffern any part of the forces, equipment and supplies of
the police department, police force or parkway police force of the local
government of which the request is made; however, if the rendering of such
police assistance is to exceed four hours, the Chief of Police shall notify
and obtain permission from the Chief Executive Officer to continue such
assistance.
§ 10-2. Assistance to municipalities within County; statutory
authority.
A. The Chief of Police of the Village of Suffern Police Department is hereby
authorized to provide the assistance of the regularly employed law
enforcement officers, equipment and/or supplies of the Village of
Suffern to any municipality within Rockland County requesting such
assistance to aid in coping with situations where there exists in such
other municipality a need for the services of additional law enforcement
officers, their equipment and/or supplies to protect the health, life and
property of such other municipality, its inhabitants and the visitors
hereto.
B. The assistance offered shall be in accordance with the provisions of
§ 209-m of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York.
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2
1:11
Chapter 14
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 14-1. Legislative intent. [Amended 11-17-1997 by L.L. No. 9-1997]
The purpose of this chapter is to provide legal and financial protection for
those individuals serving the Village of Suffern from losses which may be
brought against them in their individual capacity for actions taken while
in the performance of their official duties and responsibilities. In enacting
this chapter, the Board of Trustees finds that the State of New York has
enacted similar provisions for the legal and financial security of its officers
and employees and further finds that such security is also required for local
personnel. By enactment of this chapter, the Board of Trustees does not
intend to limit or otherwise abrogate any existing right or responsibility of
the Village or its employees with regard to indemnification or legal defense.
This chapter is intended to implement and supplement the provisions of § 18
of the Public Officers Law.
§ 14-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person holding a position by election, appointment
or employment in the service of the Village of Suffern, whether or not
compensated, or a volunteer expressly authorized to participate in a
municipally sponsored volunteer program, but shall not include an
independent contractor. The term "employee" shall include a former
employee or his estate or judicially appointed personal representative.
§ 14-3. Right to legal counsel.
A. Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 14-5 of this
chapter, the Village shall provide for the defense of the employee in any
civil action or proceeding in any state or federal court arising out of any
alleged act or omission which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to
have occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his
public employment or duties or which is brought to enforce a provision
of 42 U.S.C. § 1981 or 42 U.S.C. § 1983. This duty to provide for a
defense shall not arise where such civil action or proceeding is brought
by or on behalf of the Village of Suffern.
B. Subject to the conditions set forth in Subsection A of this section, the
employee shall be entitled to be represented by the Village Attorney;
provided, however, that the employee shall be entitled to
representation by private counsel of his choice in any civil judicial
proceeding whenever the Village Attorney determines, based upon his
investigation and review of the facts and circumstances of the case, that
representation by the Village Attorney would be inappropriate or
whenever a court of competent jurisdiction, upon appropriate motion or
§ 10-2 SUFFERN CODE § 14-3
1:12
§ 14-4. Settlement of claim.
by a special proceeding, determines that a conflict of interest exists and
that the employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel of
his choice. The Village Attorney shall notify the employee, in writing,
of such determination that the employee is entitled to be represented
by private counsel of his choice. The Village Attorney may require, as a
condition to payment of the fees and expenses of such representation,
that appropriate groups of such employees be represented by the same
counsel. If the employee or group of employees is entitled to
representation by private counsel under the provisions of this section,
the Village Attorney shall so certify to the Board of Trustees.
Reasonable attorneys' fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by the
Village to such private counsel from time to time during the pendency
of the civil action or proceeding, subject to certification that the
employee is entitled to representation under the terms and conditions
of this section by the head of the department, commission, division,
office or agency in which such employee is employed and upon the
audit and warrant of the Village Treasurer. Any dispute with respect to
representation of multiple employees by a single counsel or the amount
of litigation expenses or the reasonableness of attorneys' fees shall be
resolved by the court upon motion or by way of a special proceeding.
C. Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to the
Village Attorney as required by § 14-5 of this chapter, the Attorney shall
take the necessary steps, including the retention of private counsel
under the terms and conditions provided in Subsection B of this section,
on behalf of the employee to avoid entry of a default judgment pending
resolution of any question pertaining to the obligation to provide for a
defense.
A. The Village shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the
amount of any judgment obtained against such employees in any state
or federal court or in the amount of any settlement of a claim, including
punitive or exemplary damages, provided that the act or omission from
which such judgment or settlement arose occurred while the employee
was acting within the scope of his public employment or duties. The
duty to indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this section shall not
arise where the injury or damage resulted from intentional wrongdoing
or recklessness on the part of the employee. [Amended 11-17-1997
by L.L. No. 9-1997]
B. An employee represented by private counsel shall cause to be
submitted to the Board of Trustees any proposed settlement which may
be subject to indemnification by the Village, and, if not inconsistent
with the provisions of this section, the Mayor shall certify such
settlement and submit such settlement and certification to the Village
Attorney. The Attorney shall review such proposed settlement as to
form and amount and shall give his approval if, in his judgment, the
settlement is in the best interest of the Village. Nothing in this
§ 14-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-4
1:13
§ 14-5. Conditions.
The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless provided by this chapter
shall be conditioned upon delivery to the Village Attorney or his assistant,
at his office, by the employee of the original or a copy of any summons,
complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within five days after he
is served with such document and the full cooperation of the employee in
the defense of such action or proceeding and in defense of any action or
proceeding against the Village based upon the same act or omission and
in the prosecution of any appeal. Such delivery shall be deemed a request
by the employee that the Village provide for his defense pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 14-6. Effect on other parties and state law.
The benefits of this chapter shall inure only to employees as defined herein
and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party, nor shall any
provision of this chapter be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provision
of the Workers' Compensation Law.
§ 14-7. Rights of insurers.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit
or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of
insurance.
§ 14-8. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all actions and proceedings
pending upon the effective date thereof or thereafter instituted.
§ 14-9. Effect on other immunity or right to defense and
indemnification.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions of
this chapter shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify,
abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon any unit,
entity, officer or employee of the Village or any right to defense and/or
subsection shall be construed to authorize the Village to indemnify
or save harmless an employee with respect to a settlement not so
reviewed and approved by the Village Attorney.
C. Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee or upon the
settlement of the claim, the employee shall cause to be served a copy of
such judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or registered
mail, within 30 days of the date of entry or settlement, upon the Mayor;
and if not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, such
judgment or settlement shall be certified for payment by such Mayor. If
the Attorney concurs in such certification, the judgment or settlement
shall be paid upon the audit and warrant of the Village Treasurer.
§ 14-4 SUFFERN CODE § 14-9
1:14
indemnification provided for any governmental officer or employee by, in
accordance with or by reason of any other provision of state or federal
statutory or common law.
Chapter 18
ELECTIONS
§ 18-1. Runoff election.
In the event that more eligible candidates than the number to be elected to
the same Village office receive an equal number of votes, which number of
votes would be sufficient to elect a candidate to the Village office in question
had candidates not received an equal number of votes, a runoff election
shall be held to determine which of such persons shall be elected.
§ 18-2. Waiver; election by lot.
Such runoff may be waived and the selection of the persons elected shall be
made by lot if each person who shall have received an equal number of votes
shall file with the Village Clerk within two days after the final certification
of such tie result a written and signed notice of consent that such selection
be made by lot.
§ 18-3. Time.
Unless waived, such runoff election shall be held on the first Tuesday at
least 10 days after the final certification of such tie result, subject to the
adoption of a resolution by the Board of Trustees pursuant to § 15-104,
Subdivision 3b, of the Election Law. The only persons who shall be deemed
nominated for the purposes of § 15-104, Subdivision 3b, shall be those
persons who shall have received an equal number of votes.
Chapter 22
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Chief of Police — See Ch. 10.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 14.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 53.
§ 22-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Ethics in Government Law of
the Village of Suffern" (repealing and replacing the former Chapter 22 of
the Code of Ethics of the Village of Suffern originally adopted February 8,
1971).
§ 14-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-2
1:15
§ 22-2. Legislative intent.
In a democracy, government should be open, accessible, equitable and
efficient. Democratic government requires that elected officials be
independent, impartial and responsible to the people. Government
decisions and policy must be made through the appropriate channels of
government structure. Public office must not be used or be perceived
for personal gain. The public must have confidence in the integrity of
its government. In order to strengthen the democratic operation of the
Village of Suffern and to enhance public trust in that government, this code
requires disclosure of financial interests that may influence or be perceived
to influence the actions of elected officials, covered employees or Village
employees. Elected officials, covered employees or Village employees hold
office for the benefit of the public, and their conduct must be of the highest
standard. It is of the utmost importance that all individuals covered by that
law must be seen to be acting solely in the public interest. Therefore, it is
the intent of this legislation to:
§ 22-3. Scope and applicability.
A. Establish high standards of ethical conduct for elected officials, covered
employees and Village employees.
B. Afford elected officials, covered employees and Village employees clear
guidance to such standards.
C. Promote public confidence in the integrity of Village government.
D. Require disclosure of financial interests that may influence or be
perceived to influence the actions of elected officials, candidates for
elected office and covered employees.
E. Facilitate consideration of potential problems before they arise,
minimize unwarranted suspicion and enhance the accountability of
government to the people.
A. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to supersede the
provisions of §§ 800, 801, 802, 803 and 809 of the General Municipal
Law, but rather this chapter is deemed supplementary thereto.
However, should a higher standard of disclosure of conflict of interest
be required by this chapter, then the provisions of this chapter shall
govern.
B. All other legal requirements pertaining to the conduct of elected
officials, covered employees and Village employees shall not be deemed
to have been superseded by this chapter, including but not limited to
rules of any state or county agency relating to licensing and discipline
and any other applicable disciplinary codes.
§ 22-2 SUFFERN CODE § 22-4
1:16
§ 22-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — Any agency, department, division, board, commission or bureau
of the Village of Suffern.
BOARD — The Board of Ethics of the Village of Suffern.
BUSINESS/PROFESSIONAL DEALING AND/OR BUSINESS TRANSACTION
— Having or providing any contract, service or work with the Village;
buying, selling, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring from or dispensing
to the Village any goods, services or property; or obtaining any approval,
grant, loan, license, permit or other privilege from the Village, excepting
that by operation of law.
CANDIDATE FOR ELECTED OFFICE — A candidate for Village-wide office
who receives the designation of a party and who files a designating petition
for nomination at a primary election, or who receives the nomination of a
party other than at a primary election (whether or not for an uncontested
office), or who seeks independent nomination and who has not been
designated by a party to receive a nomination but files a designating
petition, or whose name appears on a primary or election ballot pursuant
to § 6-148 of the Election Law. The terms "party," "designation," "primary
election," "nomination" and "independent nomination," as used herein, shall
have the same meaning as those contained in § 1-104 of the Election Law.
COMPENSATION — Any money, thing of value or financial benefit conferred
in return for services rendered or to be rendered.
COVERED EMPLOYEES — The heads, other than elected officials, of any
agency, department, division, council, board, commission or bureau of the
Village and their deputies and assistants and the officers, employees and
consultants on annual retainers of such agencies, departments, divisions,
boards, bureaus, commissions or councils who hold policy-making positions
as determined by the Village Board and set forth in a written instrument
annexed hereto as Appendix I,2 which shall be filed with the Board of Ethics.
ELECTED OFFICIAL — An elected official of the Village of Suffern.
INTEREST — A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to
an elected official, covered employee or Village employee, his or her spouse,
child or dependent, whether as a result of a contract with the Village or
otherwise.
LICENSING — Any agency activity respecting the grant, denial, renewal,
revocation, enforcement, suspension, annulment, withdrawal, recall,
cancellation or amendment of a license, permit or other form of permission
conferring the right or privilege to engage in a profession, trade or
occupation or any business or activity regulated by a regulatory agency
which, in the absence of such license, permit or other form of permission,
would be prohibited.
2. Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 22-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-4
1:17
MINISTERIAL MATTER — An administrative act carried out in a prescribed
manner not allowing for substantial personal discretion.
RELATIVE — Such individual's spouse, child, stepchild, stepparent, or any
person who is a direct descendant of the grandparents of the reporting
individual or of the reporting individual's spouse.
REPRESENTATIVE CAPACITY — The presentation of the interests of a
client or other person pursuant to an agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services.
SPOUSE — The husband or wife of the reporting individual unless living
separate and apart from the reporting individual with the intention of
terminating the marriage or providing for permanent separation or unless
separated pursuant to a judicial order, decree or judgment or a legally
binding separation agreement.
STEPCHILD — A child of one's husband or wife, but not born of the
marriage.
UNEMANCIPATED CHILD — Any son, daughter, stepson or stepdaughter
who is under the age of 22, unmarried and living in the household of the
reporting individual.
VILLAGE EMPLOYEE — Any employee other than an elected official or
covered employee of the Village of Suffern, whether paid or unpaid.
§ 22-5. Code of Ethics.
A. No elected official, covered employee or Village employee shall directly
or indirectly solicit or receive compensation or agree to receive
compensation for services rendered concerning matters before any
Village agency, nor shall any such person accept other employment or
engage in any business transactions or make any investments directly
or indirectly which create a conflict with his or her official duties.
B. No elected official, covered employee or Village employee shall have
any business or professional dealings or be interested, directly or
indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, except by operation of law, in any
business or professional dealings with the Village of Suffern or any
agency thereof.
C. No elected official, covered employee or Village employee shall be
employed, with or without compensation, as an attorney, agent, broker,
director, representative or employee for any person, firm or corporation
interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business
or professional dealings with the Village or any agency thereof unless
full disclosure is made as to such employment to the Village Board, in
writing, and such elected official, covered employee or Village
employee disqualifies himself or herself from acting in his or her official
capacity in matters affecting such person, firm or corporation.
D. No elected official, covered employee or Village employee shall, directly
or indirectly, solicit any gift or gifts, or accept or receive any gift or gifts
§ 22-4 SUFFERN CODE § 22-5
1:18
with an aggregate value of $75 or more within any twelve-month
period, whether in the form of a service, loan, thing, travel,
entertainment, hospitality or promise, or any other form of gratuity,
from any person other than a relative or from any firm, any organization
or any corporation which, to his or her knowledge, is interested,
directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business or any
case, proceeding or application or professional dealings with the
Village or any agency thereof. Refreshments or meals that are provided
as part of an informational presentation in a group setting or as part
of a reception shall not be considered gifts, nor shall the receipt or
acceptance of gifts or other things of value less than $150 received
from other elected officials, covered employees or Village employees for
purposes of being social, showing appreciation or celebrating a holiday
or other event be considered gifts.
E. No former elected official, former covered employee or former Village
employee shall directly or indirectly appear, render services or have
any business transaction before any Village agency concerning a matter
in which he or she was personally involved for two years after
termination of his or her service of employment.
F. No elected official, covered employee or Village employee who is a
member of a firm which is appearing before a Village agency may
communicate about the matter with an elected official, covered
employee or Village employee concerned with the matter. However,
printed material such as the letterhead or stationery imprinted with the
name of the elected official, covered employee or Village employee is
deemed not to be a communication so long as the printed material is not
issued or signed by the elected official, covered employee or Village
employee.
G. No elected official, covered employee or Village employee shall disclose
confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs
of the Village except when permitted or required by law, nor shall be or
she use such information to advance the financial or other private
interests of any person, firm or corporation.
H. Any applicant or any representative of any applicant before any agency
must disclose, in writing and on the record, any previous business
dealings and/or business transactions that said applicant or
representative has had with any member of said agency within the
previous two years.
I. Each elected official, covered employee or Village employee shall be
furnished a copy of the Code of Ethics, Chapter 22 of the Code of the
Village of Suffern, by the Personnel Administrator before entering the
duties of his or her office of employment.
J. Each elected official, covered employee or Village employee shall be
barred from videotaping and/or audiotaping any individual or
proceeding, involving Village business, without the consent of each of
§ 22-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-5
1:19
§ 22-6. Financial disclosure.
Each elected official, covered employee and candidate for elected office
must file an annual financial disclosure statement containing the
information and in the form set forth as Appendix II3 hereto. Such statement
shall be filed with the Board of Ethics on or before the 15th day of May with
respect to the preceding calendar year, with the following exceptions:
the individuals who are being video- and/or audiotaped.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any individual who is acting as agent
or under the direction or on behalf of law enforcement, whether local,
state or federal, is permitted to video- and/or audiotape if such conduct
is at the law enforcement agency's direction.
A. A person who is subject to the reporting requirements of this section
and who timely filed with the Internal Revenue Service an application
for automatic extension of time in which to file his or her individual
income tax return for the immediately preceding calendar or fiscal year
shall be required to file such financial disclosure statement on or before
May 15, but may, without being subjected to any civil penalty on
account of a deficient statement, indicate with respect to any item of
the disclosure statement that information with respect thereto is
lacking but will be supplied in a supplementary statement of financial
disclosure, which shall be filed on or before the seventh day after the
expiration of the period of such automatic extension of time within
which to file such individual income tax return, provided that failure to
file or to timely file such supplementary statement of financial
disclosure or the filing of any incomplete or deficient supplementary
statement of financial disclosure shall be subject to the notice and
penalty provisions of this section respecting annual statements of
financial disclosure as if such supplementary statement were an annual
statement.
B. A person who is required to file an annual financial disclosure
statement with the Board and who is granted an additional period of
time within which to file such statement due to justifiable cause or
undue hardship, in accordance with required rules and regulations on
the subject adopted by the Board, shall file such statement within the
additional period of time granted.
C. Candidates for elected office shall file such annual financial disclosure
statement within seven days after the last day allowed by law for the
filing of primary election designating petitions; or the last day allowed
by law for the filing of independent nominating petitions; or the date of
the meeting of the party committee at which they are nominated; or
within seven days of receiving the designation or nomination or
independent nomination or otherwise becoming a candidate by virtue of
§ 6-148 of the Election Law, as shall be applicable to the form of their
candidacy.
3. Editor's Note: Appendix II is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 22-5 SUFFERN CODE § 22-6
1:20
§ 22-7. Board of Ethics; membership; duties.
D. Any person required to file an annual financial disclosure statement
who commences employment after April 15 of any year shall file such
statement within 30 days after commencing employment.
E. A person who is required to file an annual financial disclosure
statement in more than one capacity need file only one such statement
but must observe the earliest filing date with respect to each of such
capacities.
A. There shall be a Board of Ethics consisting of five members to be
appointed by the Village Board, all of whom shall reside in the Village of
Suffern and who shall serve without compensation, which shall be set
by resolution of the Village Board. The members of the present Board
existing on the effective date of this chapter shall continue in office until
the expiration of their respective terms unless they or any one of them
is in violation of any of the provisions of Subsection B hereof, in which
case said member or members are deemed to have vacated their office
as of the effective date of this chapter. The members of the Board shall
elect a Chairman and a Secretary.
B. No member of the Board shall:
(1) Hold any public office, elected or appointed, or be a public officer
or employee. This provision is adopted so as to establish a Board of
Ethics that is an unquestionably independent body, pursuant to and
by the authority granted to the Village by the New York
Constitution, Article IX, § 2(c) and § 10(1)(i) and (ii)(a)(1) of the
Municipal Home Rule Law to adopt a Code provision not
inconsistent with and stricter than § 808(3) of the General
Municipal Law.
(2) Hold office in any political party or be employed as a lobbyist.
(3) Be a relative, as that term is defined in § 22-4 of this chapter, of a
person holding any office or position described in Subsection B(1)
or (2) above.
(4) Be a party to any civil proceeding against the Village other than
that arising out of a personal injury or property damage claim or
from any lawful benefit, or have any business dealings with the
Village, other than applications for building permits, certificates of
occupancy, marriage licenses, or other similar ministerial matters.
C. Any vacancy occurring on the Board shall be filled within 60 days of its
occurrence by the Village Board in the same manner as the member
whose vacancy is being filled was appointed. A person appointed to fill a
vacancy shall be appointed for the unexpired term of the member he or
she succeeds.
§ 22-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-7
1:21
D. Three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, and the Board
shall have power to act by a majority vote of the total number of
members of the Board without vacancy.
E. The term of office for members of the Board shall be five years.
Members of the Board may be removed by the Village Board for cause
amounting to substantial neglect of duty, gross misconduct in office,
inability to discharge the powers or duties of the office or violation of
this chapter, after a hearing on written notice and opportunity to
respond.
F. The members of the Board shall receive no compensation.
G. The Board shall be the repository for all financial disclosure statements
required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The information set
forth in the annual statement of financial disclosure filed pursuant to
this chapter shall be available for public inspection except the
categories of value or amount, which shall remain confidential. All other
documents filed with the Board, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, shall be kept confidential and shall not be used for any purpose
outside of the jurisdiction of the Board except pursuant to a lawfully
issued subpoena by or on behalf of a law enforcement agency. The
Board shall notify the Temporary State Commission on Local
Government Ethics, if such Commission is in existence, and, if not, shall
file a statement with the Village Clerk that it is the authorized
repository for completed annual statements of financial disclosure and
that, on account thereof, such completed statements will be filed with it
and not with the Commission.
H. The Board shall inspect all financial disclosure statements filed with the
Board to ascertain whether any person subject to the reporting
requirements of this chapter has failed to file such a statement, has
filed a deficient statement or has filed a statement which reveals a
possible violation of § 811 or 812 of the General Municipal Law or of
this chapter, as the case may be.
I. The Board shall obtain from the Rockland County Board of Elections
lists of all candidates for elected office. The Board shall determine from
such lists those candidates who have not, after the required date for
filing such statement, filed the statement required by this chapter.
J. The Board shall meet at least annually in the month of June for purposes
of organization and to review the status of all confidential memoranda
required to be on file with it and to transact any other business as may
properly come before it and shall report publicly to the Village Board
not later than the 15th day of September annually on its current state of
organization and on the currency of all reports required to be on file
and for which notices of delinquency have been issued and on any other
matters which may appear to be a just and proper exercise of its
responsibility.
§ 22-7 SUFFERN CODE § 22-7
1:22
K. The Board shall adopt, amend and rescind rules and regulations to
govern procedures of the Board, which shall include but not be limited
to the procedure whereby a person who is required to file an annual
financial disclosure statement with the Board may request an additional
period of time within which to file such statement, due to justifiable
cause or undue hardship. Such rules or regulations shall provide for a
date beyond which, in all cases of justifiable cause or undue hardship,
no further extension of time will be granted.
L. The Board shall receive only sworn complaints alleging a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter. The source of the complaint shall
be verified prior to the commencement of any investigation thereof.
M. The Board shall permit any person required to file a statement of
financial disclosure to request an exemption from any requirement to
report one or more items of information which pertain to such person's
spouse or unemancipated children, which item or items may be
exempted by the Board upon a finding by a majority of the total number
of members of the Board without vacancy that the reporting individual's
spouse, on his or her own behalf or on behalf of an unemancipated
child, objects to providing the information necessary to make such
disclosure, and that the information which would otherwise be required
to be reported will have no material bearing on the discharge of the
reporting person's official duties.
N. Upon written request from any person who is subject to the jurisdiction
of the Board, the Board shall render advisory opinions on the
requirements of the provisions of this chapter. An opinion rendered by
the Board, until and unless amended or revoked, shall be binding on the
Board in any subsequent proceeding concerning the person who
requested the opinion and who acted in good faith unless material facts
were omitted or misstated by the person in the request for an opinion.
Such opinion may also be relied upon by such person and may be
introduced and shall be a defense in any criminal or civil action. Such
request and any such opinions shall be confidential.
O. If a person required to file a financial disclosure statement with the
Board has failed to file a disclosure statement or has filed a deficient
statement, the Board shall notify the reporting person, in writing, state
the failure to file or detail the deficiency, provide the person with a
fifteen-day period to cure the deficiency and advise the person of the
penalties for failure to comply with the reporting requirements. Such
notice shall be confidential. If the person fails to make such filing or
fails to cure the deficiency within the specified time period, the Board
shall send a notice of delinquency to the reporting person and, in the
case of a covered employee, to the appointing authority for such
person. Such notice shall be available for public inspection.
P. If a reporting person has filed a statement which reveals a possible
violation of the Code of Ethics of this chapter or the Board receives a
sworn complaint alleging such a violation or if the Board determines on
§ 22-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-7
1:23
§ 22-8. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
its own initiative to investigate a possible or alleged violation, the Board
shall notify the reporting person, in writing, describe the possible or
alleged violation of such Code of Ethics and provide the person with a
fifteen-day period in which to submit a written response setting forth
information relating to the activities cited as a possible or alleged
violation of law. If the Board thereafter makes a determination that
further inquiry is justified, it shall give the reporting person an
opportunity to be heard. The Board shall also inform the reporting
person of its rules regarding the conduct of adjudicatory proceedings
and the due process procedural mechanisms available to such
individual. If the Board determines at any stage of the proceeding that
there is no violation or that any potential conflict of interest violation
has been rectified, it shall so advise the reporting person and the
complainant, if any. All the foregoing proceedings shall be confidential.
If the Board determines that there is reasonable cause to believe that
a violation has occurred, it shall send notice of reasonable cause to
the reporting person, to the complainant, if any, and, in the case of a
covered employee, to the appointing authority for such person. Such
notice shall be available for public inspection.
Q. The Board shall adopt rules governing the conduct of adjudicatory
proceedings relating to the assessment of civil penalties herein
authorized. Such rules shall provide for due process procedural
mechanisms substantially similar to those set forth in Article 3 of the
State Administrative Procedure Act, but such mechanisms need not be
identical in terms or scope. Assessment of a civil penalty shall be final
unless modified, suspended or vacated within 30 days of imposition
and, upon becoming final, shall be subject to review at the instance of
the affected reporting individual in a proceeding commenced against
the appropriate body pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules.
R. The Board shall conduct any investigation necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter. Pursuant to this power and duty, the Board
may administer oaths or affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel their
attendance and require the production of any books or records which it
may deem relevant or material.
S. All decisions of the Board not otherwise required to be kept confidential
shall be printed and made public within 30 days after their decision and
shall be filed with the Village Clerk and shall be available for public
inspection during regular business hours.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of § 22-5 of this
chapter shall be subject to a civil fine in an amount not to exceed
$10,000 for each violation. Assessment of a civil penalty hereunder
shall be made by the Board.
§ 22-7 SUFFERN CODE § 22-8
1:24
§ 22-9. Duties of Village Clerk.
B. In addition, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of § 22-5
of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor as that term is
defined in the New York State Penal Law.
C. An elected official, covered employee or candidate for elected office
who knowingly and willfully fails to file an annual statement of financial
disclosure or who knowingly and willfully, with intent to deceive, makes
a false statement or gives information which such individual knows to
be false on such statement of financial disclosure filed pursuant to
§ 22-6 of this chapter shall be assessed a civil penalty in an amount not
to exceed $10,000. The Board may, in lieu of a civil penalty, refer a
violation to the appropriate prosecutor and, upon such conviction, but
only after such referral, such violation shall be punishable as a Class A
misdemeanor. A civil penalty for false filing may not be imposed
hereunder in the event that a category of value or amount reported
hereunder is incorrect, unless such reported information is falsely
understated. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the
contrary, no other penalty, civil or criminal, may be imposed for a failure
to file or for a false filing of such statement, except that the Board may
impose disciplinary action as otherwise provided by law.
D. In the event that a civil penalty assessed by the Board shall become
final and shall not be reviewed pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules or, if so reviewed such civil penalty shall be
sustained or modified and, as so modified, sustained in part or, if after
referral to the appropriate prosecutor by the Board the reporting
person shall be convicted, the Board is hereby directed to review the
facts and, if appropriate, to file appropriate disciplinary charges and to
impose disciplinary action as provided by law.
A. The Village Clerk shall maintain as a record subject to public
inspection:
(1) A copy of this chapter or any amendments hereto adopted, within
30 days after the adoption thereof.
(2) A statement that the Village of Suffern has established a Board of
Ethics in accordance with this chapter and the composition of such
Board, within 30 days after the establishment of such Board.
(3) A copy of the form of annual statement of financial disclosure and a
statement of the date such annual statement form was promulgated
by this chapter.
B. The Village Clerk shall, in accord with § 22-6C herein, notify the
candidates for local office of the requirement to file an annual financial
disclosure statement and shall collect and forward the executed
financial disclosure statements to the Board of Ethics.
§ 22-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-10
1:25
§ 22-10. Removal from certain state provisions.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, the
Village of Suffern hereby elects to remove itself from the ambit of all of the
provisions of § 812, other than Subdivision 3 of such section, of the General
Municipal Law, in accordance with the provisions of Subdivision 3 of such
section.
§ 22-11. Inducement of violations.
Any person who induces any elected official, covered employee or Village
employee to take any action or refrain from taking any action, which is in
violation of this chapter, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor as that
term is defined in the New York State Penal Law and shall be barred from
doing business with the Village for a period of five years from the date of
conviction.
§ 22-12. Claims against Village.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar the timely filing by a present or
former elected official, covered employee or Village employee of any claim,
demand, or suit against the Village, made individually or in a representative
capacity, arising out of any personal injury or property damage or from
any lawful benefit, or from receiving a municipal service or benefit that is
generally available to the public.
§ 22-13. Recusal from voting or other discretionary act.
A. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply to acts under this section:
CONTRACT — Any claim, account or demand against or agreement
with a municipality, express or implied, and shall include the
designation of a depository of public funds and the designation of a
newspaper, including, but not limited to, an official newspaper, for the
publication of any notice, resolution, ordinance, or other proceeding
where such publication is required or authorized by law. "Contract"
shall include, for the purposes of this section, an approval or denial of
a rezoning, subdivision, variance or other discretionary application and
shall also include a determination made pursuant to § 8-0101 et seq. of
the Environmental Conservation Law. "Contract" shall not include, for
purposes of this section, a proposed collective bargaining agreement
with the Village that may collaterally affect one or more of the persons
set forth in Subsection (2) of the definition of "interest" herein when
such person is classified as a nonexempt position person by said
collective bargaining agreement.
INTEREST — A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing
to an elected official or covered employee as a result of a contract with
the Village which such elected official or covered employee serves. For
§ 22-10 SUFFERN CODE § 22-13
1:26
Chapter 28
LANDLORD-TENANT REVIEW BOARD
§ 28-1. Establishment; membership; terms; compensation.
A Landlord-Tenant Review Board is hereby established. It shall consist of
five members who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Board of Trustees. The term of each member shall be for five years or
until his successor is appointed and qualifies. The terms of the members
shall be staggered so that the term of one member expires each year.
Upon initial appointment, the Mayor shall designate the initial term of
each member so that staggered five-year terms may exist subsequently.
Subsequent appointments shall be for a full term. The Mayor shall appoint
a Chairman, who shall be confirmed by the Board of Trustees. The members
shall be a tenant, a homeowner, a condominium or cooperative owner and a
businessman. The members shall serve without compensation.
§ 28-2. Duties.
The Review Board shall hear complaints relative to increases in rental
charges in multiple dwellings, which shall be defined for the purposes
of this chapter as a dwelling which is either rented, leased or let to be
the purposes of this section an elected official or covered employee
shall be deemed to have an interest in the contract of:
(1) A spouse, child, stepchild or dependent;
Business partners, or a business, association, partnership,
corporation, or other entity of which the elected official or covered
employee is an owner, partner, officer, director, or shareholder,
as identified in the financial disclosure statement of said elected
official or covered employee executed by him or her pursuant to
§ 22-6 herein; and
(2)
A person, business, association, partnership, corporation, or other
entity who is represented in a professional capacity (such as
attorney-client or real estate broker/customer) by the elected
official or covered employee, as identified in the financial
disclosure statement of said elected official or covered employee
executed by him or her pursuant to § 22-6 herein.
(3)
B. Prohibited actions. Whenever an elected official or covered employee is
called upon to vote on, advise on, or otherwise take discretionary action
before the Village in which the elected official or covered employee has
an interest, the elected official or covered employee shall immediately
declare the nature of the interest and shall refrain from taking any
action or inaction that would affect the outcome of the matter. Such
declaration shall be made a part of the public record concerning the
matter.
§ 22-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2
1:27
occupied or is occupied as the residence or home of three or more families
living independently of each other. The Review Board shall attempt to
resolve amicably disputes between landlords and tenants regarding the
amount or frequency of rental increases.
§ 28-3. Considerations in determining fair rent.
The Review Board shall request that the owner or representative of any
multiple dwelling concerning which a complaint has been filed by a tenant
appear before the Review Board. The Review Board may assist in obtaining
agreement between the parties and may recommend a fair rental. In
determining a fair rental, the Review Board may consider:
Chapter 32
LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 266.
A. Rentals for similar accommodations within the same multiple residence
or complex of housing.
B. Rentals for similar accommodations in the same area or in other similar
areas of the municipality.
C. The physical condition of the premises and the nature and extent of the
services actually provided by the landlord.
D. The cost of providing the rental service, as presented by the landlord.
E. Recent changes in cost, including changes in applicable tax rates, as
presented by the landlord.
F. Recent deletions or additions in the services provided.
§ 28-2 SUFFERN CODE § 28-3
1:28
ARTICLE I
General
[Adopted 2-8-1971 as Ch. 26 of the 1971 Code]
§ 32-1. Hearing required; notices.4
No local law shall be adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Suffern until a public hearing has been held thereon in its final form before
such Board of Trustees not less than three days after public notice has
been given of the time and place of the holding of such public hearing.
Such notices shall be given by the Village Clerk by causing the same to be
published once in the official newspaper of the Village. Such notice shall
contain the title of the proposed local law and a brief explanatory statement
thereof.
§ 32-2. Posting and publication of notice of hearing.
The Village Clerk shall cause to be printed or otherwise reproduced copies
of such proposed local law and shall, not later than the day such notice
is published, post one such copy, together with the notice of hearing, in a
conspicuous place in his office and shall also make copies of such proposed
local law available at his office for inspection by and distribution to any
interested person during business hours.
§ 32-3. Notice of adoption.
The Village Clerk shall forthwith upon the adoption of a local law by the
Board of Trustees post a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in his office
and shall within 10 days after such adoption cause the local law or an
abstract thereof describing the same in general terms to be published in the
official newspaper of the Village.
§ 32-4. Filing of proofs.
Proof of publication of the notice of public hearing required by § 32-1 hereof
and proof of the posting and publication required by § 32-3 hereof shall be
filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 32-5. Numbering; filing.
Each local law shall be numbered consecutively beginning with number one
(No. 1) for each calendar year. When a local law is finally adopted and
certified copies thereof are required by § 27 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law to be filed in the offices of the Village Clerk, the State Comptroller and
the Secretary of State, the Village Clerk shall accordingly assign to such
local law its appropriate number.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 32-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-5
1:29

ARTICLE II
Zoning Amendments
[Adopted 12-8-1986 by L.L. No. 8-1986]
§ 32-6. Summary publication.
Every zoning law and amendment thereto, including any map incorporated
therein, adopted pursuant to the Article 7 of the Village Law and the
provisions of the Village of Suffern Zoning Local Law5 or any successor
thereto, in addition to the filing of said local law as required by § 27 of
the Municipal Home Rule Law, shall be entered into the minutes of the
Board of Trustees, and a summary or abstract thereof, exclusive of any map
incorporated therein, shall be published once in the official newspaper of
the Village of Suffern, and a copy of said local law, together with any map
incorporated therein, shall be posted conspicuously on the Village of Suffern
bulletin board, and affidavits of said publication and posting shall be filed
with the Village Clerk.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 32-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-6
1:31
Chapter 36
MEETINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public access to records — See Ch. 213.
§ 36-1. Notice of special meetings.
Special meetings of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern may be
called by the Mayor or by any two Trustees by causing a written notice
specifying the time and place and the subject to be considered thereat. Only
subjects contained in the notice may be considered. Said notice shall be
served personally upon each member of the Board at least one hour before
the meeting or by leaving a notice at his residence or place of business with
someone of suitable age and discretion at least 24 hours before the time of
the meeting or by mailing such notice at least 72 hours before such meeting.
§ 36-2. Manner of giving notice.6
Notice of all special meetings must be given, to the extent practicable,
to the news media and shall be conspicuously posted in one or more
designated public locations at a reasonable time prior thereto.
Chapter 41
PLANNING BOARD; ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 239. Zoning — See Ch. 266.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 32-6 SUFFERN CODE § 36-2
1:32
ARTICLE I
Training of Members
[Adopted 7-26-1993 by L.L. No. 5-1993]
§ 41-1. Initial training.
All members appointed to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Appeals
of the Village of Suffern are required, as a condition of appointment, to
attend a training program related to the function of said board within two
years of the date of such appointment. All members of the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Appeals on the effective date of this article shall attend
such a program within two years of the effective date of this article.
§ 41-2. Continuing education.
Thereafter, each member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals
shall attend a minimum of two acceptable training sessions each year.
§ 41-3. Certification of training sessions.
Prior to attendance at a training session or continuing education session,
the member(s) intending to attend the same shall provide a description
of the same, including the topics to be covered, speakers and anticipated
duration of the session(s) to the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees,
upon consultation with the Village Attorney, Planning Board Chairman and/
or Zoning Board of Appeals Chairman, will determine whether such
session(s) is sufficient to satisfy all, a portion or none of the required
training or continuing education.
§ 41-4. Effect of training on action.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the failure of a member of the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Appeals to obtain such training or continuing
education shall not affect said person's appointment to serve on such board,
to entertain applications or to vote on such applications and the validity of
such members' actions shall not be affected thereby.
§ 41-5. Removal from office.
Failure to receive such required training or continuing education shall
constitute cause for removal of such board member pursuant to § 36 of
the Public Officers Law. The Board of Trustees may, upon showing of good
cause, grant an extension of the time within which a member of said board
must complete required training or continuing education, but shall not
waive such requirement.
§ 41-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-5
1:33

ARTICLE II
Attendance at Meetings
[Adopted 7-9-2012 by L.L. No. 10-2012]
§ 41-6. Compensation.
Members and alternate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals and
Planning Board shall be paid based on attendance at meetings at the rate of
one-twelfth of the sum set forth in the budget for the annual compensation
of each member.
§ 41-7. Removal for nonattendance.
Failure to attend four or more regularly scheduled and special meetings in
any twelve-month period shall constitute grounds for removal of such board
member pursuant to § 36 of the Public Officers Law. The Board of Trustees
may, upon a showing of good cause, excuse such nonattendance.
§ 41-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-7
1:35
Chapter 43
POLICE AUXILIARY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Powers of Chief of Police — See Ch. 10.
Police Department — See Ch. 44.
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 57.
Parades — See Ch. 181.
§ 43-1. Auxiliary police established; duties.
Chapter 44
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 22. Police Investigation Fund — See Ch. 48.
A. An auxiliary police force is hereby established. The auxiliary police
persons shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees upon
recommendation of the Chief of Police and shall serve at the pleasure of
the Board of Trustees. The Chief of Police shall conduct a full
investigation of the background and history of any such volunteer prior
to making a recommendation to the Board of Trustees. Auxiliary police
persons shall serve without compensation or payment of any kind. The
Chief of Police shall ensure that auxiliary police persons receive
sufficient training prior to undertaking activities hereunto.
B. Auxiliary police persons shall assist in nonpolice matters Village police
officers as traffic control, civil events, and emergencies upon their
direction in such activities.
C. Auxiliary police persons shall not carry firearms and shall not have the
authority of arrest, issuance of appearance tickets or uniform traffic
tickets. Upon completion of training for such devices, auxiliary police
persons may, upon written authorization of the Chief of Police, carry
handcuffs, which they may use only in emergency situations upon the
direction of a Village police officer.
D. Upon prior approval of the Mayor, the Chief of Police is authorized to
adopt additional rules and regulations regarding auxiliary police
persons not inconsistent with this chapter.
§ 41-7 SUFFERN CODE § 43-1
1:36
ARTICLE I
Charges Against Members
[Adopted 3-25-1985 by resolution]
§ 44-1. Adoption of rules and regulations.
Pursuant to the laws of the State of New York, the Board of Trustees hereby
adopts the following rules and regulations for examination and hearing of
charges made or preferred against any member of the Police Department of
the Village of Suffern.
§ 44-2. Information to be supplied to member.
Any member of the Police Department of the Village of Suffern against
whom removal or other disciplinary action is proposed shall have written
notice thereof and of the reasons therefor, shall be furnished a copy of the
charges preferred against him and shall be allowed at least eight days for
answering the same in writing.
§ 44-3. Hearing.
The hearing upon such charges shall be held by a hearing officer appointed
by the Board of Trustees who shall, for the purposes of such hearing, be
vested with all of the powers of the Board of Trustees and shall make a
record of such hearing which shall, with his recommendations, be referred
to the Board of Trustees for review and decision.
§ 44-4. Representation by legal counsel or employee organization.
The person against whom charges are preferred may be represented by
counsel or by a representative of a recognized or certified employee
organization and may be permitted to summon witnesses on his behalf.
§ 44-5. Technical rules of evidence.
Compliance with technical rules of evidence shall not be required.
§ 44-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-5
1:37
Chapter 48
POLICE INVESTIGATION FUND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 44.
§ 48-1. Establishment.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern may, by resolution, establish
a Police Investigation Fund Account in such amount as it deems necessary.
Any such Police Investigation Fund Account shall continue in existence from
year to year until abolished by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Suffern.
§ 48-2. Expenditures from fund.
Expenditures from such Police Investigation Fund may be made only for
payment in advance of audit and upon receipt of properly itemized bills,
for information and evidence furnished to the Village and the Village Police
Department for the conduct of the affairs of the Village and the performance
of the duties of the police officers of the Village Police Department and
upon the terms calling for the payment of cash to the vendor or supplier
of such material, information and evidence or the rendering of services in
connection with the delivery of the same.
§ 48-3. List of expenditures.
A list of all expenditures made from such Police Investigation Fund Account,
together with the bills and/or information supporting such expenditures,
shall be presented periodically and at least quarterly during the fiscal year
to the Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern for audit.
§ 48-4. Availability of information supporting claims; confidential
information.
Adequate information concerning the claims and transactions referred to
in § 48-3 of this chapter shall be available to the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Suffern. In cases where the expenditures so made are for
materials, information, evidence or services involving a confidential matter
which, by their very nature, require that the names of the parties and
other information should not be made public, bills or claims which are to
be audited and which are public records shall be drafted in such form as
will indicate in general terms the nature of the claim. Information of a
confidential matter regarding such claims shall be retained in a diary or
some other record to be kept by the Chief of Police. Such diary or record
shall be a confidential record not open to inspection by the general public
but available to the Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern.
§ 44-5 SUFFERN CODE § 48-5
1:38
§ 48-5. Disallowed claims.
Any of such bills or any portion of any such bills as shall be disallowed upon
audit shall be the personal liability of the officer responsible for the use
of such Police Investigation Fund Account from which payment on account
thereof was made, and such officer shall promptly reimburse such Police
Investigation Fund Account in the amount of such disallowances. If such
reimbursement has not been made by the time of the first salary payment
to such officer after the action disallowing the amount so expended, such
amount shall be withheld from such salary payment and, if necessary,
subsequent salary payments and paid into such Police Investigation Fund
Account until an amount equal to the amount so disallowed has been repaid.
Chapter 53
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 53-1. Mayor and Trustees.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern shall from time to time
determine and fix the compensation to be paid to the Mayor and to the
Trustees of the Village of Suffern.7 Said compensation shall not be in an
amount in excess of the amount respectively established and set forth in the
schedule of wages annexed to the Village of Suffern budget.
Chapter 57
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 254.
§ 57-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Local Law Establishing a Traffic
Violations Bureau for the Village of Suffern."
§ 57-2. Creation.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern, wishing to assist the
residents of the Village and the Village Justice Court in the disposition of
offenses relating to traffic and parking violations, does hereby, pursuant to
§ 370 of the General Municipal Law, create a Traffic Violations Bureau.
§ 57-3. Director; hours.
7. Editor's Note: Current salary figures are on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 48-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-3
1:39
§ 57-4. Jurisdiction.
The Traffic Violations Bureau shall be authorized to dispose of any violations
of the traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations when such offenses
shall not constitute the traffic infraction known as "speeding" or a
misdemeanor or a felony.
§ 57-5. Guilty plea; summons; receipt.
§ 57-6. Failure to answer violation.
If a person charged with a traffic violation does not answer the violation,
as prescribed in § 57-5, within a time specified on the notice of violation,
the Bureau shall cause a complaint to be entered against said person and
a warrant to be issued for said person's arrest and appearance before the
Court.
§ 57-7. Appearance in court required.8
Any person who shall have been, within the preceding 12 months, guilty
of a number of parking violations in excess of a maximum number to be
established by the Court or of three or more violations other than parking
violations shall not be permitted to appear and answer to a subsequent
A. The Village Justice Court Clerk is hereby designated as the Director of
the Traffic Violations Bureau.
B. Said Bureau shall maintain such hours as may be designated by the
Village Justice Court.
A. Any individual may plead guilty to an offense within the jurisdiction of
the Traffic Violations Bureau by a written document, in such form as
prescribed by the Traffic Violations Bureau, waiving the right to trial
and inclusion with said document of the payment of such fine as shall be
designated by the Village Justice Court for said offense, provided that
such fines are within the limits established as penalties for such
offense.
B. Within the time specified on the summons, a person may appear
personally or by designated person or by written power of attorney in
such form as prescribed by the Traffic Violations Bureau before the
Traffic Violations Bureau to answer the violation alleged. Said violation
may be satisfied by payment of the prescribed fine and a writing
waiving a court hearing. Fulfillment of said conditions shall
presumptively be considered a plea of guilty, which plea the Bureau
Director shall be authorized to enter.
C. Fulfillment of said conditions shall be deemed complete satisfaction for
the violation, and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 57-3 SUFFERN CODE § 57-7
1:40
violation before the Traffic Violations Bureau but must appear in court at a
time specified by the Bureau.
§ 57-8. Restrictions on Bureau.
The Traffic Violations Bureau shall not be authorized to deprive a person of
his right to counsel or to prevent him from exercising his right to appear in
court to answer to, explain or defend any charge of a violation of any traffic
law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
§ 57-9. Establishment of fines.
The Village Justice Court shall designate the fines to be paid for offenses
which may be satisfied at the Bureau as provided in this chapter, provided
that such fines are within the limits established as penalties for such
offenses.
§ 57-10. Records.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 65
ADVERTISING MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 168. Fees — See Ch. A275.
§ 65-1. Legislative intent.
Numerous individuals or organizations distribute newspapers, magazines,
handbills and other papers by depositing the same on the driveways,
sidewalks or lawns of private residences and premises. The indiscriminate
distribution of printed matter upon residential property creates a significant
risk to the public in that the accumulation thereof is an open invitation
to burglary. Said manner of indiscriminate distribution is, in addition,
unsightly, contributes to litter, results in the expenditure of public funds in
order to eliminate and constitutes an invasion of privacy of those who do
not wish to receive such material. Additionally, the placing of handbills on
A. The Traffic Violations Bureau shall keep a record of all violations of
which each person has been guilty, whether such guilt was established
in court or in the Bureau, and also a record of all fines collected and the
disposition thereof.
B. The Bureau shall also perform such other or additional duties and keep
such other or additional records as shall be prescribed by the Village
Justice Court and/or the Board of Trustees.
§ 57-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-1
1:41
vehicles on private and public property causes a severe litter problem, is
unsanitary and unsightly and results in the expenditure of public funds in
order to eliminate.
§ 65-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms and words shall
have the meanings set forth herein:
ADVERTISING MATTER — Any printed or written matter, any sample or
device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed
matter or literature other than a newspaper, unsolicited newspaper and
campaign material which is not delivered by the United States Postal
Service, including but not limited to those which:
CAMPAIGN MATERIAL — Any printed matter used to promote the
candidacy of any person running for public office or the support or
defeat of any proposition, referendum or ballot measure or the support,
opposition or opinion of any issue of public interest, including material
of a religious nature.
NEWSPAPER — Any printed matter of general circulation published for
the dissemination of news or community information.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or entity and any agent, designee, employee or person acting
on behalf thereof.
PRIVATE PREMISES — All property which is not a public place,
including but not limited to any land, building or other structure
designed or utilized for residential, commercial, business, industrial,
institutional or religious purposes, together with any yard, grounds,
walk, driveway, fence, porch, steps, vestibule, mailbox and other
structure appurtenant thereto; and vacant land.
PUBLIC PLACE — The streets, alleys or other public ways, public parks,
public buildings, public grounds and public parking lots.
UNSOLICITED NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper which is not delivered
pursuant to subscription agreement.
Advertise for sale or lease any article, merchandise, product or
commodity.
(1)
(2) Advertise or promote any trade, profession or service for hire.
Direct attention to or to advertise any theatrical performance or
exhibit.
(3)
Direct attention to any business, mercantile, professional trade
or commercial establishment or other activity for the purpose of
either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales
or use thereof.
(4)
§ 65-1 SUFFERN CODE § 65-3
1:42
§ 65-3. Certificate of registration.
A. No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed any advertising
matter, unsolicited newspaper or campaign material to private
premises in the Village of Suffern without first having obtained a
certificate of registration from the Village Clerk.
B. All persons desiring to distribute or cause to be distributed any
advertising matter, unsolicited newspaper or campaign material to
private premises in the Village of Suffern shall file with the Village Clerk
a registration statement, on forms provided by the Village Clerk,
containing the following information:
(1) The name of the unsolicited newspaper or of the general type of
material to be distributed.
(2) The owner or publisher of the unsolicited newspaper or of the
person or organization, if any, distributing the material.
(3) Whether the person distributing or causing the distribution is a
natural person, partnership, corporation or association.
(4) If a natural person, the business or residence address and
telephone number.
(5) If a partnership, the principal business address and telephone
number of the partnership, together with the local business
address and telephone number, if any.
(6) If a corporation, whether it is a domestic or foreign corporation
and, if foreign, the state of incorporation, the principal office,
address and telephone number of the corporation and the address
and telephone number of the local office or agent, if any.
(7) The anticipated frequency of distribution of the unsolicited
newspaper, advertising matter or campaign material.
C. The Village Clerk shall issue a certificate of registration immediately
upon the filing of a completed registration statement. If the registration
statement has not been completed, the Village Clerk shall inform the
person filing the registration statement of the specific information
which is lacking. The Village Clerk shall also provide to the person
receiving the certificate of registration and shall mail to the address
specified in the registration statement the names and addresses of any
persons who have notified the Village Clerk pursuant to § 65-4 herein
that they do not wish to receive delivery of unsolicited newspapers,
advertising matter or campaign material.
D. The certificate of registration shall be valid for the calendar year for
which it was issued. A new registration statement must be filed at such
time as there is any change in the information provided in the
registration statement and prior to a distribution in subsequent
calendar years.
§ 65-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-4
1:43
§ 65-4. List of persons not wanting delivery of unsolicited material.
§ 65-5. Method of delivery.
A. The Village Clerk shall maintain a list of addresses of the owners,
occupants, tenants or persons in charge of private premises who have
notified the Village Clerk that they do not wish to receive delivery of
unsolicited newspapers, advertising matter and campaign material. The
Village Clerk shall revise said list when notified that an individual
desires to withdraw a prior notification that he refuses to receive
delivery of the aforementioned materials. All notifications herein to the
Village Clerk must be in writing. Whenever the Village Clerk ascertains
that the ownership or tenancy of any premises has changed, by virtue of
a request for a water meter reading or otherwise, for which the owner,
tenant or person in charge has filed a refusal of delivery of advertising
matter, unsolicited newspaper and campaign material, the Village Clerk
shall revise the aforementioned list by deleting said address from the
list. The list compiled and the written requests for nondelivery shall be
available for inspection pursuant to Article 6 of the Public Officers Law.
B. The Village Clerk shall furnish a copy of the aforementioned list to each
person who is issued a certificate of registration at the time said
certificate of registration is issued and shall mail a copy of said list to
the address specified in the registration statement filed pursuant to this
chapter. The Village Clerk shall mail a revised list to the address
specified in the registration statement on or about the first day of each
month if there are any deletions or additions to said list.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute an unsolicited
newspaper, advertising matter or campaign material to any person who
has refused delivery thereof pursuant to this chapter after personal
delivery of the list containing the addresses of those persons refusing
delivery thereof to a person filing a registration statement and from a
date 15 days after a revised list has been mailed to a distributor
pursuant to Subsection B herein.
A. All unsolicited newspapers, advertising matter and campaign material
which has not been refused pursuant to § 65-4 herein and all
newspapers shall be distributed to private premises as follows:
(1) To offices, apartments, condominiums, cooperatives and retail
stores:
(a) Placed in the hands of the intended recipient; or
(b) Placed in the door jamb, door handle or through the mail slot of
the individual office, apartment, condominium, cooperative or
retail store.
(2) To all other private premises:
(a) Placed in the hands of the intended recipient; or
§ 65-4 SUFFERN CODE § 65-5
1:44
§ 65-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $50 per occurrence.
Each incident and each day for which a violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 65-7. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the distribution or mail
by the United States Postal Service or to the service of any legal notice or
process which is permitted or required by law.
Chapter 69
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 175.
§ 69-1. Legislative intent.
There have been reported to the Board of Trustees by the Volunteer Fire
Department and Police Department extraordinary numbers of false alarms
emanating from automated devices. These false alarms unnecessarily
require that our police and firemen respond in an emergency fashion to
signals which should not have been created in the first place, depriving the
citizens of this Village from the sorely needed services of our emergency
forces and exposing the emergency volunteers to unnecessary hazards and
risks. Therefore, it is the intent of this chapter to provide a mechanism
whereby those responsible for the creation of these false alarms are dealt
with in an appropriate fashion. It is not the intent to discourage the use
of automated equipment, but rather to encourage the use of automated
equipment that fulfills its intended function.
(b) Placed on the porch or covered entranceway of a house or
building on said property, provided that it shall be wrapped,
bound, lockfolded or enclosed so as to prevent the same from
being blown, scattered or fragmented by the action of the
elements or normal pedestrian access to the premises; or
(c) Placed within the outer door to the premises or in the door
jamb or door handle.
B. No person shall place or cause to be placed any unsolicited newspaper,
advertising matter, newspaper or campaign material on any motor
vehicle. This subsection shall not apply to the issuance of any traffic
ticket or other notice permitted or required by law.
§ 65-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-2
1:45
§ 69-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ALARM DEVICE — A mechanical, electrical or electronic device which,
when activated, will transmit a signal which is intended to create a response
from either a fire department or police department or other emergency
service, whether or not the signal generated is audible, visible or electronic
and whether such signal is automatic or otherwise.
ALARM USER — Any person, firm, corporation or business entity upon
whose premises an alarm device is installed or operating.
FALSE ALARM — A signal transmitted to either the Fire or Police
Department indicating that a fire or criminal act or emergency is occurring
when, in fact, neither a criminal act nor fire nor emergency is occurring.
§ 69-3. False alarms. [Amended 6-5-2006 by L.L. No. 5-2006]
It shall be unlawful for any alarm user to permit or allow, whether
intentionally or unintentionally or whether due to malefaction or otherwise,
an alarm device to signal a false alarm. The Fire Inspector, the Code
Enforcement Officer or the Police Department of the Village of Suffern is
authorized to issue a warning or an appearance ticket upon the occurence
of a false alarm.
§ 69-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter within one year after the
issuance of a warning to such person or to any member of his household
or to an agent shall be subject to the following penalties for all subsequent
false alarms which occur more than 72 hours after the issuance of a
warning:
Chapter 73
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 193. Peace and good order — See Ch. 197.
A. For the first false alarm: a fine of not to exceed $150.
B. For the second false alarm: a fine of not to exceed $250.
C. For all subsequent false alarms within a one-year period from the
issuance of a warning: $500.
§ 69-2 SUFFERN CODE § 73-1
1:46
§ 73-1. Legislative intent.9
It is the intent of the Village of Suffern, as an exercise of its police power,
to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents and
inhabitants of the Village by enacting this chapter, since it is the finding
of the Board of Trustees that the consumption of alcoholic beverages by
persons on certain public lands, except under controlled conditions, is
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Village
in that such consumption contributes to the development of unsanitary
conditions and the creation of nuisances, including but not limited to
littering and raucous or other disorderly behavior. It is further the intent
of the Board of Trustees that this chapter not be considered as a traffic
regulation insofar as it relates to motor vehicles or the operation thereof.
§ 73-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them. All other words shall have the meanings normally
ascribed to them in regular usage.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer,
cider and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits,
wine or beer and capable of being consumed by a human being.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle suitable for or
used to hold any liquid.
INTENT TO CONSUME10 — Includes any of the following:
PUBLIC LANDS — Any highway, street, sidewalk, park or playground.
VILLAGE — The Village of Suffern.
§ 73-3. Prohibitions against public consumption.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to:
A. Drinking from the container.
B. Possession with movement of the container to the mouth.
C. Possession with alcohol on the breath of the possessor.
Any circumstances evidencing an intent to ultimately consume on any
public lands.
D.
A. Consume any alcoholic beverage on any public land within the Village
of Suffern.
B. Have in his possession, with intent to consume therefrom, any open
container containing any alcoholic beverage on any public lands in the
Village.11
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
10.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 73-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-3
1:47
§ 73-4. Exceptions.
The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply in the event of a fair, picnic or
other community gathering for which special permission has been granted
by the Board of Trustees. The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply to the
transportation of an unsealed but not open container across public lands of
the Village from one point to another with no intent to consume the contents
of such open container while upon public lands.
§ 73-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all persons on public lands in the Village except
as provided in § 73-4 above and shall not apply to any person drinking
an alcoholic beverage while operating a motor vehicle upon any public
highway within the Village in violation of § 1227 of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York.
§ 73-6. Penalties for offenses.12
Each violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 1-12 of
Chapter 1, General Provisions.
Chapter 77
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 105.
Curfew — See Ch. 117.
Noise — See Ch. 175.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 185.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 197.
Zoning — See Ch. 266.
Fees — See Ch. A275.
§ 77-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin,
slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally for use as
a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score.
C. Have within his possession for the purposes of consumption on public
lands by either himself or another person any open container
containing an alcoholic beverage within the Village of Suffern.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 73-3 SUFFERN CODE § 77-1
1:48
It shall include but not be limited to such devices as pinball machines,
electronic games, skill ball and all games, operations or transactions similar
thereto under whatever name they may be known. The term does not
include vending machines in which there is not incorporated gaming or
amusement features, nor does the term include any coin-operated musical
devices or rides.
§ 77-2. License required. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
No person, firm, association, corporation or other entity shall possess,
maintain, use or permit to be possessed, maintained, used or operated in or
upon any premises in his possession or under his control in any commercial
zone (C-1 or C-2), as set forth in the Village of Suffern Zoning Local Law,13
an amusement device without first having obtained a license for each such
device, the fee for which shall be set by resolution in the Standard Schedule
of Fees of the Village of Suffern,14 and which shall be valid for the calendar
year for which it was issued.
§ 77-3. Application for license.
A. Application for an amusement device license shall be made to the
Village Clerk and shall contain the following information.
(1) The name and date of birth, home address, social security number
and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) If a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the names, dates
of birth, home addresses, social security numbers and telephone
numbers of the principals and officers thereof.
(3) The names, dates of birth, home addresses, social security numbers
and telephone numbers of all persons having a financial interest in
such gamerooms.
(4) The address of the premises for which licenses are required,
including the square footage of the proposed operating area.
(5) The name, date of birth, home address, social security number and
telephone number of the manager of the premises for which
licenses are requested.
(6) For each person named on the application form, a statement of fact
concerning any conviction in any jurisdiction of any crime,
including full disclosure of the nature of such conviction, the place
of conviction, the date of conviction and any penalty or disposition
of such conviction.
(7) The distributor, trade name, description, serial number and
manufacturer of each amusement device proposed. The Village of
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 77-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-3
1:49
§ 77-4. Display of license; transferability; fee. [Amended 3-12-1990
by L.L. No. 3-1990]
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed
in the premises wherein the amusement device is operated or maintained.
Such license may be transferred from one amusement device to another
amusement device at the same location upon notification of the Village
Clerk to such effect, upon the furnishing of a description and serial number
of the new amusement device and the payment of a transfer fee in an
amount set by resolution of the Board of Trustees in the Standard Schedule
of Fees of the Village of Suffern.16
§ 77-5. Regulations.
Suffern shall be notified within 10 business days of any change in
machines.
(8) Certification, under oath, made by the applicant that the
information contained in the application is complete, accurate and
truthful.
(9) The floor plan of the premises, including dimensions, depicting the
proposed location of amusement devices, aisles, exits and counter
areas, if any.
(10) A plan depicting the manner in which the applicant proposes to
satisfy § 77-5E of this chapter.
B. Copies of the application shall be referred to the Chief of Police, the
Building Inspector and the Fire Inspector. The Chief of Police shall
ascertain if the applicant has been previously convicted of a crime and
shall inform the Village Clerk of his findings. If the applicant has never
been convicted of a crime, the Chief of Police shall approve the
application. The Building Inspector and Fire Inspector shall determine
whether the location and operation of the premises and of the
amusement device are in compliance with the applicable statutes, local
laws, ordinances and regulations and shall inform the Village Clerk of
their findings. If the location and proposed operation of the premises
and of the amusement device comply with all applicable statutes, local
laws, ordinances and regulations, the Building Inspector and Fire
Inspector shall approve the application. If the aforementioned
individuals approve of the application and if the applicant complies with
the other provisions of this chapter, the Village Clerk shall issue an
amusement device license for each such device upon the payment of the
fee set by resolution of the Board of Trustees in the Standard Schedule
of Fees.15 [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 77-3 SUFFERN CODE § 77-5
1:50
§ 77-6. Expiration, suspension or revocation of license.
A. A licensee may not offer any prize or reward to any person playing an
amusement device, nor shall any licensee permit such amusement
devices to be used for gambling purposes.
B. Amusement devices shall be located on a premises so as not to impair
ingress or egress to the premises and so as not to interfere with the
circulation and movement of customers.
C. Amusement devices shall be located where they are visible at all times
to the licensee or his agent.
D. The licensee shall not permit noise, either from mechanical means or
the patrons, which causes a disturbance of the peace of the adjacent
and surrounding occupants or uses.
E. The licensee shall provide adequate and orderly parking for bicycles
and shall keep the storefront and sidewalks unobstructed so that they
are clear and open to unencumbered pedestrian traffic.
A. Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
expire upon any of the following conditions:
(1) Discontinuance of the permit holder's business.
(2) Removal of a permitted amusement device from the business
premises, which is not replaced within 30 days by another
amusement device of similar size.
(3) Transfer or sale of the business to another individual, partnership,
corporation or other entity.
(4) December 31 of each year.
B. All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are subject
to suspension or revocation of the Chief of Police upon any of the
following conditions:
(1) Willful misrepresentation by the licensee or his agent in applying
for the license.
(2) Conviction of the licensee of any felony or misdemeanor involving
any violation of this chapter.
(3) The existence of a nuisance to customers, other businesses or the
public stemming from the operation of amusement devices on the
licensee's premises. The definition of "nuisance" for the purposes of
this subsection shall include the violation of any provision of the
Code of the Village of Suffern or New York State statutes pertaining
to force, violence, disorderly conduct, moral turpitude or gambling.
C. Prior to the suspension or revocation of any license, the Chief of Police
shall give the licensee written notice of the suspension and the length of
§ 77-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-6
1:51
§ 77-7. Enforcement. [Amended 11-3-2008 by L.L. No. 16-2008]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer or Village
of Suffern Police Department.
§ 77-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No.
3-1990]
Any person, firm, corporation or association violating any provision of this
chapter, in addition to the revocation of his license(s), shall be guilty of a
violation punishable as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions,
per amusement device. The continuation of a violation of this chapter shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense for each and every week the
violation is continued.
Chapter 81
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs — See Ch. 122.
the suspension or revocation, the reason therefor and the date of
suspension or revocation, which date shall be at least 10 days from the
date of service of said notice. Said notice shall inform the licensee that
he may request a hearing on the issue of the suspension or revocation
by filing a letter requesting a hearing with the Village Clerk prior to the
suspension or revocation date specified in the notice. Said notice may
be served personally on the licensee or on an agent or employee of the
licensee or may be mailed to the premises of the licensee by registered
or certified mail. The license shall be considered to have been revoked
on the date specified in said notice unless the licensee demands a
hearing on the suspension or revocation prior to the suspension or
revocation date specified in said notice. The Mayor shall forthwith
appoint a hearing officer who shall hear and determine the matter.
D. The hearing officer shall determine whether the licensee violated the
provisions of this chapter and whether the license(s) should be
suspended and, if so, the period of suspension or whether the license(s)
should be revoked. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal
manner. The Village shall have the burden of establishing grounds for
suspension or revocation. The hearing officer shall prepare a written
decision which shall be mailed to the parties and filed with the Village
Clerk. The hearing officer's decision shall not affect any criminal
proceedings pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or the Code of
the Village of Suffern.
§ 77-6 SUFFERN CODE § 77-8
1:52
ARTICLE I
Wild Animals, Birds and Reptiles
[Adopted 11-14-1977 by L.L. No. 13-1977]
§ 81-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to protect the residents of the Village of
Suffern from possible dangerous animals kept within the Village of Suffern.
§ 81-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, limited association,
corporation, voluntary association and/or other legal entity.
PREMISES — Any house, garage, barn, building or structure of any kind or
nature.
WILD ANIMALS, BIRDS AND REPTILES — Any animal, bird or reptile of
a species dangerous to human beings or savage in nature living ordinarily
at large and not customarily made tame or gentle by long-continued
association with man without regard to whether a specific animal or reptile
is considered a pet or domesticated by its keeper or possessor.
§ 81-3. Confinement to owner's premises.
No wild animal, bird or reptile will be allowed outside the premises of the
owner of said wild animal, bird or reptile.
§ 81-4. Penalties for offenses.17
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1,
General Provisions.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 81-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-4
1:53
Chapter 89
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance — See Ch. 146.
§ 89-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Bingo Licensing Ordinance of the
Village of Suffern."
§ 89-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words used herein shall have the
meanings as defined in Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law. The word
"Village" shall mean the Village of Suffern.
§ 89-3. Games authorized.
§ 89-4. License required.
Any authorized organization, before being allowed to hold a game of bingo
hereunder, shall first make application for and obtain a license from the
Village Clerk, which license shall be obtained in accordance with the
provisions of the General Municipal Law.
§ 89-5. Conduct of games on Sunday.
No games of chance shall be conducted on Sunday under any license issued
hereunder unless special permission is first obtained from the Board of
Trustees.
Chapter 93
A. It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, upon obtaining a
license as provided by Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law, to
conduct the game of bingo within the territorial limits of the Village of
Suffern, subject to the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of
Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and the provisions of the
State Bingo Control Law.18
B. All the provisions of §§ 475 to 499, inclusive, of the General Municipal
Law of the State of New York, and amendments thereto, are hereby
made a part of this chapter.
18.Editor's Note: See Executive Law § 430 et seq.
§ 81-4 SUFFERN CODE § 89-5
1:54
BRUSH AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 150. Littering — See Ch. 168.
§ 93-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Brush and Weed Removal Ordinance."
§ 93-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to enhance the beauty of the public streets
and rights-of-way of the Village, to improve the condition and maintenance
of premises abutting such streets and rights-of-way and to establish
reasonable safeguards in that connection for the safety, health and welfare
of the residents of the Village using such streets and rights-of-way.
§ 93-3. Removal required upon notice.
Whenever the Department of Public Works shall determine that it is
necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public health, safety
or general welfare or for the elimination of a fire hazard to require the
removal of brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris from any lands within the limits
of the Village, the owners, occupants or tenants of such lands shall, within
10 days after notice from the Department of Public Works so to do, remove
from such lands all bushes, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots,
obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris thereon.
§ 93-4. Failure to comply; removal by Village; costs.
In all cases where owners, tenants or occupants of lands within the Village
to whom notice has been given as provided in § 93-3 shall, nevertheless,
refuse or neglect to remove from such lands within the time herein provided
all bushes, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths,
filth, garbage, trash and debris, the Department of Public Works shall cause
the same to be removed, and the Superintendent of Public Works shall
certify the cost thereof to the Board of Trustees, which shall examine the
certificate and, if correct, shall cause the cost, as shown thereon, to be
charged against said lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith become
a lien on such lands and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes
next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at
the same rate as taxes and to be collected and enforced in the same manner.
§ 93-5. Height restrictions; notice to cut.
All owners, tenants or occupants of lands lying within the Village shall keep
all brush, hedges and other plant life and trees growing within 10 feet of
§ 89-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-5
1:55
any public street or right-of-way and within 25 feet of the intersection of
two public streets or rights-of-way cut to a height of no more than three feet
where it shall be necessary and expedient, in the opinion of the Department
of Public Works or the Police Department, for the preservation of the public
safety, within 10 days after notice to cut the same rendered by either of such
Departments.
§ 93-6. Failure to comply with notice to cut.
In the event that an owner, tenant or occupant of land shall refuse or neglect
to cut the brush, hedges or other plant life within 10 days after notice to
said owner, occupant or tenant as provided in § 93-5, such brush, hedges or
other plant life may be cut under the direction of the Department of Public
Works of the Village.
§ 93-7. Assessment and collection of costs.
The cost of cutting brush, hedges or other plant life by the Department of
Public Works shall be certified by the Superintendent of Public Works to
the Board of Trustees, which shall examine the certificate and, if correct,
shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said lands. The
amount so charged shall become a lien upon said lands and be added to
and become part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied against such
lands, shall bear interest at the rate of other taxes and shall be collected
and enforced in the same manner.
§ 93-8. Penalties for offenses; additional remedies.
A. Any person who shall refuse or neglect to comply with the conditions of
any notice as is provided for by this chapter shall be guilty of a violation
of this chapter. In addition to any other penalty or remedy herein
provided, each and every violation of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions.19
B. In addition to all other remedies provided for herein, the Board of
Trustees may also enforce obedience to this chapter by injunction or by
any other remedy available to it by virtue of the judicial process.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art I.
§ 93-5 SUFFERN CODE § 93-8
1:56
Chapter 96
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 100.
Contractors' security for homes — See Ch.
113.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 127.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 141.
Housing standards — See Ch. 162.
Numbering of property — See Ch. 177.
Site plan regulations — See Ch. 228.
Soil removal — See Ch. 231.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 239.
Zoning — See Ch. 266.
Fees — See Ch. A275.
§ 93-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-8
1:57

ARTICLE I
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code
§ 96-1. Applicability of state code.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern hereby readopts and accepts
the applicability of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code for the Village of Suffern.
§ 96-2. Administration and enforcement.
The Building Inspector, Fire Inspector and Code Enforcement Officer of the
Village of Suffern and their deputies are hereby designated to administer
and enforce the State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code within the
Village of Suffern.
§ 96-3. Rules and regulations.
The Fire Inspector, Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer may
adopt rules and regulations for the administration and enforcement of
the State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. Said rules and
regulations shall be published at least five days prior to the effective date
thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village of Suffern.
Such rules and regulations shall not conflict with the State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, this chapter or any other provision of law.
§ 96-4. Inspections. [Amended 11-3-2008 by L.L. No. 19-2008]
The Code Enforcement Officer and the Building Inspector are authorized
to conduct periodic inspections, and the Fire Inspector is authorized to
conduct annual inspections for compliance with the New York State and
Village of Suffern codes.
§ 96-5. Compliance required.
A person owning, operating or maintaining property or premises within
the scope of the State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or this
chapter shall comply with the provisions of the State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, this chapter and all orders, notices, rules,
regulations or determinations issued in connection therewith.
§ 96-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-5
1:59

ARTICLE II
Rockland County Uniform Fire Prevention Code
§ 96-6. Title.
This article shall be the "Rockland County Uniform Fire Prevention Code."
§ 96-7. Purpose.
§ 96-8. Applicability.
Except as provided below, the provisions of this code shall apply equally to
new and existing conditions, except for the requirements for sprinkler and
fire alarm systems in existing premises. The provisions of this code shall
not apply to single-family and two-family dwellings. The code shall apply to
any dwelling(s) which contain three or more dwellings not separated from
each other by a fire wall, which contain common areas or storage areas
for three or more dwelling units or have heating, furnace, water heater
or air-conditioning equipment which service three or more dwelling units.
When existing premises are renovated, converted or added to, and the cost
of such addition, conversion or renovation equals or exceeds 50% of the
replacement cost of the premises, such premises shall be brought into full
compliance with all provisions of this code. Existing conditions not in strict
compliance with the terms of this code may be permitted to continue where
the exceptions do not constitute a distinct hazard to life or property. The
Board of Appeals shall have the authority to grant a waiver for the existing
condition upon the written application of the person owning the installation
concerned.
§ 96-9. Appeals.
The Board of Appeals shall consist of the Fire Inspector, the Building
Inspector, the local Fire Chief(s) and anyone else designated by the Board
of Trustees. All appeals shall be made in writing to the Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
§ 96-10. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Fire Inspector, Building Inspector and
Code Enforcement Officer and their deputies.
A. The intent of this code is to prescribe minimum requirements necessary
to establish a reasonable level of life safety and property protection
from the hazards created by fire and explosion.
B. This code is designed to supplement and expand upon the requirements
of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
Should there be a discrepancy between this code and the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
§ 96-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-11
1:61
§ 96-11. Right of entry.
The Fire Inspector, Building Inspector and/or Code Enforcement Officer
may at all reasonable hours enter any building or premises for the purpose
of making any inspection or investigation which, under the provisions of this
code, may be deemed necessary.
§ 96-12. Inspection.
§ 96-13. Exit requirements.
A. It shall be the duty of the Fire Inspector or Assistant or Deputy Fire
Inspectors to inspect all buildings and premises except single-family
and two-family dwellings as often as may be necessary for the purpose
of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any condition liable to
cause a fire, contribute to the spread of a fire, interfere with firefighting
operations or endanger life or any violation of the provisions or
intent of this chapter or any other ordinance or law affecting firesafety.
It is the intent of this section that in structures containing three or more
dwelling units not separated by a fire wall or which contain common
areas for three or more dwelling units or which have heating, furnace,
water heater or air-conditioning equipment which service more than
three dwelling units, that only the common areas, areas containing such
service facilities and common storage areas be inspected.
B. The Fire Inspector or Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspectors shall
investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring
in the Village of Suffern which is of an unknown cause or of a suspicious
nature or involves the loss of life or injury to persons or has caused
substantial property damage. Such investigation shall be made as soon
as possible upon the occurrence of any such fire and, if it appears that
the fire is the result of arson, the Fire Inspector shall immediately notify
the property authorities designated by law to investigate such matters.
A. Adequate exits shall be provided in all buildings, structures and
premises within the Village of Suffern to ensure safe egress in case of
fire or other emergency. The location, number, type and other
considerations of exits shall be provided in accordance with
requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and the most current edition of the National Fire
Protection Association Life Safety Code (NFPA 101).
B. No furnishings, decorations or other objects shall be so placed as to
obstruct exits, access thereto, egress therefrom or visibility thereof.
C. Exit lights, emergency lighting and panic hardware shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements listed in Table 1.
§ 96-11 SUFFERN CODE § 96-14
1:62
§ 96-14. Electrical firesafety.
All electrical appliances, fixtures and wiring shall be installed in accordance
with the current edition of the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70). All
electrical appliances, fixtures and wiring shall be maintained so as not to
be a fire hazard nor a source of ignition for combustible or hazardous
substances, materials or devices.
§ 96-15. Smoking.
Where smoking is considered a fire hazard, the Fire Inspector or Assistant
or Deputy Fire Inspectors shall be authorized to order the owner in writing
to post NO SMOKING signs in conspicuous designated locations where
smoking is prohibited. In areas where smoking is permitted,
noncombustible ash trays shall be provided.
§ 96-16. Outdoor fires.
§ 96-17. Fire lanes and fire zones.
A. Outdoor fires include all fires burning outdoors with the exception of
fires used to cook food in approved and/or recognized grills or stoves.
B. All outdoor fires are prohibited with the exception of live burn drills
conducted by the Fire Department, fires for religious purposes or for
other purposes as specifically approved by the Fire Inspector. Prior
approval from the Rockland County Health Department and a permit
from the Fire Inspector are required for all outdoor fires. Any other
person, firm or corporation starting, maintaining or having control over
an outdoor fire would be in violation of this code.
A. The Fire Inspector or Assistant or Deputy Fire Inspector, in cooperation
with the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief, is authorized, pursuant to
the authority granted under § 1660-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of
the State of New York, to recommend to the Board of Trustees the
establishment of appropriate fire lanes and fire zones at parking areas,
driveways, private streets and roadways of all premises except one- and
two-family dwellings.
B. Fire lanes shall be provided for all buildings that are set back more than
100 feet from a public road or exceed 30 feet in height and are set back
50 feet from a public road. Where buildings are protected throughout
with an approved automatic sprinkler system, the provisions of this
section may be modified by the Fire Inspector.
C. Fire lanes shall not be less than 20 feet of unobstructed width, able to
withstand live loads of fire apparatus and have a minimum of 13 feet six
inches of vertical clearance.
D. Fire zones and fire lanes shall be marked with freestanding signs that
have the words "no standing — no parking — fire lane (or zone)" and
§ 96-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-17
1:63
§ 96-18. Key boxes.
§ 96-19. Fire protection markings.
appropriate yellow pavement markings installed in conformance with
the New York State Uniform Traffic Code requirements.
E. No motor vehicles shall park, stand or remain unattended in an
established fire zone or fire lane. Fire zones and lanes shall be
maintained free of all obstructions at all times.
A. When a structure is protected by an automatic fire alarm system or fire
suppression system and access to or within the structure is unduly
difficult because of secured openings and where immediate access is
necessary for lifesaving or fire-fighting purposes, the Fire Inspector
may require a key box to be installed in an approved location.
B. All new business, mercantile, industrial, storage, assembly, institutional
and three-or-more-story multiple residences constructed, altered or
changed in use after the effective date of this code shall have installed a
key box in an approved location. Such key boxes shall be installed prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
C. The key box shall be of the type approved by the Fire Inspector and, in
order to maintain uniformity throughout Rockland County, order forms
for said key box must be obtained from the Fire Inspector.
D. The key box shall contain:
(1) Keys to locked points of ingress, whether on the interior or exterior
of such structures.
(2) Keys to locked mechanical rooms.
(3) Keys to locked electrical rooms.
(4) Keys to elevator controls.
(5) Keys to other areas as directed by the Fire Inspector or Fire Chief.
(6) The layout of the building showing the locations of the above.
(7) Other information as requested by the Fire Inspector or Fire Chief.
A. Premises identification. New and existing buildings shall have approved
address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible
from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall
contrast with their background. The numbers should be at least four
inches in height and if possible made of a reflective material for
nighttime visibility.
B. Shaftways to be marked. Every outside opening accessible to the Fire
Department that opens directly on any hoistway or shaftway
communicating between two or more floors in a building shall be plainly
§ 96-17 SUFFERN CODE § 96-19
1:64
§ 96-20. Vacant buildings.
§ 96-21. Security gates.
Where the use of security gates is permitted, such gates shall provide
unobstructed view of at least 50% of the door(s), window(s) or other
building opening which is protected by the security gate when the security
gate is in place.
§ 96-22. Sprinklers.
marked with the word "shaftway" in red letters at least six inches high
on a white background; such warning signs shall be so placed as to be
readily discernible from the outside of the building.
C. Stairway marking. Stairways serving four or more stories shall be
provided with signs indicating floor level, roof access or no roof access,
and reentry locations in accordance with the National Fire Protection
Association Life Safety Code (NFPA 101).
D. Identification of lightweight construction.
(1) Upon inspection and identification of a building, other than a oneor
two-family dwelling, of truss, wood I-beam or other lightweighttype
construction, the owner/occupant shall be notified by the Fire
Inspector of the requirements of this code.
(2) Upon notification, the owner/operator will be required to
permanently affix an approved twelve-inch-by-eighteen-inch
reflective truss construction identification logo on the building. The
exact location shall be identified by the Fire Inspector. The
identification logos shall be properly installed with 10 days of
receipt of written notice.
(3) The Fire Inspector should notify the local Fire Chief of any building
with lightweight construction. This information should be provided
to the Rockland County Fire Control Center to be included in the
Rockland County computer dispatch system data base.
A. Every person owning or having control of any vacant building shall
remove all combustible waste and refuse therefrom and lock, barricade
or otherwise secure all windows, doors and other openings in the
building to prohibit entry by unauthorized persons.
B. Buildings that are vacant shall maintain all required and existing fire
detection and suppression systems in service and monitored by a direct
connection to Rockland County Fire Control (44-Control). [Amended
11-3-2008 by L.L. No. 18-2008]
§ 96-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-22
1:65
§ 96-23. Fire detection systems.
A. In accordance with Table I,20 all buildings and structures occupied for
purposes other than residential buildings with less than six units that
exceed 5,000 square feet of total floor area, or a place of assembly with
an occupant load of more than 100 persons, except assembly spaces
used expressly for religious purposes, shall be fully protected by an
automatic sprinkler system.
B. All sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance
with the most current edition of the National Fire Protection
Association Standard for Sprinkler Systems (NFPA 13) or the
appropriate NFPA Standard for special occupancies.
C. All sprinkler system components shall be tested and inspected in
accordance with National Fire Protection Association Standard for the
Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water-Based Fire Protection
Systems (NFPA 25). Copies of all service, repair, inspection and testing
reports shall be forwarded to the Fire Inspector within 10 days of such
service, repair, inspection or testing.
D. In order to ensure that fire fighters utilize the proper siamese
connection, all siamese connections and/or the protective covers
installed on the siamese connection shall be color coded as follows:
(1) Red: siamese supplying a standpipe (fire hose) system.
(2) Green: siamese supplying a sprinkler system.
(3) Yellow: siamese supplying a combination standpipe and sprinkler
system.
A. All buildings and structures other than one-family and two-family
residences shall be equipped with fire-detection and alarm systems as
described in Table I,21 with a direct connection to Rockland County Fire
Control (44-Control). A sprinkler system with a water flow device
monitored to immediately send an alarm with a direct connection to
Rockland County Fire Control (44-Control) shall be considered a firedetection
system.
B. Where a one-hundred-ten-volt (hard-wired) smoke detector is required
to be installed in any building (including a one- or two-family dwelling)
by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or
any other applicable regulation, such smoke detector shall be equipped
with a battery backup to ensure operation of the smoke detector in the
event of a power interruption.
C. All fire detection and alarm systems shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the most current edition of the National Fire
20.Editor's Note: Table I is included at the end of this chapter.
21.Editor's Note: Table I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 96-22 SUFFERN CODE § 96-23
1:66
§ 96-24. Portable fire extinguishers.
Portable fire extinguishers, installed and maintained in accordance with
National Fire Protection Association Standard No. 10, the Standard for
Portable Fire Extinguishers, shall be provided in all occupancies as required
by Table I.22
Protection Association Fire Alarm Code (NFPA 72). Copies of all
service, repair, inspection and testing reports shall be forwarded to
the Fire Inspector within 10 days of such service, repair, inspection or
testing.
D. The Fire Inspector shall be notified in writing prior to the installation of
any fire alarm or fire detection system. Such notification shall consist of
plans sufficient to determine compliance with the fire code.
E. Fire alarm or fire detection systems shall have an annunciation or
remote located at or near the main entrance of the building. Such
annunciation shall show the location and type of alarm. A floor plan of
the protected premises shall also be provided at this location. The
location of any annunciator or panel not clearly visible upon entry of the
main entrance of a building shall be marked with a sign.
F. Upon activation of a fire alarm, the persons in charge of a premises
shall cause the premises to be evacuated unless an evacuation plan
preapproved by the Fire Inspector and Fire Department is in place. In
such case the provisions of the plan shall be followed.
G. No fire system shall be reset from an alarm condition unless approved
by the Fire Inspector or Fire Department Officer-in-Charge. A sign
stating such shall be provided on all fire alarm panels capable of
resetting an alarm.
H. The owner or responsible party of any premises containing a fire alarm
or fire detection system shall ensure that a qualified technician is
available to respond within two hours of notification to initiate needed
repair or service of the system.
I. If the fire alarm system signal transmission to the alarm receiving
station is not tested on a daily basis, all dedicated phone lines used for
the purpose of transmitting fire alarm signals shall be equipped with a
visual/audio signal on the exterior of the building to operate in the
event of a line failure or disablement. It shall be the sole responsibility
of the property owner to maintain all dedicated fire alarm system phone
lines active at all times.
J. A red name plate with one-inch white letters shall be located below the
visual/audio signal with the following information:
(1) Name of the alarm company.
(2) Telephone number of the alarm company.
§ 96-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-25
1:67
§ 96-25. Extinguishing systems.
§ 96-26. Access to fire protection equipment.
§ 96-27. Strobe lights.
A. Protection of cooking equipment and ductwork.
(1) All commercial cooking appliances, exhaust removal systems,
ductwork and related equipment shall be protected by an
automatic fire extinguishing system installed and maintained in
compliance with current applicable National Fire Protection
Association Standards.
(2) These systems shall be inspected by an approved service firm on a
semiannual basis. To ensure proper inspection, a uniform
inspection form, provided by the Fire Inspector, shall be utilized
with a copy of the completed form forwarded to the Fire Inspector
within 10 days of the inspection.
B. Special extinguishing systems. Wherever deemed necessary for the
protection of a special hazard, the Fire Inspector may require the
installation of a special extinguishing system. Any such special
extinguishing system shall be installed and maintained in accordance
with the most current applicable National Fire Protection Association
Standards.
A. The parking of any vehicle within 15 feet of any fire hydrant or Fire
Department siamese connection shall be prohibited.
B. No shrubs, dumpsters or other items that may obstruct the view of and/
or access to any fire hydrant or Fire Department siamese connection
shall be permitted.
A. In order to notify responding fire fighters of conditions within a building
or structure equipped with sprinkler systems, fire alarm systems or
containing hazardous materials or other hazards to fire fighters,
identification strobe lights shall be installed on the exterior of the
building as follows:
(1) Red strobe light: located above the Fire Department siamese
connection of a sprinklered building to indicated activation of the
water flow alarm.
(2) Yellow strobe light: installed to indicate activation of a pull station,
smoke detector, heat detector or other alarm device.
(3) Blue strobe light: installed to indicate the presence of hazardous
materials, conditions or other danger to fire fighters.
22.Editor's Note: Table I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 96-25 SUFFERN CODE § 96-27
1:68
§ 96-28. Hazardous materials.
Where identification of buildings and structures containing hazardous
materials is required in accordance with the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, the National Fire Protection Association
Hazardous Materials Identification System (NFPA 704) shall be utilized.
B. The exact location of these lights shall be determined by the Fire
Inspector.
§ 96-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-28
1:69

ARTICLE III
Enforcement
§ 96-29. Certificates of compliance.
§ 96-30. Violation order.
A. An annual certificate of compliance to ensure compliance with all
requirements of this code and the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code shall be required for all uses and
occupancies of property other than one- or two-family dwellings. Such
certificate does not take the place of any other permits or certificates
required by law. It shall not transferable, and any change in the use or
occupancy of premises shall require a new certificate.
B. Before a certificate of compliance may be issued, a Fire Inspector,
Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer shall make such
inspections or tests as are necessary to assure that the provisions of
this Code and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code are being complied with.
C. Any certificate of compliance required under the provisions of this
section shall be issued by the Building Department upon approval of the
Fire Inspector, and such certificate shall be posted or displayed in a
conspicuous place on the premises.
D. The Fire Inspector, Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer
may require applicants to submit written applications supplying under
affidavit such information needed for fire protection purposes as
requested by the Fire Inspector and/or Fire Department.
E. Fees for certificates of compliance for new or changed uses and annual
inspection fees payable each year for the specific uses subject to
inspection by the Fire Inspector shall be established from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
A. Whenever the Fire Inspector, Building Inspector or Code Enforcement
Officer determines that there has been a violation of the State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code, this chapter or any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter, a violation order shall be
issued to the person or persons responsible.
B. Contents of violation order. Violation orders shall be in writing and shall
identify the property or premises. The violation order shall specify the
violation and remedial action to be taken and shall provide a reasonable
time limit for compliance.
C. Service of violation orders. Violation orders may be served by personal
service, by registered or certified mail or by posting a copy thereof in a
conspicuous place on the premises and by mailing a copy thereof to the
premises on the same day as posted, enclosed in a postpaid wrapper
addressed to the person responsible.
§ 96-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-30
1:71
§ 96-31. Penalties for offenses.
§ 96-32. Additional remedies.
An action or proceeding in the name of the Village of Suffern may be
commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance
with or restrain by injunction the violation of any provision of the State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, this chapter, rules or
regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter or a violation order or to
vacate the occupancy or building in the case of imminent danger to life or
property. Such remedy shall be in addition to penalties otherwise prescribed
by law.
D. Failure to comply; legal action. If the owner, lessor, occupant or agent
shall fail, neglect or refuse to remove, eliminate or abate the violation
within the time specified in the violation order, the Fire Inspector,
Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
an appearance ticket to the owner/or the responsible person.
A. The following fines and other penalties are hereby imposed, in addition
to the punishments imposed by other statute, law or ordinance, on
every person violating any of the requirements or other provisions of
this code: a fine not exceeding $1,000 per day or imprisonment not
exceeding one year, or both.
B. A sentence to pay a fine which is imposed on a corporation for an
offense defined in this code shall be in conformity with § 80.10 of the
Penal Law.
C. The continuation of an offense against the provisions of this code shall
constitute, for each day the offense is continued, a separate and distinct
offense hereunder.
§ 96-30 SUFFERN CODE § 96-32
1:72
Chapter 100
BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 96.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 127.
Housing standards — See Ch. 162.
Zoning — See Ch. 266.
§ 100-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Village of Suffern
or a person authorized by the Board of Trustees to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
BUILDING or STRUCTURE — Any house, lot, building, shed, garage, wall,
fence, storage tank, underground container, pole, smokestack, excavation,
basement, cellar, well or cistern.
DANGEROUS BUILDING — All buildings or structures which have any of
the following defects:
Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.
A.
Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more of damage
or deterioration of the supporting member or members or 50% of
damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside
walls or covering.
B.
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roof
or in which the same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength
to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
C.
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to
have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and
welfare of the occupants or the people of the Village of Suffern.
D.
Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe or
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to
decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or are likely to
cause sickness or disease so as to work injury to the health, morals,
safety or general welfare of those living therein.
E.
§ 96-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-1
1:73
OWNER — The owners of record of the premises in fee or lesser estate
therein, receiver, executor, administrator, trustee or any other person, firm,
partnership or corporation in control of a building or the duly authorized
agent of any of the aforementioned.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — All buildings or structures which, by reason of their
condition, endanger or may endanger the health, life, limb or property or
cause any hurt, harm, inconvenience, discomfort, damage or injury to the
health, life, limb or property of the people of the Village of Suffern in any of
the following ways:
§ 100-2. Unoccupied buildings and structures.
Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to
protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings
who live or may live therein.
F.
Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic
or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other
means of communication.
G.
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall
and injure members of the public or property.
H.
Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people
of the Village of Suffern.
I.
Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the Building
Code or any provision of the Fire Prevention Code23 or other ordinance
or local law of the Village of Suffern.
J.
A. By reason of being detrimental to the general health of the community.
B. By reason of being a fire hazard.
By reason of being unsafe for occupancy or use on, in, upon, about or
around the above said premises.
C.
By reason of continued vacancy thereby resulting in lack of reasonable
or adequate maintenance of structures and grounds and causing a
deteriorating and blighting influence on nearby properties and thereby
depreciating the enjoyment and use of the property in the immediate
vicinity to such an extent that it is harmful to the community in which
such structure is situated.
D.
A. Notice to secure building or structure. Whenever the Building Inspector
determines that any building or structure is not adequately secured,
locked or closed and is accessible to juveniles, transients or
undesirables or is a health, fire or safety hazard to the adjacent
community, he shall serve the owner with a notice to secure or close the
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 96, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
§ 100-1 SUFFERN CODE § 100-2
1:74
same forthwith so as to prevent unauthorized persons from gaining
access thereto.
B. Contents of notice. Said notice shall inform the owner that:
(1) He must forthwith secure or close said building or structure so as
to prevent unauthorized persons from gaining access thereto.
(2) He may request a hearing within 10 days after receipt of the notice
if he believes that the building or structure is adequately secured
or closed.
(3) If the required work is not completed within 10 days after service of
the notice and if a timely demand for a hearing is not made, the
Village of Suffern may perform the work at the expense of the
owner.
C. Service of notice. Proper service of said notice shall be made in
accordance with § 100-4 herein.
D. Request for hearing. Within 10 days of service upon the owner or
person having control of a building or structure of a notice, the owner
or any other person deeming himself aggrieved by said notice may
request a hearing.
E. Hearing. Upon receiving a request for a hearing, the Building Inspector
shall forthwith inform the Mayor that a request for a hearing has been
filed. The Mayor shall designate a hearing officer to hear and determine
the matter and shall inform the Building Inspector of the person so
designated. The Building Inspector shall inform the person requesting
the hearing of the date and place of the hearing not less than five days
prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing officer shall, upon the
presentation of relevant evidence, determine whether the building or
structure is or is not adequately secured, locked or closed and whether
the building or structure is accessible to juveniles, transients or
undesirables or is a health, fire or safety hazard to the adjacent
community. The hearing officer shall promptly issue a report of the
contentions of the parties, the findings of fact and his determination to
the person requesting the hearing and his attorney, if any, the Building
Inspector and the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall review
the evidence and determination and may accept, reject or modify the
determination of the hearing officer. The Village Clerk shall notify the
person requesting the hearing and his attorney, if any, and the Building
Inspector of the decision. Any person aggrieved by the decision may
appeal said decision directly to the Supreme Court of the State of New
York pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Such a
proceeding shall not stay further action pursuant to this chapter unless
the Court so orders.
F. Securing structures by the Village. If a person is properly served with a
notice as provided by this section and he does not request a hearing or
if a hearing is requested and held and it is determined that said person
§ 100-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-2
1:75
§ 100-3. Abatement of public nuisance or dangerous building.
is required to secure or close such building and if said building is not so
secured or closed within 10 days after service of the required notice or
within 10 days after service of the decision, the Village of Suffern may
cause the building to be secured and closed.
G. Owner responsible for cost of work. Whenever the Village has secured
or closed any building or structure or has paid any other person or
corporation to perform said work, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued
interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the date of the completion of
said work, shall be charged to the owner of said property. If the owner
of said property does not pay said charges, they shall be included as a
part of the next Village tax bill, and said charges shall be due and
payable by said owner at the time of payment of said bill.
H. Statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due the Village is not
paid by such owner within 10 days after securing or closing a building,
then and in that case the Building Inspector shall file a sworn statement
with the Village Clerk showing the cost and expense incurred for the
work, the date the work was done and the location of the property on
which said work was done. The recordation of such sworn statement
shall constitute a lien and privilege on the property and shall remain in
full force for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of
court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been made. Said
costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the
collection of taxes. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the
provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities
have been complied with and that the work has been done properly and
satisfactorily and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the
amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the
property designated or described in the statement and that the same is
due and collectible as provided by law.
I. Emergency procedures. Whenever the conditions described in
Subsection A constitute such an immediate hazard that the building or
structure must be secured or closed forthwith or within less than the
designated period and if the Building Inspector so determines or either
the Police Chief or the Fire Chief so determines and notifies the
Building Inspector, the Building Inspector shall request the Director of
Public Works to cause such building or structure to be secured after
giving such notice to the owner or the person in charge as
circumstances permit or without notice when, in the opinion of the Fire
Chief, Police Chief or Building Inspector, immediate action is necessary.
If notice cannot be given to the owner or person in charge prior to such
action, notice shall be given to the owner or person in charge within
seven days thereafter in accordance with the provisions of Subsections
B and C.
A. Whenever the Building Inspector suspects the existence of a public
nuisance or dangerous building, he shall inspect the premises on which
§ 100-2 SUFFERN CODE § 100-3
1:76
the suspected nuisance exists upon being granted permission by the
owner or person in control of the premises or after having obtained
an appropriate warrant or, if sufficient, upon an inspection without
entering the premises. A written report of the inspection and the
findings with respect to the existence of a public nuisance or dangerous
building shall be prepared by the Building Inspector and filed with the
Village Clerk.
B. If the Building Inspector determines that a public nuisance or
dangerous building exists, he shall cause a written notice to be served
on the owner setting forth the findings with respect to the existence of a
public nuisance or dangerous building and stating that, unless the
owner thereof shall cause the abatement of the public nuisance or
dangerous building by rehabilitation or by removal of the building,
structure or nuisance, the same will be abated or removed by the
Village at the expense of the owner. Said notice shall state that the
owner must commence to comply with the order of the Building
Inspector within 10 days after service of the notice or such other time
as the Building Inspector determines and be completed within the time
prescribed by the Building Inspector and that a building permit must be
obtained in accordance with the provisions of the Village of Suffern
Zoning Local Law.24
C. Service of notice. Proper service of said notice shall be made in
accordance with § 100-4 herein.
D. Abatement of public nuisances or dangerous building.
(1) Upon being served notice, the owner may, within 10 days after
receipt of notice, make application to the Building Inspector to
undertake the repairs or replacement of items found to constitute a
public nuisance or danger.
(2) Adequate plans and specifications, as required by the Building
Inspector and by the Village of Suffern Zoning Local Law, covering
said repairs or replacements shall be furnished by the owner to the
Building Inspector within 10 days after receipt of notice or such
additional time, not to exceed 90 days, as the Building Inspector
may deem necessary to complete plans and specifications.
(3) The Building Inspector shall, upon approval of the plans and
specifications and upon site plan approval if required by the Zoning
Local Law, cause a building permit to be issued to the owner. The
building permit shall be valid for a period of 90 days, and within
that time the owner shall effect and complete the repairs and/or
replacements. The Building Inspector may grant an extension of
the building permit if the owner shows reason or cause for the
requested extension.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 100-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-3
1:77
(4) Upon being served notice, the owner may, within 10 days, make
application to the Building Inspector for a demolition permit to
abate the nuisance completely by demolition and removal of the
structure. The demolition permit shall be valid for a period of 30
days, and within that time the owner shall completely demolish and
remove the building and, if required by the Building Inspector, fill
in open pits and enclose the lot with a fence at least six feet in
height, approved by the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector
may grant an extension of the demolition permit if the owner shows
reason or cause for the requested extension.
(5) In determining whether to apply the provisions of § 100-3 to the
following enumerated portions of the definitions of "dangerous
building" or "public nuisance" for any property for which a building
permit has been secured, the Building Inspector shall consider the
intention of the owner to rebuild or repair the structure, the
proposed and realistic time within which such work can be
accomplished, the circumstances giving rise to the condition,
whether the condition giving rise to the potential classification as a
dangerous building or public nuisance implicates public health or
safety or aesthetics and any other factor which equitably is
relevant. This provision shall apply to the following provisions of
the term "dangerous building:" Subsections A, B, F and J; and to the
following provisions of the term "public nuisance:" Subsections A
and D.25 This provision shall not apply to any property for which a
building permit presently is in effect. The appeal provisions set
forth in § 100-3E of this chapter shall apply to any determination
made hereunder. [Added 5-7-2012 by L.L. No. 7-2012]
E. Appeal hearing of public nuisances structures.
(1) The owner may, within 10 days after receipt of notice, make a
demand, in writing, to the Building Inspector for a hearing on the
question of whether in fact a public nuisance or dangerous building
exists. The hearing shall be held within a reasonable time, not to
exceed 30 days following receipt of the written demand, and at
least five days' notice, in writing, of the hearing shall be given to
the owner. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer
appointed by the Mayor. The hearing officer may:
(a) Sustain the finding that a public nuisance or dangerous
building exists on the property and order the abatement
thereof by repair or replacement of the items found to
constitute a public nuisance or danger or order the abatement
thereof by demolition;
(b) Reject or modify the finding of the Building Inspector; or
25.Editor's Note: See § 100-1, Definitions.
§ 100-3 SUFFERN CODE § 100-3
1:78
§ 100-4. Service of notice.
Proper service of any notice required by this chapter shall be made by
personal service or by certified mail upon the record owner or the person
having control of said building or structure at his last known address and
by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the building or
structure. If the owner or person in charge cannot be personally served and
if the notice mailed by certified mail is returned unserved, proper notice
shall be accomplished by publication of the required notice in the official
newspaper of the Village of Suffern and by posting a copy of the notice in a
conspicuous place on the building. An affidavit of service in accordance with
this section shall be filed with the Village Clerk and shall set forth the name
and address of the person served, the manner and place of service and the
date thereof.
§ 100-5. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be a limitation or
restriction on the authority of any department, official or employee of
the Village pursuant to any other ordinance, local law, statute or other
enactment of the Village or State of New York.
(c) Take such other action and render such other orders as he
deems appropriate within the authority conferred by this
chapter.
(2) A copy of the findings of fact and decision of the hearing officer
shall be promptly served upon the owner and his attorney, if any,
the Building Inspector and the Board of Trustees and shall be filed
with the Village Clerk. The Board of Trustees shall review the
evidence and determination and may accept, reject or modify the
determination of the hearing officer. Any person aggrieved by the
decision may appeal said decision directly to the Supreme Court of
the State of New York pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice
Law and Rules. Such a proceeding shall not stay further action
pursuant to this chapter unless the Court so orders.
F. Abatement of nuisance or dangerous building by Village; demolition of
structure. Should the nuisance or danger not be abated at the
expiration of the time stated in the notice or expiration of the time
stated in the building permit or any extensions granted by the Building
Inspector or such additional time as the Board of Trustees may grant,
the Building Inspector or his designee shall be authorized at any time
thereafter to enter upon the premises, and the owner shall permit him
entry to abate the nuisance or danger by demolition and removal of the
structure or by repair, replacement or removal, whichever shall be
appropriate in the opinion of the Building Inspector if no appeal has
been filed or in the opinion of the Board of Trustees if a hearing has
been deemed and held. [Amended 4-12-1982 by L.L. No. 3-1982]
§ 100-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-6
1:79
§ 100-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No.
3-1990]
The owner or person in charge of a building or structure who shall fail
to comply with any notice or order herein shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions, for
each offense. Each day of such failure to comply shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 101
BUILDINGS, VACANT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush and weeds — See Ch. 93.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 100.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 205.
§ 100-6 SUFFERN CODE § 100-6
1:80
ARTICLE I
Registration of Vacant Buildings
§ 101-1. Legislative findings and purpose.
It is the finding of the Board of Trustees that buildings which remain vacant
are unsightly and unsafe and have a negative effect on their surroundings.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a program for identifying and
registering vacant buildings; to determine the responsibilities of owners
of vacant buildings and structures; and to speed the rehabilitation of the
vacant properties.
§ 101-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section:
EMERGENCY SITUATION — Where the condition of a building, structure,
or any part thereof is an imminent, immediate, and substantial danger to the
health or safety of occupants, emergency responders, and/or the general
public. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, fire hazards, falling
or dilapidated buildings, structures, or any part thereof, loss of significant
water, heat, ventilation, or a lack of sanitary conditions.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A duly authorized representative of the
Building Department, including the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement
Officer and their assistants or designees.
OWNER — Those shown to be the owner or owners on the records of
the Assessor's Office, those identified as the owner or owners on a vacant
building registration form, a mortgagee in possession, a mortgagor in
possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, other
person, firm or corporation in control of the premises. Any such person shall
have a joint and several obligation for compliance with the provisions of this
article.
SECURED BY OTHER THAN NORMAL MEANS — A building secured by
means other than those used in the design of the building.
UNOCCUPIED — A building or portion thereof which lacks the habitual
presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises,
including buildings ordered vacated by an Enforcement Officer. In
determining whether a building is unoccupied, the Enforcement Officer may
consider these factors, among other:
A. Whether lawful residential or business activity has ceased;
The percentage of the overall square footage of the occupied to
unoccupied space or the overall number of occupied and unoccupied
units;
B.
The building is substantially devoid of contents or the minimal value of
fixtures or personal property in the building;
C.
§ 101-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-2
1:81
UNSECURED — A building or portion of a building which is open to entry
by unauthorized persons without the use of tools or ladders.
VACANT BUILDING — A building or portion of a building which is:
§ 101-3. Vacant building registration.
D. The building lacks utility services;
E. The building is subject to a foreclosure action;
F. Duration of vacancy; and/or
G. The presence or reoccurrence of code violations.
A. Unoccupied and unsecured;
B. Unoccupied and secured by other than normal means;
Unoccupied and an unsafe building as determined by an Enforcement
Officer;
C.
D. Unoccupied and has multiple housing or building code violations;
E. Illegally occupied.
A. The owner shall register with the Building Department no later than 30
days after any building that becomes a vacant building, as defined in
§ 101-2, or not later than 30 days after being notified by the Building
Department of the requirement to register. The Department may
identify vacant buildings through its routine inspection process as well
as through notification by residents, neighborhood associations and
other community groups that a building may be eligible for inclusion on
the registry.
B. The registration shall be submitted on forms provided by the Building
Department and shall include the following information supplied by the
owner:
(1) A description of the premises, including but not limited to square
footage, number of stories, age of the building, and most recent use
of the building.
(2) The names and addresses of the owner or owners. If the owner is a
corporation, limited liability company or partnership, the address
for each director, manager, or partner, as the case may be. The
address must include a street address; a post office box is not
acceptable.
(3) If the owner does not reside in Rockland County, the name and
address of any third party with whom the owner has entered into a
contract or agreement for property management. The address must
include a street address; a post office box is not acceptable.
§ 101-2 SUFFERN CODE § 101-3
1:82
(4) The names and addresses of all known lienholders and all other
parties with an ownership interest in the building. Each address
must include a street address; a post office box is not acceptable.
(5) A name, address and telephone number where a responsible
natural person (not a corporation, partnership, or limited liability
company) can be reached at all times during business and
nonbusiness hours. The address must include a street address; a
post office box is not acceptable.
(6) A vacant building plan as described in Subsection C.
C. The owner shall submit a vacant building plan which must meet the
approval of the Enforcement Officer. The plan, at a minimum, must
contain information from one of the following three choices for the
property:
(1) If the building is to be demolished, a demolition plan indicating the
proposed time frame for demolition.
(2) If the building is to remain vacant, a plan for the securing of the
building in accordance with standards provided in § 101-12, if
applicable, along with the procedure that will be used to maintain
the property in accordance with Article II, and a statement of the
reasons why the building will be left vacant.
(3) If the building is to be returned to permissible occupancy or use, a
rehabilitation plan for the property. The rehabilitation plan shall
not exceed 365 days from the date of submission and will include
progress benchmarks at least every 90 days, unless the Board of
Trustees grants an extension for good cause shown, upon receipt of
a written statement from the owner detailing the reasons for the
extension. Any repairs, improvements or alterations to the property
must comply with any applicable zoning, housing, or building codes
and must be secured in accordance with § 101-12, if applicable,
during the rehabilitation.
D. The owner will comply with all applicable laws and codes. The owner
shall notify the Enforcement Officer of any changes in information
supplied as part of the vacant building registration within 30 days of the
change. If the plan or timetable for the vacant building is revised in any
way, the revisions must be in writing and must meet the approval of the
Enforcement Officer.
E. The owner and subsequent owners shall keep the building secured and
safe and the building and ground properly maintained as provided in
Article II of this chapter.
F. Failure of the owner or any subsequent owners to maintain the building
and premises as required herein will be grounds for the Village:
§ 101-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-3
1:83
(1) To remediate the building and bill the cost of same to the owner as
provided in Chapter 100;
(2) To revoke the rehabilitation plans; and
(3) To subject the owner to fees and penalties as provided herein.
G. The owner will notify the Code Enforcement Office of any transfer of
ownership within 15 days of transfer. The new owners shall comply with
the approved plan and timetable submitted by the previous owner until
any proposed changes are submitted and meet the approval of the
Enforcement Officer.
H. Vacant building fees.
(1) The owner of a vacant building shall pay a registration fee of $200.
The registration fee is due and payable upon registration; that is,
no later than 30 days after any building becomes a "vacant
building," as defined above, or no later than 30 days after being
notified by an Enforcement Officer of the requirement to register.
(2) If the building is to remain vacant pursuant to § 101-3C(2), the
owner will also pay an annual vacant building fee of $500 for the
first year. This fee is due and payable together with the registration
fee of $200. Subsequent annual fees shall be paid as follows:
(a) For the second year that the building remains vacant: $1,000.
(b) For the third year and each succeeding year, that the building
remains vacant: $1,500.
(c) Vacant building fees for structures 5,000 square feet or greater
are double the foregoing fees.
(3) If the building is to be returned to a permitted use pursuant to
§ 101-3C(3), the rehabilitation plan will not exceed 365 days and
will include progress benchmarks at least every 90 days, unless the
Board of Trustees grants an extension for good cause shown upon
receipt of a written statement from the owner detailing the reasons
for the extension. If the rehabilitation has not been completed or
extended by the Board of Trustees, then the owner will pay an
annual vacant building fee in accordance with the rates established
above until the building is properly demolished or rehabilitated.
The annual vacant building fee is payable either on each
anniversary of the payment of the initial registration fee and on
each anniversary thereafter until the building is demolished or
rehabilitated.
(4) All delinquent fees shall be paid by the owner prior to any transfer
of an ownership interest in any vacant building. The owner will give
the purchaser written notice that the building in question is a
vacant building under this section.
§ 101-3 SUFFERN CODE § 101-3
1:84
§ 101-4. Exemptions.
A building which has suffered fire damage or damage caused by extreme
weather conditions shall be exempt from the registration requirement for a
period of 90 days after the date of the fire or extreme weather event if the
property owner submits a request for exemption in writing to the Building
Department of Building. This request shall include the following information
supplied by the owner:
§ 101-5. Inspections.
The Building Department shall inspect any premises in the Village for
the purpose of enforcing and assuring compliance with the provisions of
this article. Upon the request of the Building Department, an owner may
provide access to all interior portions of an unoccupied building in order
to permit a complete inspection. Nothing contained herein, however, shall
diminish the owner's right to insist upon the procurement of a search
warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction by the Building Department
in order to enable such inspection, and the Enforcement Officer shall be
required to obtain a search warrant whenever an owner refuses to permit
a warrantless inspection of the premises after having been advised of his
or her constitutional right to refuse entry without same. In the case of an
emergency, this section will not apply.
§ 101-6. Annual reports.
The Building Department annually shall submit to the Board of Trustees
a list of all buildings in the Village declared vacant under the provisions
of this chapter, as well as a list of all previously declared vacant buildings
which are no longer subject to the provisions of this article. Such report
shall also provide the fees collected, penalties assessed and an enumeration
of buildings/properties known not to be in current compliance.
(5) If the owner of a vacant building fails to register and pay the fees in
a timely manner, then the owner will be subject to the penalty set
forth in § 101-7.
(6) The vacant building registration fee and annual vacant building fee
as set forth in § 101-3H are to be delivered, by mail or in person, to
the Village Clerk's Office. A late charge of 1 1/2% per month, or any
part thereof, will be assessed on any invoice which is unpaid after
30 days from the date of the demand for payment or an invoice.
A. A description of the premises.
B. The reason for an exemption.
C. The names and addresses of the owner or owners. A post office box is
not acceptable.
D. A statement of intent to repair and reoccupy the building in an
expedient manner, or the intent to demolish the building.
§ 101-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-7
1:85
§ 101-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, including but not limited
to failure to register or providing false information to the Enforcement
Officer, shall be subject to the following fines:
A. Such person will be subject to a fine of $1,000 or imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or both.
B. The term "person," as used in this section, will include the owner,
occupant, mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, administrator, trustee, lessee, agent or any other
person, firm or corporation directly in control of the building or part
thereof.
C. Each week of violation will be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
§ 101-7 SUFFERN CODE § 101-7
1:86
ARTICLE II
Maintenance of Vacant Buildings
§ 101-8. Title.
This article shall be known as "Maintenance of Vacant Buildings" and is
supplementary to applicable provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
§ 101-9. Purpose.
This article provides standards governing the facilities and the condition
and maintenance of vacant premises to safeguard the safety, health and
welfare of the community.
§ 101-10. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to the following:
§ 101-11. Entry.
Provision for safe and continuous entry shall be provided to the interior of
a building or structure from the exterior at a street or to a yard, court or
passageway leading to a public open area at any time entry is necessary for
purposes of required maintenance or inspection.
§ 101-12. Exterior protection.
A. Lots, plots or parcels of land on which buildings designed for or
developed for residential use or occupancy, mixed-occupancy buildings,
nonresidential occupancy or accessory structures are located; and
B. Buildings designed for or developed for residential use or occupancy,
including one- and two-family dwellings and multiple dwellings, mixedoccupancy
buildings, nonresidential occupancy and accessory
structures.
A. The covering for doors and windows may not consist of any substance
sprayed onto the window panes. All enclosures shall be properly fitted
and be of such material and surface that they are neither unsightly nor
will materially detract from the general appearance of the building or
the neighborhood.
B. The covering for doors and windows may consist of replacement glass,
plexiglass, or similar materials finished and maintained in a weather
tight manner. The materials will be designed to blend in with the finish
of the building and will, to the extent possible, provide an appearance
that the building or store is not vacant. When the Enforcement Officer,
in his judgment, deems it appropriate, the visual/aesthetic suitability
and sufficiency of such coverings may be referred to the Planning Board
for its review and approval.
§ 101-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-12
1:87
§ 101-13. Interior protection.
§ 101-14. Fuel gas.
Fuel gas pipe systems shall be maintained gastight, safe and operative
under conditions of use or shall be disconnected at the main.
§ 101-15. Plumbing.
C. In addition to the standards prescribed above, vacant commercial and
retail buildings shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Any and all first-floor windows will be replaced by glass, plexiglass,
an approved mural or announcement sign. Such covering must be
maintained.
(2) Any and all window display areas shall be kept clean, free of hazard
and free of debris.
(3) Any window covering shall have a clear opening equal to the
existing window area.
D. If the owner shall fail to comply with the provisions of this section
regarding exterior protection, the Building Department may, after
notice of noncompliance and intent to remedy is mailed to the owner,
perform or cause such work to be performed and may recover the
expense either by action or by including the same on the tax bill of the
owner, or both. This action shall be in addition to any other available
remedy under this article.
A. The covering for doors and windows may consist of:
(1) Venetian or similar blind.
(2) Drapes, curtains or shades.
B. Unheated attics, spaces below flat roofs and crawl spaces shall be
ventilated to minimize deterioration.
A. The water supply system of the building shall be connected to an
approved source, shall not be subject to contamination and shall not be
connected to unsafe water supplies or shall be disconnected at the main
and the system completely drained.
B. Stormwater drainage systems shall be maintained so as to function
properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. Sewage
systems shall be similarly maintained or shall be sealed so as to prevent
accumulation of sewage gases in buildings.
§ 101-12 SUFFERN CODE § 101-16
1:88
§ 101-16. Electrical.
Electrical fixtures, devices, wiring and systems shall be maintained in safe
working condition in a manner which will avoid a potential source of ignition
or shock, or service shall be discontinued at the supply.
§ 101-17. Exterior property areas.
Any excavations or other attractive nuisance shall be filled in or secured to
prevent access.
§ 101-18. Provisions not exclusive.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, all other applicable laws and
local laws shall apply to any vacant building regulated by this chapter and,
in the case of conflicting requirements, the most restrictive and protective
provision shall apply.
§ 101-19. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to any vacant building or covered property that
becomes vacant after the effective date of this chapter.
§ 101-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-19
1:89
Chapter 105
CODE ENFORCEMENT
§ 105-1. Code Enforcement Officer.
The Board of Trustees may appoint a Code Enforcement Officer to enforce
the provisions of various chapters of the Code of the Village of Suffern and
to appear in courts of competent jurisdiction in order to enforce the same.
§ 105-2. Chapters enforced by Code Enforcement Officer. [Amended
11-3-2008 by L.L. No. 16-2008; 7-11-2011 by L.L. No. 7-2011]
In addition to any other chapters or provisions which the Code Enforcement
Officer may heretofore have been authorized to enforce, notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in the Code of the Village of Suffern, the Code
Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of:
§ 105-3. Enforcement. [Added 8-21-2000 by L.L. No. 7-2000;
amended 1-13-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
A. Chapter 93, Brush and Weeds.
B. Chapter 96, Building Construction and Fire Prevention.
C. Chapter 100, Buildings, Dangerous.
D. Chapter 150, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse.
E. Chapter 162, Housing Standards.
F. Chapter 168, Littering.
G. Chapter 177, Numbering of Property.
H. Chapter 189, Parking Areas, Commercial.
I. Chapter 228, Site Plan Regulations.
J. Chapter 235, Streets and Sidewalks.
K. Chapter 254, Vehicles and Traffic, §§ 254-22 and 254-67, handicapped
parking; §§ 254-23, 254-25.3 and 254-68, loading zones; and
§§ 254-25.2 and 254-71, fire zones.
L. Chapter 266, Zoning.
M. Chapter 175, Noise. [Added 9-7-2011 by L.L. No. 14-2011]
A. In addition to any other individual, officer or employee authorized to
enforce any provision of the Code of the Village of Suffern, every police
officer employed by the Village of Suffern is authorized to enforce every
provision of the Code of the Village of Suffern.
§ 101-19 SUFFERN CODE § 105-3
1:90
§ 105-4. Appearance tickets. [Amended 8-21-2000 by L.L. No.
7-2000]
Chapter 113
CONTRACTORS' SECURITY FOR HOMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 239.
§ 113-1. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following terms, unless the context requires
otherwise, shall have the following meaning:
DEFAULT — Occurs where title to the home is not transferred to the
vendee because of the failure of the vendor and vendee wherein the vendor
undertook to build or construct a home for the vendee or where the vendor
becomes insolvent.
DEMAND — Communication of an actual notice to the vendor of requests
made therein.
DEPOSIT — Any moneys given as down payment by the vendee to the
vendor as required by the vendor prior to the commencement of the work
to be performed pursuant to an agreement between the vendor and vendee
wherein the vendor undertook to build or construct a home for the vendee.
HOME — A new one- or two-family dwelling intended to be used primarily
as a residence.
B. In addition to any other individual, officer or employee authorized to
enforce the following provisions, the Fire Inspector and Assistant Fire
Inspectors are authorized to enforce the following provisions:
§ 254-25.2 and 254-71 (fire zones); and Vehicle and Traffic Law
§ 1202(b) (stopping, standing, or parking within 15 feet of a fire
hydrant).
A. Police officers. Any police officer employed by the Village of Suffern is
hereby authorized to issue appearance tickets in the name of the Village
of Suffern for the violation of any chapter, section and/or provision of
the Code of the Village of Suffern.
B. Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby
authorized to issue appearance tickets in the name of the Village of
Suffern for violation of any chapter, section and/or provision of the Code
of the Village of Suffern which he is authorized to enforce, including,
but not limited to, the provisions set forth in § 105-2 of this chapter.
§ 105-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-1
1:91
VENDEE — Any individual or individuals who have contracted with a vendor
for construction of a home on land not owned at the time of such agreement
by such individual or individuals.
VENDOR — Any person, firm, corporation or association engaged in the
business of erecting or constructing homes.
§ 113-2. Posting of bond required.
When a vendor undertakes to build or construct a home for a vendee within
the Village of Suffern and such vendee is required to pay a deposit to such
vendor, the vendor shall post with the Clerk and Treasurer of the Village of
Suffern a bond in the amount of such deposit or deposits. Such bond shall be
posted within five business days after receipt of said deposit or deposits by
the vendor and shall secure the payment of said deposit to the vendee upon
the vendor's default. Such bond shall be issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in the State of New York and shall be in such form
as required by the Superintendent of Insurance.
§ 113-3. Alternative to posting bond.
In lieu of posting a bond as provided in this chapter, the vendor shall
place the deposit or deposits paid to him by the vendee in an interestbearing
escrow account with a bank as defined in the Banking Law within
five business days after receipt of such deposit or deposits. Such deposit
or deposits, together with interest accumulated thereon, shall remain the
property of the vendee, except as otherwise provided herein.
§ 113-4. Disposition of security.
A. Upon transfer of title of the home to the vendee, the bond posted
pursuant to this chapter shall be released, and any funds held in escrow
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, together with interest
accumulated thereon, shall become the property of the vendor, unless
otherwise agreed between the vendor and vendee. The vendor shall
apply for the release of any bond posted herein pursuant to § 113-2 by
supplying the Village Clerk and Treasurer with proof that title has been
transferred to the vendee. The submission of an affidavit by a title
company that it has received the deed in question for recording and
that said deed is in recordable form and will be recorded within seven
days shall be deemed good and sufficient proof.
B. Upon default by the vendor, the vendee may demand return of his
deposit or deposits in an escrow account pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter. The vendor shall physically transfer the account to the
vendee or pay the balance of said account to the vendee within 14
business days after the day on which the demand was made. If the
vendor has posted a bond pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the
vendee may initiate action for payment thereon if his deposit or
deposits have not been paid to such vendee by the vendor within 14
business days after the day in which said demand was made.
§ 113-1 SUFFERN CODE § 113-5
1:92
§ 113-5. Penalties for offenses.26
Chapter 117
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 185. Peace and good order — See Ch. 197.
§ 117-1. Recognition of requests.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern takes recognition of requests
by the Police Department and residents of the Village to impose a curfew on
minors.
§ 117-2. Curfew imposed. [Amended 6-24-1991 by L.L. No. 4-1991]
No person under the age of 16 years shall be or remain in or upon any
streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places of the Village of Suffern, New
York, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and dawn unless such person is
accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having legal control
or custody of such minor person or unless the employment of such person
makes it necessary to be upon said streets, alleys or public places during the
nighttime after said specified hours, provided that the exception shall not
apply when the person under age shall be playing or unnecessarily loitering
in or upon such street, alley or public place.
§ 117-3. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any minor below the age
of 16 years who shall be gainfully employed during these hours, who shall
be a bona fide student of a school of evening instruction, who shall be in
attendance at a function sponsored by a religious or school organization or
who shall be in attendance at a properly supervised recreational program
A. Failure of the vendor to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is a misappropriation of funds, and action may be brought by
the vendee against the vendor for the return of any moneys advanced.
In addition, such vendor shall be liable for the penalties in § 1-12 of
Chapter 1, General Provisions.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impair, limit or reduce the
statutory, common law or contractual duties or liability of any vendor in
the construction of a home, nor shall these provisions apply to any local
law or ordinance which requires the posting of public improvement
bonds.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 113-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-3
1:93
or social event, during the time necessarily required to travel between such
minor's residence and the place of assembly.
§ 117-4. Written permit required.
Nothing in § 117-2 or 117-3 of this chapter shall be so construed as to
authorize the arrest of any such minor person who shall have in his
possession a written or printed permit signed by the parent or guardian or
person having the legal custody of such minor person and dated in ink for
the day it is to be used, which said permit shall state that said minor person
is absent from home for some necessary purpose. But in order that said
permit shall exempt such minor person from arrest on the evening for which
it is dated, said minor person shall not be found unnecessarily loitering or
playing upon any of the streets, alleys or public places of the Village.
§ 117-5. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person
having the legal care, custody or control of a person under the age of 16
years to allow or permit any such child, ward or other person under such
age, while in such legal custody, to go or be in or upon any of the streets,
alleys or public places of this Village after the hour prohibited by § 117-2
of this chapter, unless there exists a reasonable necessity therefor and
they shall have furnished said minor person with the permit hereinbefore
specified.
§ 117-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any minor violating the provisions of §§ 117-1 and 117-2 shall be dealt with
in accordance with the Family Court Act of the State of New York. Any
parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the
minor violating §§ 117-1 and 117-2 shall be fined not more than $50.
Chapter 122
DOGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 81.
Noise — See Ch. 175.
Fees — See Ch. A275.
§ 122-1. Leashing; prolonged barking. [Amended 11-16-1998 by L.L.
No. 13-1998]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, boarding, harboring or
otherwise keeping or having in his or her custody a dog within the limits of
the Village of Suffern to permit such dog, whether licensed or not, to be at
§ 117-3 SUFFERN CODE § 122-1
1:94
large elsewhere than on the premises of the owner or on the premises of
other persons with the knowledge and consent of such other persons, unless
said dog, when accompanied by the owner or other person, on a public
street, road or highway or on other premises other than the premises of the
owner or custodian, in the Village of Suffern, is on a leash, or to permit or
keep a dog tied up or confined in such a manner as to cause a nuisance in
the area because of the dog's repeated and prolonged barking.
§ 122-1.1. Dogs Prohibited at Public Gatherings. [Added 7-9-2007
by L.L. No. 11-2007]
No person shall be accompanied by, bring or permit a dog at any parade,
event or public gathering attended by 25 or more persons, or at any time
when the Suffern Police Department posts a prohibition of dogs at a public
gathering. This prohibition shall not apply to seeing-eye dogs, service dogs
or dogs necessary to assist a person with a handicap or to dogs actually
utilized by emergency service organizations.
§ 122-2. Defecation on public property; conditions for curbing dogs.
[Added 7-24-1972]
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall cause,
suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance
on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area,
park or any place where people congregate or walk or upon any public
property whatsoever or upon any private property without the permission
of the owner of said property. The restriction in this section shall not apply
to that portion of the street lying between the curblines, which shall be used
to curb such dog under the following conditions:
§ 122-3. Confiscation of dogs. [Added 8-15-1977 by L.L. No. 8-1977]
A. The person who so curbs such dog shall immediately remove all feces
deposited by such dog by any sanitary method approved by the local
health authority.
B. The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall be
disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of
any dog curbed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter in a
sanitary manner approved by the local health authority.27
C. Any person walking, accompanying or having a dog in his custody,
possession or charge shall have in his possession a device sufficient to
remove feces deposited by such dog. [Added 4-20-1998 by L.L. No.
5-1998]
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by § 10a(11) of Article 2 of the
Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New York, any dog, licensed
27.Editor's Note: Former §§ 13-2 and 13-3, which immediately followed this section and dealt
with killing of attacking dogs and the confinement or killing of dogs on order of a Police
Justice, were deleted as being superseded by subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 122-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-3
1:95
§ 122-4. Claiming impounded dogs. [Added 8-15-1977 by L.L. No.
8-1977; amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
The owner of any such dog as defined in § 122-3B and C claiming such
animal at the Village Dog Pound or at such pound or kennel as shall be
designated by the Village shall produce a license for the dog and pay the
costs involved for the boarding at the Village Pound.
§ 122-5. Unclaimed licensed dogs. [Added 8-15-1977 by L.L. No.
8-1977]
The owner of any dog so defined in § 122-3B and C of this chapter who shall
not claim such within a period of five days from the time the dog is delivered
to the Village Dog Pound shall forfeit all rights to thereafter claim such dog,
and the same may be disposed of by the Village Dog Warden.
§ 122-6. Dangerous and vicious dogs. [Added 8-15-1977 by L.L. No.
8-1977; amended 11-18-2002 by L.L. No. 7-2002]
or unlicensed, running at large or destroying property or being a public
nuisance shall be picked up by the Village Dog Warden and confined in
the Village Dog Pound or such pound as the Village shall contract for
and designate for such purpose.
B. The Dog Warden shall immediately notify the Village Clerk as to the
number of the licensed animal. The Village Clerk shall then notify the
owner.
C. The Dog Warden or any peace officer shall seize any unlicensed dog.
D. The fact a dog is without a current dog tag attached to the dog's collar
or harness as provided in Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law
shall be presumptive evidence that the dog is unlicensed.
A. Definitions. As used in the section, the following words and terms shall
have the following meanings:
DANGEROUS DOG —
Any dog:
Which, when unprovoked, approaches any person upon the
streets, sidewalks or on any public grounds or places in a
vicious or terrorizing manner or in any apparent attitude of
attack.
(a)
With a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the
safety of human beings or domestic animals.
(b)
Which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a
human being or domestic animal without provocation on public
or private property.
(c)
(1)
§ 122-3 SUFFERN CODE § 122-6
1:96
KEEPER — Any person other than the owner of a dangerous/vicious dog
who harbors or has in his or her possession a dangerous/vicious dog or
manages, controls or cares for a dangerous/vicious dog.
OWNER — Any person or legal entity having a possessory property
right in an animal or who harbors, cares for or exercises control over an
animal or knowingly permits an animal to remain on premises occupied
by him.
UNCONFINED — Outside the confines of a residence or commercial
structure commonly occupied by human beings or an enclosure of at
least six feet in height with secure sides, top and bottom or, if there is
no bottom, with sides which extend at least one foot underground, and
which shall be locked and designed to prevent the escape of the animal
or the entry of young children.
VICIOUS DOG —
Which has been ordered confined pursuant to the provisions of
§ 121 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
(d)
Notwithstanding the foregoing, except pursuant to Subsection 1(d)
above, no dog may be considered to be a dangerous/vicious dog by
reason of any injury or damage sustained by a person when such
person was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or
was committing or attempting to commit a crime; any injury or
damage sustained by a domestic animal which, at the time such
injury or damage was sustained, was teasing, tormenting, abusing
or assaulting the dog; or any injury or damage caused by the dog
in protecting or defending a human being within the immediate
vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault.
(2)
Any dog owned, harbored or trained primarily or in part for the
purpose of dog fighting.
(1)
Any dog owned, harbored or trained primarily or in part for the
purpose of attacking a human being or domestic animal upon
command.
(2)
Any dog known by the owner to be or identifiable as, in whole or
in part, of a breed commonly known as a "pit bull," which shall
include dogs wholly or partly of the breeds known as "American
Staffordshire terrier," "American pit bull terrier," "bull terrier" and
"Staffordshire bull terrier," but shall not include any purebred dog
of the breed "bull terrier" or "Staffordshire bull terrier" which is
registered as such with the American Kennel Club.
(3)
B. Restrictions. No person should suffer, permit or allow any dangerous/
vicious dog to remain unconfined on property within the Village of
Suffern to go beyond the boundaries of such property unless such dog is
securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile
strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in length and is
under the direct control and supervision of the owner of the dog. The
§ 122-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-6
1:97
owner or keeper of a dangerous/vicious dog shall post conspicuous
notices on the perimeter of the property where such dog is kept to warn
persons of the nature of the dog confined therein.
C. Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Animal shelters designated by the Department of Health to keep or
hold animals, including all shelters operated by the American
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.
(2) Facilities which are maintained by or are under the control of the
Village.
(3) Places of public exhibition, contest or show sponsored by a dog
club association or similar organization and persons who have
brought a dog temporarily within the jurisdiction of the Village of
Suffern for the purpose of showing a dog to such an exhibition,
contest or show or for other entertainment purposes as defined in
regulations promulgated by the Village Board, provided that the
sponsor of the exhibition, contest, show or entertainment has
obtained written permission from the Village Board and has
provided protective measures adequate to prevent dogs from
escaping or injuring the public.
(4) Laboratories operated pursuant to § 504 of the Public Health Law
or educational or scientific institutions.
(5) Persons authorized to enforce the provisions of this section.
D. Registration. The owner of any dangerous/vicious dog shall register
such dog with the office of the Village Clerk no later than 180 days after
the effective date of this section.
E. Insurance required. No owner of any dangerous/vicious dog shall be
allowed to register said animal unless such owner produces proof that
he has obtained liability insurance in the amount of at least $100,000
covering any damage or injury which may be caused by such dog during
the twelve-month period for which registration is sought. The owner of
a dangerous/vicious dog shall maintain liability insurance in full force
and effect at all times unless he shall cease to own, keep or harbor the
dog prior to the expiration of such registration.
F. Enforcement.
(1) Any police officer or code enforcement officer of the Village of
Suffern is authorized to issue an appearance ticket or uniform
appearance ticket for the violation of any provision of this section.
(2) Any animal which is observed running at large in violation of the
provisions of this section may be picked up or captured by a dog
warden, animal control officer, police officer or by any other person
or agency duly designated by the Village of Suffern to perform such
service. Any such dog warden, animal control officer, police officer
§ 122-6 SUFFERN CODE § 122-6
1:98
§ 122-7. Interference with officers. [Added 8-15-1977 by L.L. No.
8-1977]
Any person or persons who shall hinder, molest or interfere with any officer
or agent of the Town or Village in the performance of any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter.
§ 122-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-15-1977 by L.L. No.
8-1977]
or the authorized person or agency who picks up or captures such
animal shall be empowered to exercise such degree of force as shall
be necessary to effect such pickup or capture without intentionally
injuring or harming the animal.
(3) When the animal seized is a dog, it shall be held, cared for and
disposed of in a manner consistent with § 118 of the Agriculture
and Markets Law of New York.
(4) Every reasonable effort will be made by the Village of Suffern to
locate and notify the owner of the pickup or capture of his or her
animal. Upon such location and notification to the owner, the
Village or custodian will return the animal to its owner within a
prompt and reasonable period of time, provided that such return of
the animal is not contrary to the provisions of this section. The
Village may require reasonable proof of ownership. The return of
such animal to its owner shall be deemed proof of ownership unless
such animal has a valid license tag pursuant to the provisions of the
Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York, in which
case such tagging shall be deemed proof of such ownership.
(5) Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be
liable for a fine of not more than $2,500 or imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 10 days, or both.
A. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $250 nor
less than $50. [Amended 10-26-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981;
4-20-1998 by L.L. No. 5-1998]
B. Appearance tickets.
(1) The Dog Warden or any peace officer of the Village of Suffern or of
the Town of Ramapo is hereby authorized to issue an appearance
ticket pursuant to Article 150 of the Criminal Procedure Law of the
State of New York for any violation of this chapter.
(2) Any person served with such appearance ticket may answer said
ticket by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested,
within five days of the violation in lieu of a personal appearance,
subject to the provisions of Subsection B(3) and (4) hereafter.
§ 122-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-8
1:99
§ 122-9. Recovery of damages. [Added 8-15-1977 by L.L. No.
8-1977]
No action shall be maintained to recover the possession or value of a dog or
for damages for injury or destruction of a dog not wearing a tag attached to
a collar as provided in this chapter.
§ 122-10. Enforcement. [Amended 8-15-1977 by L.L. No. 8-1977;
7-9-2007 by L.L. No. 11-2007]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Village of Suffern Police Department
and a Dog Warden who shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees to serve
at the will of the Board of Trustees and shall be paid such compensation
as duly fixed for such services plus expenses, not exceeding, however, the
amounts set forth in the budget therefor. Such Dog Warden shall have all
the powers of a constable or other peace officer in enforcing this chapter
and the applicable provisions of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
Chapter 127
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 96.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 100.
Housing standards — See Ch. 162.
§ 127-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Electrical Code of the Village of Suffern,
New York."
(3) A person served with such an appearance ticket may admit to the
violation charged and complete the form set forth on the back of
said appearance ticket as prescribed hereinafter and by
accompanying said ticket with a check or money order in an
amount set forth on the back of said appearance ticket and as
established herein.
(4) If the person so charged denies the violation charged in the
appearance ticket, he may complete an appropriate form provided
for that purpose on the back of the appearance ticket and forward
the ticket to the office specified on the appearance ticket. The
Village office receiving such answer shall, by return mail, notify
said person so charged of a new return date at which a personal
appearance of the person charged shall be required.
§ 122-8 SUFFERN CODE § 127-2
1:100
§ 127-2. Purpose.
Since there is danger to life and property inherent in the use of electrical
energy, this Electrical Code is enacted to regulate the installation and
alteration of wiring for electric light, heat or power and signal systems
operating on 50 volts or more in or on all real property within the Village of
Suffern, New York.
§ 127-3. Compliance required. [Amended 3-10-1975 by L.L. No.
5-1975]
All electrical installations heretofore mentioned shall be made in conformity
with the requirements of the National Electrical Code except where the
provisions of this chapter or any other local law, ordinance or the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code shall differently prescribe,
in which event compliance with the provisions of such local law, ordinance
or New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code shall be
recognized as proper compliance with this code. The requirements of the
National Electrical Code shall be those known as "National Fire Protection
Association Pamphlet No. 70," as approved and adopted by the American
Standards Association. Nothing herein to the contrary, except for use as a
bus bar, the use of aluminum electric wiring for light, heat or power to be
installed within a building or structure is prohibited.
§ 127-4. Inspectors.28
The Chief Inspector and each of the duly appointed inspectors of the New
York Board of Fire Underwriters or other authorized agency are hereby
authorized and deputized as agents of the Village of Suffern, New York, to
make inspections and reinspections of all electrical installations heretofore
and hereafter described and to approve or disapprove the same. In no event,
however, will the cost or expense of such inspections and reinspections be
a charge against the Village of Suffern, New York.
§ 127-5. Duties of inspector, emergencies; reports; certificate of
compliance.
A. It shall be the duty of the inspector to report, in writing, to the Village of
Suffern Building Inspector, whose duty it shall be to enforce all the
provisions of this code and all violations of or deviations from or
omissions of the electrical provisions of the National Electrical Code
and of all local laws, ordinances and the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code as referred to in this chapter insofar as
any of the same apply to electrical wiring. The inspector shall make
inspections and reinspections of electrical installations in and on
properties in the Village of Suffern, New York, upon the written request
of the Mayor, Building Inspector or Fire Inspector of the Village of
Suffern, New York, or as herein provided. The inspector is authorized to
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 127-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-5
1:101
§ 127-6. Application for inspection and certificate of compliance
required.29
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation
to install or cause to be installed or to alter electrical wiring for light,
heat or power in or on properties in the Village of Suffern, New York, until
an application for inspection has been filed with the New York Board of
Fire Underwriters or other authorized agency. It shall be a violation of
this chapter for a person, firm or corporation to connect or cause to be
connected electrical wiring in or on properties for light, heat or power to
any source of electrical energy supply prior to the issuance of a temporary
certificate or a certificate of compliance by the New York Board of Fire
Underwriters or other authorized agency.
§ 127-7. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the electrical installations
in mines, ships, railway cars and automotive equipment or the installations
or equipment employed by a railway, electrical or communication utility in
the exercise of its function as a utility and located outdoors or in buildings
used exclusively for that purpose. This chapter shall not apply to any
work involved in the manufacture, assembly, test or repair of electrical
machinery, apparatus, materials and equipment by a person, firm or
corporation engaged in electrical manufacturing as its principal business. It
shall not apply to any building which is owned or leased in its entirety by
the Government of the United States or the State of New York.
make inspections and reinspections of electrical wiring in installations,
devices, appliances and equipment in and on properties within the
Village of Suffern, New York, where he deems it necessary for the
protection of life and property.
B. In the event of an emergency, it is the duty of the inspector to make
electrical inspections upon the oral request of an official of the Village
of Suffern, New York, or the Mayor, Building Inspector or Fire Inspector
of the Village of Suffern, New York.
C. It shall be the duty of the inspector to furnish written reports to the
proper officials of the Village of Suffern, New York, and owners and/or
lessees of property where defective electrical installations and
equipment are found upon inspection.
D. He shall authorize the issuing of a certificate of compliance when
electrical installations and equipment are in conformity with this
chapter. He shall direct that a copy of the certificate of compliance be
sent to the Village of Suffern, New York, to the attention of the Building
Inspector.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 127-5 SUFFERN CODE § 127-8
1:102
§ 127-8. Waiver and assumption of liability.30
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any
electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for loss of life or damage
to person or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the Village of
Suffern, New York, or the New York Board of Fire Underwriters or other
authorized agency be deemed to have assumed any such liability by reason
of any inspection made pursuant to this chapter.
§ 127-9. Penalties for offenses.31
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter or any rule or regulation made pursuant thereto shall be
punished as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions. Each day
on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 132
FEES
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 127-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-9
1:103

ARTICLE I
Reimbursement of Professional Fees
[Adopted 10-9-2016 by L.L. No. 10-2016]
§ 132-1. Title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Reimbursement of
Professional Fees Law of the Village of Suffern."
§ 132-2. Legislative intent.
The intent of this article is to reimburse the Village of Suffern for all
expenses incurred in connection with the review of applications made to
the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Appeals and the Village Board of
Trustees.
§ 132-3. Reimbursement of Village-paid fees required.
In addition to the application fees required to be paid by an applicant, the
applicant shall also reimburse the Village for any and all fees paid by the
Village in connection with the review of such application by the Planning
Board, Zoning Board of Appeals or Board of Trustees. The applicant shall be
presented with a fee statement or statements for such review on a periodic
basis. Such statements shall be due and payable upon presentation thereof.
§ 132-4. Fees for professional services.
Such professional services shall include, but not be limited to, planning
consultants, engineers, architects, attorneys and traffic consultants for
services rendered in connection with the review of applications for relief, as
set forth in § 132-1 hereof, by municipal boards and agencies. Fees for such
services shall be charged on a time-and-expense or flat basis, as the case
may be, and as is customary in the County of Rockland, State of New York,
for such services, and shall be at a rate which is competitive with other like
professionals in the County of Rockland, State of New York.
§ 132-5. Presentation of fee statements.
Presentation of such statements shall be deemed complete when mailed by
the Village to the applicant's designated representative.
§ 132-6. Fee statement content.
Such statements shall set forth the nature of services performed, the date
such services were rendered, the time spent thereon (if such services are
rendered on a timed basis) and the name of the party rendering such
services. A voucher or other bill rendered to the Village and paid by the
Village shall be deemed a fee statement in full compliance with this section,
and with § 132-3 hereof.
§ 132-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-7
1:105
§ 132-7. Disputed fees.
Any applicant who disputes any fee statement presented to him pursuant
to this article may bring a proceeding in the Supreme Court of the State of
New York, in and for the County of Rockland, pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York, within 30 days after
presentation of such disputed fee statement. The commencement of such
a proceeding shall not stay the obligation of the applicant to pay any fee
statement presented to him pursuant to this article.
§ 132-8. Failure to reimburse fees.
Any fee statement imposed by this article which remains unpaid at the
time the Village certifies its annual tax roll shall become a lien upon the
premises for which the application was made. Such unreimbursed fees
shall thereupon be levied against the said premises, as if a tax on real
property, and in addition to all other taxes, fees, rents or charges which
would otherwise be so levied. In the event the affected premises comprise
more than one tax lot, then the Village Treasurer shall distribute such levy
equally among each such tax lot without regard to assessed value or any
other factor.
§ 132-9. Applications.
An application for approval, or for any intermediate approval process, or
for any action covered by this article by the Planning Board, Zoning Board
of Appeals, or Board of Trustees shall not be deemed complete for any
purpose until such time as the funds required by the agency before which
the application is pending shall have been paid to the Village Treasurer.
§ 132-10. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section
or part thereof directly referred to in said judgment.
§ 132-11. When effective.
This article shall be effective immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State.
§ 132-7 SUFFERN CODE § 132-11
1:106
Chapter 135
FILMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 65.
Noise — See Ch. 175.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 254.
§ 135-1. Purpose.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern wishes to create an
atmosphere where the Village serves as a destination place for TV and
movie production while also recognizing that some disruption of the peace
and tranquility of the Village can result from these activities. For this
reason, the Board of Trustees declares that it is necessary to regulate and
control commercial filming in the Village both on public as well as private
property.
§ 135-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures, either on film, videotape
or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational purposes
intended for viewing on television or in theaters or for institutional use.
Filming shall include setup and breakdown time.
PERSON — An owner of property or an applicant for a permit under this
chapter.
PRIVATE LANDS — All other areas within the Village of Suffern, including
areas zoned for residential as well as business use.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public building, street, highway, sidewalk
or square, public park or playground or other public place within the
jurisdiction and control of the Village.
§ 135-3. Permits.
A. No person shall film or permit filming within the Village of Suffern
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Village Clerk, which
permit shall set forth the location of such filming; the date or dates
when filming shall take place; and such other information as may be
required by the Village Clerk. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any
filming which is scheduled to last more than two consecutive days or
shall require the closing of a public street shall require the additional
approval of the Board of Trustees.
§ 132-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-3
1:107
§ 135-4. Rules and regulations; appeals; waiver of regulations.
B. Applications for permits shall be obtained from the Village Clerk during
normal business hours. Applications for such permits shall be in a form
approved by the Board of Trustees and shall be accompanied by an
application and permit fees as hereinafter set forth.
C. An approved permit issued by the Village Clerk, listing each filming
location, must be obtained prior to any filming operations commencing.
D. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not take place on the dates specified, the Village Clerk may,
at the request of the applicant who shall certify that filming did not take
place on the dates specified, issue a new permit for filming on other
dates subject to full compliance with all other provisions of this chapter.
No additional fee shall be paid for this permit.
E. At least seven days prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall
notify property owners and/or businesses in writing within a twohundred-
foot radius of the filming activities, except in the downtown
business district where, at the discretion of the Suffern Police Chief,
such notification requirements may be expanded. Notice shall be
provided personally or left at residences and/or businesses along with a
copy of the Filming Notification for Neighborhoods and Businesses
form included with the filming application submitted to the Village
Clerk.
A. No permit shall be issued for filming at a particular location within the
Village of Suffern which would permit filming at said location on more
than six days during any one calendar year unless approved by the
Board of Trustees.
B. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands within the
Village of Suffern unless the applicant for such permit:
(1) Provides proof of insurance coverage as follows: general public
liability in the amount of not less than $1,000,000 combined single
limit; automobile liability covering owned and nonowned vehicles
in the amount of not less than $2,000,000 combined single limit;
and workers' compensation and disability insurance as required by
the State of New York. The Village shall be named as an additional
insured for the entire time granted by the permit.
(2) Agrees, in writing, to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the
Village of Suffern from any and all claims, actions at law, liability or
damages resulting from the use of public lands or employees of the
Village of Suffern.
C. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Village of
Suffern Police Department with respect thereto.
§ 135-3 SUFFERN CODE § 135-4
1:108
D. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and limit, to the extent possible,
any interference with normal public activity on such public lands.
E. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize the
creation and spread of debris and rubbish during filming and shall be
responsible for the removal of all equipment, debris and other rubbish
from the filming location upon the completion of the filming or upon the
expiration of the permit, whichever comes first.
F. Filming shall be permitted only Monday through Friday, between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., except in the business district, where
filming shall be permitted only Monday through Thursday, 7:00 a.m.
through 8:00 p.m., unless approved by the Board of Trustees. In this
connection, the arrival and setup of equipment and vehicles and the
breakdown of such equipment and vehicles at the end of the filming
shall be accomplished with the permitted time period.
G. The Village Clerk or the Board of Trustees may refuse to issue a permit
whenever it is determined, on the basis of objective evidence after a
review of the application and a report thereon from the Police
Department and by any other applicable Village departments or
agencies involved with the proposed filming site, that filming at the
location and/or the time set forth in the application would violate any
law or would unreasonably interfere with the public's use of public
lands, unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjoining
properties, unreasonably impede the free flow of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic or otherwise endanger the public health and welfare or
unreasonably disturb the peace and tranquility of adjoining property
owners.
H. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Village Clerk or the Board of
Trustees granting, denying or revoking a permit or a person requesting
relief pursuant to Subsection G may appeal in accordance with Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Any such appeal must be filed
not later than 30 days after the decision of the Board.
I. The Board of Trustees may authorize a waiver of any of the
requirements or limitations of this chapter and may authorize filming
other than during the hours and days herein described whenever it
determines that such a permit may be issued without endangering the
public health, safety and welfare and without unreasonably disturbing
the peace and tranquility of the neighborhood where it is proposed to
film. A public hearing shall be held for every application for a waiver.
The Village Board shall fix the time and place of such a hearing and
shall give written notification to abutting and adjacent property owners.
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-5
1:109
§ 135-5. Fees, deposit, and security.
Fees associated with this chapter shall be as follows:
§ 135-6. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the filming of news stories
by media personnel.
§ 135-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate or permit the violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to a fine in an amount not less than $500 for
the first offense, $1,000 for the second offense and $1,000 and loss of rights
for a period of six months for the third and subsequent offenses.
§ 135-8. Enforcement of private/public property.
As to private property, this chapter shall be enforced by the Building
Inspector, and, as to public property, this chapter shall be enforced by the
Police Department. This chapter may also be enforced by direct action of
the Board of Trustees.
Chapter 137
FIREARMS
A. Nonrefundable application fee: $300; nonrefundable application fee of
$100 for applicants filming for approved educational purposes.
B. Permit fee schedule:
Per-Day Permit
Day 1
Per-Day Permit
Day 2 to
Completion
Crew size of less than 3
people
$350
Crew size 3 to 15 $1,000 $750
Crew size greater than 15
people
$1,500 $1,000
C. Security deposit: $1,000. In the event that the Village Clerk determines
that the conditions of the permit have been violated, the Village Clerk
shall be authorized to declare that the security deposit is forfeited in its
entirety.
D. Reimbursement for police, DPW and other involved Village employees
or agencies: time and a half per hour.
E. Cost of the use of recreation buildings.
§ 135-5 SUFFERN CODE § 137-1
1:110
§ 137-1. Discharge prohibited.
No person shall discharge any firearm in the Village of Suffern, except
for police in the normal course of their duties or in defense of person or
property.
§ 137-2. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
FIREARM — Includes any gun, rifle, pistol, shotgun, handgun, BB gun,
pellet gun or other gun which propels a projectile, bow and arrow, crossbow
or slingshot.
§ 137-3. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 1-12 of
Chapter 1, General Provisions, for each violation.
Chapter 141
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 96.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 127.
Sewers — See Ch. 220.
Site plan regulations — See Ch. 228.
Soil removal — See Ch. 231.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 239.
Zoning — See Ch. 266.
§ 137-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-3
1:111

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization and Purpose
§ 141-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern finds that the potential
and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the Village of Suffern and that such damages may include:
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 141-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 141-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
§ 141-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-3
1:113
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 141-3 SUFFERN CODE § 141-3
1:114
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 141-4. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percentor-
greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one
to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A,
AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE, or VI-V30. It is also commonly
referred to as the "base floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain."
For purposes of this chapter, the term "special flood hazard area
(SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special
flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor,
18 inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside
of the lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed
area, which may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must
be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed
crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the equalization
of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of
flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
§ 141-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-4
1:115
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building i) built, in the case
of a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to
have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones
V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure
member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the
flow of the water and ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude
of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C,
X, or D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means
of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zones
V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise
meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower
area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet the federal
standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
§ 141-4 SUFFERN CODE § 141-4
1:116
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible
to being inundated by water from any source. (See definition of
"flooding.")
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair
facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing,
sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of
land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual
and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in (1)
above.
(2)
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
(4)
§ 141-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-4
1:117
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community
to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions. This person
is often the Building Inspector, the Code Enforcement Officer, or an
employee of an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a
building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so
as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88), or other datum, to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same
meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(2)
§ 141-4 SUFFERN CODE § 141-4
1:118
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 141-15B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, additional placement, or other improvement is within
180 days after the date of issuance. The "actual start of construction"
means the first placement of permanent construction of a building
(including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of
a slab or footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as
clearing, excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or
walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations,
or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory
buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
(3)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
§ 141-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-4
1:119
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
§ 141-4 SUFFERN CODE § 141-4
1:120
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 141-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Suffern, Rockland County.
§ 141-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 141-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 141-8. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 141-9. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered, and no land shall be
excavated or filled, without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Village of Suffern, Community
Number 360694, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers 36087C0069G,
36087C0131G, 36087C0132G, and 36087C0151G, whose effective
date is March 3, 2014, and any subsequent revisions to these map
panels that do not affect areas under our community's jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Rockland County, New York, All Jurisdictions" dated March 3, 2014.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the
office of the Village Clerk, 61 Washington Avenue, Suffern, New York
10901.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 141-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-9
1:121
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village
of Suffern from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent
or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under Article VI will
be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 141-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood-damaged. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Village of Suffern, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 141-9 SUFFERN CODE § 141-10
1:122
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 141-11. Designation of local administrator.
The Director of Public Works is hereby appointed local administrator to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain
development permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 141-12. Floodplain development permit: purpose.
A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all construction
and other development to be undertaken in areas of special flood hazard
in this community for the purpose of protecting its citizens from increased
flood hazards and insuring that new development is constructed in a
manner that minimizes its exposure to flooding. It shall be unlawful to
undertake any development in an area of special flood hazard, as shown
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 141-6, without a valid
floodplain development permit. Application for a permit shall be made on
forms furnished by the local administrator and may include, but not be
limited to, plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, and drainage facilities; and
the location of the foregoing.
§ 141-13. Floodplain development permit: fees.
All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be accompanied
by an application fee of $50. In addition, the applicant shall be responsible
for reimbursing the Village of Suffern for any additional costs necessary for
review, inspection and approval of this project. The local administrator may
require a deposit of no more than $500 to cover these additional costs.
§ 141-14. Application for permit.
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate.
Additional information may be required on the permit application form.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permitee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permitee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
§ 141-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-14
1:123
§ 141-15. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
C. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 141-17C, Utilities.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 141-17E, Nonresidential structures.
E. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 141-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
F. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
G. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 141-14, Application for permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of Article V, Construction Standards, and, in
particular, § 141-16A, Subdivision proposals.
§ 141-14 SUFFERN CODE § 141-15
1:124
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination.
(a) If the proposed development may result in physical damage to
any other property or fails to meet the requirements of Article
V, Construction Standards, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (These areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM.) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 141-14G, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notification to adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submittal of evidence
of such notification to the Regional Administrator, Region II,
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
§ 141-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-15
1:125
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the asbuilt
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in
relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer, and certified by same. For manufactured
homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of
elevation must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it
remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is
fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 141-9 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 141-9 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 141-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 141-15 SUFFERN CODE § 141-15
1:126
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 141-15E, inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to § 141-15D(1) and (2), and whether or not the
structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 141-15D, and
whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to Article VI, Variance Procedure;
(5) Notices required under § 141-15C, Alteration of watercourses.
§ 141-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-15
1:127

ARTICLE V
Construction Standards
§ 141-16. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 141-6.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Village of Suffern agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and
reimburses the Village of Suffern for all fees and other costs in
relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all
data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Village of
Suffern for all costs related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 141-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
§ 141-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-16
1:129
§ 141-17. Standards for all structures.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 141-6.
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Village of Suffern agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and
the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the Village of Suffern for all fees and
other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must
also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the
Village of Suffern for all costs related to the final map
revisions.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, new and substantially improved structures shall
have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding, designed
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding; and
§ 141-16 SUFFERN CODE § 141-17
1:130
(b) The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot above
the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all
sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at least two feet above the base flood
elevation or be designed to prevent water from entering and
accumulating within the components during a flood and to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring
and outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated
or designed to prevent water from entering and accumulating
within the components unless they conform to the appropriate
provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of New York
State or the Residential Code of New York State for location of such
items in wet locations.
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
D. Residential structures. The following standards apply to new and
substantially improved residential structures located in areas of special
flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in § 141-16A, Subdivision
proposals, § 141-16B, Encroachments, and § 141-17, Standards for all
structures.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
(2) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new construction and substantial improvements shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least three feet above
the highest adjacent grade.
§ 141-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-17
1:131
(3) Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map enumerated in § 141-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Nonresidential structures. The following standards apply to new and
substantially improved commercial, industrial and other nonresidential
structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the
requirements in § 141-16A, Subdivision proposals, § 141-16B,
Encroachments, and § 141-17, Standards for all structures.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure shall either:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to
or above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(b) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two
feet above the base flood elevation, including attendant utility
and sanitary facilities, with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water. All structural components located below
the base flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
(2) Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at
least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 141-17E(1)(b).
(3) If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional
engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing
certificate or other certification shall be provided to the local
administrator that certifies the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of § 141-17E(1)(b), including the specific elevation
(in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure is to be
floodproofed.
§ 141-17 SUFFERN CODE § 141-17
1:132
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
(5) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three
feet above the highest adjacent grade.
F. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. The following
standards, in addition to the standards in §§ 141-16, General standards,
and 141-17, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated, in areas of
special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
(1) Recreational vehicles.
(a) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE
and AH shall either:
[1] Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
[2] Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
[3] Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in
§ 141-17F(2), (3) and (4).
(b) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quickdisconnect-
type utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions.
(2) A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in
Zones A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor is elevated to or above two
feet above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
and lateral movement.
(3) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be
elevated such that the manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(4) Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number
specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 141-6
(at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
§ 141-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-17
1:133

ARTICLE VI
Variance Procedure
§ 141-18. Appeals Board.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals, as established by the Village of Suffern,
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
§ 141-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-18
1:135
§ 141-19. Conditions for variances.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 141-18D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing the items in
§ 141-18D(1) through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure; and
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met;
and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
§ 141-18 SUFFERN CODE § 141-19
1:136
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
G. Notice.
(1) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
(2) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required in § 141-15H.
§ 141-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-19
1:137
Chapter 146
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 89.
§ 146-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is subject and subordinate to all the conditions and provisions
contained in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law and amendments
thereto and any and all rules and regulations and opinions adopted or to be
adopted by the New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
§ 146-2. Definitions and word usage.
§ 146-3. Authority of Village Clerk.
The Village Clerk is hereby delegated the authority granted to the Board of
Trustees by Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law, entitled "Local Option
for Conduct of Games of Chance by Certain Organizations," in relation
A. As used in this chapter, the terms "authorized games of chance lessor,"
"authorized organization," "authorized supplier of games of chance
equipment," "games of chance," "lawful purposes," "net lease," "net
proceeds," "one occasion" and "prize" shall have the meanings
designated in the definitions set forth in Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law, and the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The Board of Trustees of the Village of
Suffern.
LICENSED PERIOD — A period of time not to exceed 14 consecutive
hours.
OFFICER — The Village Clerk of the Village of Suffern or a Deputy
Village Clerk shall be the "officer" designated in Article 9-A of the
General Municipal Law as the chief law enforcement officer of this
municipality.
STATE BOARD — The New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
VILLAGE CLERK — The Village Clerk of the Village of Suffern and, for
the purposes of this chapter, the chief law enforcement officer of this
municipality.
B. Words singular in form may include the plural; words plural in form may
include the singular; and words in the masculine gender shall include
the feminine and neuter genders.
§ 141-19 SUFFERN CODE § 146-3
1:138
to the issuance, amendment and cancellation of licenses, the conduct of
investigations and hearings and the collection and transmission of fees.
§ 146-4. Conduct of games by licensed organizations only.
No person, firm, association, corporation or organization other than an
authorized organization licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall
be permitted to conduct games of chance within the territorial limits of the
Village of Suffern.
§ 146-5. Application for license.
A. Each applicant for a license, after obtaining an identification number
from the State Board, shall file with the Village Clerk a written
application therefor in a form to be prescribed by the State Board or the
Village Clerk, duly executed and verified, in which shall be stated:
(1) The name and address of the applicant, together with sufficient
facts relating to its incorporation and organization to enable the
Village Clerk to determine whether or not it is a bona fide
authorized organization.
(2) The names and addresses of its officers and the place where and
the date and time when the applicant intends to conduct games of
chance under the license applied for.
(3) The amount of rent to be paid or other consideration to be given,
directly or indirectly, for each occasion for use of the premises of
another authorized organization licensed under this chapter to
conduct games of chance or for the use of the premises of an
authorized games of chance lessor.
(4) All other items of expense intended to be incurred or paid in
connection with the holding, operating and conducting of games of
chance and the names and addresses of the persons to whom and
the purposes for which they are to be paid.
(5) The purposes to which the entire net proceeds of the games of
chance are to be devoted and in what manner, and that no
commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense will be
paid to any person for conducting games of chance or for assisting
therein, except as otherwise provided in Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law.
(6) Any other information as shall be prescribed by the rules and
regulations promulgated by the State Board.
B. In each application there shall be designated not fewer than four active
members of the applicant organization under whom the games of
chance will be conducted, and to the application shall be appended a
statement executed by the members so designated that they will be
responsible for the conduct of the games of chance in accordance with
§ 146-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-5
1:139
§ 146-6. Restrictions on conduct of games.
the terms of the license, Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law, the
provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations of the State
Board.
C. Each applicant for a license to lease premises to a licensed organization
for the purposes of conducting games of chance therein shall file with
the Village Clerk a written application therefor in a form to be
prescribed by the State Board or the Village Clerk, duly executed and
verified, which shall set forth:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The designation and address of the premises intended to be
covered by the license sought.
(3) A statement that the applicant in all respects conforms to the
specifications contained in the definition of "authorized
organization" set forth in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law.
(4) Any other information as shall be prescribed by the State Board
and the provisions of this chapter.
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization, other than a
licensee under the provisions of this chapter, shall conduct a game of
chance or shall lease or otherwise make available for conducting games
of chance a hall or other premises for any consideration whatsoever,
directly or indirectly, except as provided in § 146-5 of this chapter.
B. No game of chance shall be held, operated or conducted on or within
any leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid wholly or
partly on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived
from the operation of a game of chance.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of this
chapter shall purchase or receive any supplies or equipment
specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of games of
chance from other than an authorized supplier of games of chance
equipment licensed by the State Board or from another authorized
organization.
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of chance and of any rental shall
be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
E. No single prize shall exceed the sum or value of $100 except that for
merchandise wheels and bell jars, no single prize shall exceed the sum
or value of $250. No single wager shall exceed $2.32
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 146-5 SUFFERN CODE § 146-6
1:140
§ 146-7. Issuance of licenses; fees.
F. No authorized organization shall award a series of prizes consisting of
cash or of merchandise with an aggregate value in excess of $1,000
during the successive operations of any one merchandise wheel or bell
jar.33
G. In addition to merchandise wheels and bell jars, no more than five other
single types of games of chance shall be conducted during any one
license period.34
H. Except for merchandise wheels, no series of prizes on any one occasion
shall aggregate more than $200 when the licensed authorized
organization conducts five single types of games of chance during any
one license period. Except for merchandise wheels and bell jars, no
series of prizes on any one occasion shall aggregate more than $250
when the licensed authorized organization conducts fewer than five
single types of games of chance, exclusive of merchandise wheels and
bell jars, during any one license period.35
I. No person except a bona fide member of any authorized organization,
its auxiliary or affiliated organization shall participate in the
management or operation of a game of chance as set forth in § 146-12
of this chapter.
J. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of chance.
K. The conduct of games of chance on Sunday is only permitted when it is
specifically provided for in the license issued. No games of chance,
however, shall be conducted on Easter Sunday, Christmas Day, New
Year's Eve or Yom Kippur.
L. No hall or other premises shall be used for the conduct of games of
chance unless said hall or premises, where applicable, complies with
the fire laws of the State of New York and the provisions of the health
laws of the Town of Ramapo.
A. The Village Clerk shall make an investigation of the qualifications of
each applicant and the merits of each application with due expedition
after the filing of the application.
B. If the Village Clerk shall determine that the applicant is duly qualified to
be licensed to conduct games of chance under this chapter that the
member of the applicant designated in the application to conduct
games of chance is a bona fide active member of the applicant and is a
person of good moral character and has never been convicted of a
crime or, if convicted, has a pardon or a certificate of good conduct, that
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
34.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
35.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 146-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-7
1:141
§ 146-8. Hearings; appeals; amendments to license.
such games of chance are to be conducted in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the State Board and that the proceeds thereof
are to be disposed of as provided by this chapter and if the Village
Clerk is satisfied that no commission, salary, compensation, reward or
recompense whatsoever shall be paid or given to any person holding,
operating, conducting or assisting in holding, operating or conducting
any games of chance, except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
and that no single prize or aggregate of prizes shall exceed the sum
or value allowed by law, then the Village Clerk shall issue a license to
the applicant for the conduct of games of chance upon payment of a
license fee in an amount set by resolution of the Board of Trustees in
the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Village of Suffern.36
C. If the Village Clerk shall determine that the applicant seeking to lease a
hall or premises for the conduct of games of chance to an authorized
organization is duly qualified to be licensed under this chapter, that the
applicant satisfies the requirements for an authorized games lessor as
defined in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law, that the Village
Clerk shall find and determine that there is a public need and that a
public advantage will be served by the issuance of the license, that the
applicant has filed its proposed rent for each game of chance occasion,
that there is no diversion of the funds of the proposed lessee from the
lawful purposes as defined in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law
and that the leasing of a hall or premises for the conduct of games of
chance is to be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State
Board, then he shall issue a license permitting the applicant to lease
said premises for the conduct of games of chance to the authorized
organization set forth in the application during the period therein
specified or such shorter period as the Village Clerk shall determine,
but not to exceed one year, upon payment of a license fee in an amount
set by resolution of the Board of Trustees in the Standard Schedule of
Fees of the Village of Suffern.37
D. Under this chapter, no license shall be issued which shall be effective
for a period of more than one year.
A. No application for the issuance of a license to an authorized
organization shall be denied by the Village Clerk until after a hearing is
held upon due notice to the applicant, at which time the applicant shall
be entitled to be heard upon its qualifications and the merits of the
application.
B. Any applicant for or holder of any license hereunder aggrieved by any
action of the Village Clerk to which an application has been made or by
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
See Ch. A275, Fees.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 146-7 SUFFERN CODE § 146-8
1:142
§ 146-9. Form, content and display of license.
§ 146-10. Control and supervision; license suspension; inspections;
alcoholic beverages.
which a license has been issued may appeal to the State Board from
the determination of the Village Clerk by filing with the Village Clerk
written notice of an appeal within 30 days after the determination
or action appealed from, and, upon the hearing of such appeal, the
evidence, if any, taken before the Village Clerk and any additional
evidence may be produced and shall be considered in arriving at a
determination of the matters in issue. The action of the State Board
upon said appeal shall be binding upon the Village Clerk and all parties
to said appeal.
C. Any license issued hereunder may be amended upon application to the
Village Clerk if the subject matter of the proposed amendment could
lawfully and properly have been included in the original license and
upon payment of any additional license fee as would have been payable
if it had been so included.
A. Each license to conduct games of chance shall be in a form as shall be
prescribed in the rules and regulations promulgated by the State Board
or the Village Clerk and shall contain a statement of the name and
address of the licensee, of the name and address of each member of the
licensee under whom the game of chance shall be conducted, of the
place where and the date and time when the games of chance are to be
conducted and of the purposes to which the entire net proceeds of the
games of chance are to be devoted. If any prizes are to be given in cash,
a statement of the amounts of the prizes authorized so to be given and
any other information which may be required by said rules and
regulations shall be contained therein. Each license issued for the
conduct of any games of chance shall be conspicuously displayed at the
place where the same is to be conducted at all times during the conduct
thereof.
B. Each license to lease premises for conducting games of chance will be
in a form as shall be prescribed in the rules and regulations of the State
Board or the Village Clerk and shall contain a statement of the name
and address of the licensee and the address of the leased premises, the
amount of permissible rent and any other information which may be
required by said rules and regulations. Each license shall be
conspicuously displayed upon the premises at all times during the
conduct of the games of chance.
A. The officer shall have and exercise rigid control and close supervision
over all games of chance conducted under each license, to the end that
the same are fairly conducted in accordance with the provisions of said
license, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the rules
and regulations promulgated by the State Board. The officer and the
§ 146-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-10
1:143
§ 146-11. Filing of statement of receipts; examination of books and
records.
State Board shall have the power and authority to temporarily suspend
any license issued by the Village Clerk pending a hearing. The officer
and State Board shall have the right of entry, by their respective officers
and agents, at all times, into any premises where any game of chance is
being conducted or intended to be conducted or where any equipment
being used or intended to be used in the conduct thereof is found for
the purpose of inspecting the same. An agent of the appropriate officer
shall make an on-site inspection during the conduct of all games of
chance licensed pursuant to this chapter.
B. Subject to the applicable provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Law, beer may be offered for sale during the conduct of games of
chance, but the offering of all other alcoholic beverages is prohibited.
A. Within seven days after the conclusion of any licensed period, the
authorized organization which conducted the games of chance, its
members who were in charge thereof and, when applicable, the
authorized organization which rented its premises therefor shall each
furnish to the Village Clerk a statement subscribed by the member in
charge and affirmed by him as true, under the penalties of perjury,
showing the amount of the gross receipts derived therefrom, each item
of expense incurred or paid, each item of expenditure made or to be
made other than prizes, the name and address of each person to whom
each item of expense has been paid or is to be paid, with a detailed
description of the merchandise purchased or the services rendered
therefor, the net proceeds derived from the conduct of the games of
chance during the licensed period the use to which such proceeds have
been or are to be applied and a list of the prizes and the values thereof
offered and given. It shall be the duty of each licensee to maintain and
keep such books and records as may be necessary to substantiate the
particulars of each statement of receipts.
B. Upon filing the statement of receipts, the authorized organization
furnishing the same shall pay to the Village Clerk as and for an
additional fee a sum of 5% of the net proceeds, if any, for the licensed
period covered by the statement and determined in accordance with the
schedule as shall be established from time to time by the State Board or
the Village Clerk to defray the actual cost to the Village of Suffern of
administering the provisions of this chapter.
C. Examination of books and records.
(1) The Village Clerk and the State Board shall have the power to
examine or cause to be examined the books and records of:
(a) Any authorized organization which is or has been licensed to
conduct games of chance, so far as they may relate to games of
chance, including the maintenance, control and disposition of
§ 146-10 SUFFERN CODE § 146-11
1:144
§ 146-12. Prohibitions.
the net proceeds derived from games of chance or from the
use of its premises for games of chance and to examine any
manager, officer, director, agent, member or employee thereof
under oath in relation to the conduct of any games of chance
under any license, the use of its premises for games of chance
or the disposition of the net proceeds derived from games of
chance, as the case may be.
(b) Any authorized games of chance lessor so far as the same may
relate to leasing premises for games of chance and to examine
said lessor or any manager, officer, director agent or employee
thereof under oath in relation to said leasing.
(2) Any information so received shall not be disclosed except for the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
A. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to play any
game of chance conducted pursuant to any license issued under this
chapter.
B. No games of chance shall be conducted under any license issued under
this chapter more often than 12 times in any calendar year. Games of
chance shall be conducted only between the hours of 12:00 noon and
12:00 midnight on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday;
only between the hours of 12:00 noon Friday and 2:00 a.m. Saturday;
and only between the hours of 12:00 noon Saturday and 2:00 a.m.
Sunday. The 2:00 a.m. closing period shall also apply to a legal holiday.
C. No person shall operate or conduct any games of chance under any
license issued under this chapter except an active member of any
authorized organization to which the license is issued, and no person
shall assist in holding, operating or conducting any games of chance
under any license except an active member or a member of an
organization or association which is an auxiliary to the licensee or a
member of an organization or association which is affiliated with the
licensee by being, with it, auxiliary to another organization or
association. At least two officers, directors, trustees or clergy of the
authorized organization shall, upon request, certify under oath that the
persons assisting in holding, operating or conducting any games of
chance are bona fide members of such authorized organization,
auxiliary or affiliated organization.
D. No games of chance shall be conducted with any equipment except that
owned or leased by the authorized organization so licensed or used
without payment of any compensation therefor by the licensee.
E. No items of expense shall be incurred or paid in connection with the
conducting of any game of chance pursuant to any license issued under
this chapter except those that are reasonable and are necessarily
§ 146-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-12
1:145
expended for games of chance supplies and equipment; prizes; stated
rental, if any; bookkeeping or accounting services according to a
schedule of compensation prescribed by the State Board; janitorial
services and utility supplies, if any; license fees; and the cost of bus
transportation, if authorized by the office.
F. Not more than $2 shall be charged by any licensee for admission to any
room or place in which any games of chance are to be conducted under
any license issued under this chapter. Every winner shall be determined
and every prize shall be awarded and delivered on the same calendar
day as the game was played.
G. No games of chance conducted or to be conducted in the Village of
Suffern shall be advertised as to their location, the time when they are
to be or have been played or the prizes awarded or to be awarded or
transportation facilities to be provided to such games by means of
newspaper, radio, television or sound trucks or by means of billboards,
posters or handbills or any other means addressed to the general
public, except that one sign not exceeding 60 square feet in area may
be displayed on or adjacent to the premises owned or occupied by a
licensed authorized organization, and, when an organization is licensed
to conduct games of chance on premises of an authorized games of
chance lessor, one additional such sign may be displayed on or adjacent
to the premises in which the games of chance are to be conducted.
Additional signs may be displayed upon any fire-fighting equipment
belonging to any licensee which is a volunteer fire company or upon any
first-aid or rescue squad in and throughout the community or
communities served by such volunteer fire company or such first-aid or
rescue squad.
H. No person, association, corporation or organization lawfully conducting
or participating in the conduct of games of chance or permitting the
conduct upon any premises owned or leased by him or it under any
license issued hereunder shall be liable to prosecution or conviction for
violation of any provision of Article 225 of the Penal Law or any other
law or ordinance to the extent that such conduct is specifically
authorized by this chapter. However, this immunity shall not extend to
any person or corporation knowingly conducting or participating in the
conduct of games of chance under any license obtained by any false
pretense or by any false statement made in any application for a license
or otherwise or permitting the conduct upon any premises owned or
leased by him or it of any game of chance conducted under any license
known to him or it to have been obtained by any such false pretense or
statement.
I. Any person, association, corporation or organization who or which shall
make any material false statement in any application for any license
issued pursuant to this chapter; shall pay or receive a rental in excess of
the amount specified as the permissive rent in the license provided for
in § 146-5 of this chapter for the use of any premises for conducting
games of chance; shall fail to keep such books and records as shall truly
§ 146-12 SUFFERN CODE § 146-12
1:146
record all transactions connected with the conducting of games of
chance or the leasing of premises to be used for the conduct of games
of chance; shall falsify or make any false entry in any books or records
so far as they relate in any manner to the conduct of games of chance,
to the disposition of the proceeds thereof and to the application of the
rents received by any authorized organization; or shall divert or pay
any portion of the net proceeds of any game of chance to any person,
association or corporation except in furtherance of one or more of the
lawful purposes defined in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall forfeit any license issued under this chapter and be ineligible
to apply for a license under this chapter for at least one year thereafter.
J. Any person, association, corporation or organization holding, operating
or conducting games of chance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, except
when operating, holding or conducting said games:
(1) In accordance with a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter;
or
(2) On behalf of a bona fide organization of persons 60 years of age or
over, commonly referred to as "senior citizens," solely for the
purpose of amusement and recreation of its member where:
(a) The organization has applied for and received an identification
number from the State Board;
(b) No player or other person furnishes anything of value for the
opportunity to participate;
(c) The prizes awarded or to be awarded are nominal;
(d) No person other than a bona fide active member of the
organization participates in the conduct of the games of
chance; and
(e) No person is paid for conducting or assisting in the conduct of
the games of chance.
K. No alcoholic beverages, with the exception of beer, shall be sold at any
games of chance.
L. No alcoholic beverages shall be offered or given as a prize in any games
of chance.
M. The unauthorized conduct of a game of chance shall constitute and be
punishable as a misdemeanor.
§ 146-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-12
1:147
Chapter 150
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush and weeds — See Ch. 93. Housing standards — See Ch. 162.
§ 146-12 SUFFERN CODE § 146-12
1:148
ARTICLE I
Collection
[Adopted 6-11-1984 by L.L. No. 4-1984]
§ 150-1. Compliance required.
No person shall place any garbage, refuse or any other waste or discarded
material on the streets or sidewalks of the Village of Suffern except in
compliance with this article.
§ 150-2. Placement and container regulations.
§ 150-3. Regular collections.
A. All refuse and garbage acceptable for collection, as provided herein,
shall be collected at the curb or shoulder of a public street.
B. Refuse and garbage shall be placed in heavy-gauge plastic or metal
waterproof containers with tight-fitting covers. Said containers shall
have adequate handles for lifting the same and shall not have a capacity
of more than 35 gallons and must have detachable lids. Refuse and
garbage containers shall be maintained in good condition and may not
have ragged or sharp edges or any other defect which may hamper or
injure the person collecting the same. [Amended 10-6-2008 by L.L.
No. 12-2008]
C. Acceptable containers may not be placed at the street curb or shoulder
prior to 8:00 p.m. on the day prior to pickup. All empty containers shall
be removed from the sidewalk, street, curb or shoulder at or before
6:00 p.m. on the day of collection, except in the central business
district, in which case they shall be removed at or before 10:00 a.m. on
the day of collection. For the purposes of this article, the "central
business district" shall mean that area within the following boundary:
Washington Avenue, East Park Place, Orange Avenue, Wayne Avenue
and Cross Street.
D. The occupant or tenant of any building or dwelling and the owner of all
buildings containing two or more rental residential dwelling units shall
be responsible for compliance with this article.
A. Regular collections shall be made at such frequency and times as the
Superintendent of Public Works determines. Only the following
materials will be accepted on regular collection days: perishable animal
and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of foods; empty plastic or metal containers not over
one gallon; glass food containers; electric light bulbs; dust; fluorescent
tubes which are broken to permit the escape of gas; wastepaper;
cardboard cartons; separately bundled and tied newspapers; and
similar waste materials accumulated in and around the home.
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-3
1:149
§ 150-4. Special collections.
§ 150-5. Bulk item pickup.
Bulk item pickup shall be made at such frequency and times as the
Superintendent of Public Works determines. Only the following materials
will be accepted for bulk pickup: noncombustible rubbish; empty cans and
bottles, other than food and liquid containers; wire; glass; heavy metal;
broken kitchenware; mattresses; furniture; household appliances; if
dismantled; and other material of like nature. The Department of Public
Works will collect material acceptable for collection only if it is notified prior
to 3:00 p.m. on the day before collection.
§ 150-6. Unacceptable material.
The following materials are not acceptable at any time: materials which
have not been prepared for collection in accordance with this article;
materials from the repair, excavation or construction of buildings or
structures, such as earth, plaster, mortar and roofing materials, septic
tanks, trees or tree stumps; body waste; junkyard wastes; solid industrial
wastes; dangerous materials or substances, such as cleaning fluids, poisons
and drugs; radioactive materials; fine powdery earth used to filter cleaning
fluids; infected materials; hazardous or toxic chemicals or substances; and
refuse of a similar nature.
B. The following materials will not be accepted on regular collection days:
materials which have not been prepared for collection in accordance
with this article; brush, grass clippings, trees, stumps, furniture,
household appliances and other material of like nature.
A. Special collections shall be made at such frequency and times as the
Superintendent of Public Works determines.
B. Only the following materials will be acceptable for special collection:
trees and stumps less than six inches in diameter and less than 24
inches in length, provided that they are tied and bundled and do not
exceed 40 pounds in weight; brush in lengths of less than 24 inches,
provided that it is tied and bundled and does not exceed 40 pounds in
weight; grass clippings; and leaves and weeds which are placed in
weather-resistant containers. Grass clippings, leaves and weeds are not
to be raked or placed into the street, storm drains or drainageways.
C. The following material will not be accepted for collection on special
collection days: noncombustible rubbish; empty cans and bottles, with
the exception of food and liquid containers of less than one gallon; wire;
glass; heavy metal; broken kitchen ware; mattresses; furniture;
household appliances and other material of like nature; and material
which has not been prepared for collection in accordance with this
article.
§ 150-3 SUFFERN CODE § 150-7
1:150
§ 150-7. Rules and regulations.
The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized to promulgate rules
and regulations in furtherance of this article, including but not limited to
the manner, method, time and items of collection and source-separation
requirements. Said regulations shall be effective upon filing in the office of
the Village Clerk.
§ 150-8. Discontinuance of service; notice; hearing.
§ 150-9. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No.
3-1990]
Any violation of this article or the regulations adopted pursuant hereto shall
be punishable per occurrence as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
A. The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized to suspend or
terminate collection for violations of this article or the rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto or for failure to correct a
violation served in compliance with the procedures set forth in this
section.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of this article or the rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be served with a notice
setting forth the nature of the violation, the time within which it must
be abated and a statement that collection will either be terminated or
suspended upon failure to comply.
C. The notice set forth in Subsection B may be served personally or by
certified mail to the owner, occupant or person in charge of the
premises violating this article or by posting the same on the offending
receptacle.
D. Any person aggrieved by a determination of the Superintendent of
Public Works may file a written request for a hearing with the
Superintendent within five days, setting forth his basis. Upon filing of
such an appeal, the Mayor shall appoint an individual to hear and
determine the appeal. The Superintendent's determination shall be
upheld unless based upon erroneous facts. The hearing officer may, in
addition, change or modify the sanction imposed by the
Superintendent.
E. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any garbage or refuse which is not
presented for collection in accordance with this article or the rules and
regulations will not be collected.
§ 150-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-9
1:151

ARTICLE II
Container Districts
[Adopted 7-18-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
§ 150-10. Intent; classification of districts. [Amended 5-17-1993 by
L.L. No. 3-1993]
It is the intention of the Village of Suffern by the adoption of this article
to provide for a fair and equitable method of providing for the removal of
residential garbage and refuse and the apportionment of the costs thereof.
Accordingly, the Village of Suffern herein establishes two districts so as to
classify together those units with similar garbage and refuse requirements.
In order to accomplish this purpose, it is the intention of this article to
establish a district for residential condominiums and cooperatives, which
generally utilize garbage containers or dumpsters for the removal of
garbage and refuse, and to establish a separate district for residential
dwellings not exceeding six on a lot which generally utilize standard-size
garbage cans for curbside pickup.
§ 150-11. Charging of removal costs.
In order to equitably apportion the cost of such garbage and refuse removal,
the Village of Suffern also intends to remove the expenses of such garbage
removal from the general Village budget and to charge the cost of garbage
and refuse removal to those units in such district receiving such service.
As a consequence, any property owner who does not receive garbage and
refuse removal service from or through the Village of Suffern will not be
charged for the same in either the general Village real property tax or the
district tax. Those units receiving such service will be charged on a unit
basis.
§ 150-12. Statutory authority.
In order to effectuate the formation of such districts, the Board of Trustees
herein exercises the authority delegated to it by the Statute of Local
Governments § 10, Subdivision 5, and Municipal Home Rule Law § 10,
Subdivision 1(ii)a(9-a) and e(3), so as to establish such districts and the
means to charge and collect the charges, rates and fees therefor from the
uses of such service and to amend and supplement the application of the
provisions of the Village Law sections.
§ 150-13. Definitions. [Amended 5-17-1993 by L.L. No. 3-1993]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTAINER REMOVAL DISTRICT — Includes all condominiums,
cooperatives and multifamily dwellings in which garbage or refuse is
deposited by the residents therein in a dumpster or container for removal
and all dwelling units located on Arapaho Court, Bannock Court, Chippewa
Court, Dakota Court, Erie Court and Fox Court.
§ 150-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-13
1:153
CURBSIDE PICKUP DISTRICT — Includes all residential dwelling units, not
exceeding six in number on a single tax lot, which receive garbage and
refuse pickup by means of removal of garbage and refuse from a garbage
can, not in excess of 30 gallons, which can is placed at the curb of a public
street or road for removal of the garbage or refuse contained therein, with
the exception of any residential units located in the Container Removal
District.
DUMPSTER OR CONTAINER — One having a capacity of one or more
cubic yards and the contents thereof are emptied by means of mechanical
equipment. A "dumpster" or "container" is not serviced by curbside service
but is stored and maintained in a designated area.
§ 150-14. Establishment of districts.
The Board of Trustees hereby establishes a container removal district and a
curbside pickup district in accordance with the definitions contained herein.
§ 150-15. Garbage and refuse removal and regulations.
Garbage and refuse removal shall be conducted in accordance with other
applicable local laws and ordinances and the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Village of Suffern or Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 150-16. District budget; computation, billing and payment of tax.
A. Simultaneously with the preparation of the general Village budget as
specified in the Village Law § 5-508, the Village Treasurer shall cause a
budget to be prepared for each district established herein.
B. Only those property owners who receive garbage and refuse removal
service from or through the Village of Suffern will be taxed for garbage
and refuse removal.
C. The tax per dwelling unit shall be computed by dividing the budget for
each district by the number of dwelling units in the district receiving
garbage and refuse removal service. Each condominium dwelling unit
and each cooperative unit shall be considered as a dwelling unit.
D. Said tax shall be billed on and as part of the general Village tax and
shall be due and payable on June 1 of each year. At the option of the
Board of Trustees, adopted in the form of a resolution, tax may be made
payable quarterly or semiannually.
E. Said tax shall be billed and collected and shall constitute a lien on the
real property which receives garbage removal service in the same
manner as the real property tax.
F. All solid waste bills not paid before February 1 shall be assessed a late
charge of 5% of the gross amount of the bill and an additional charge of
1% of the solid waste bill for each month thereafter. [Added 4-11-2005
§ 150-13 SUFFERN CODE § 150-16
1:154
by L.L. No. 1-2005; 8-8-2005 by L.L. No. 6-2005; 8-11-2008 by
L.L. No. 9-2008]
§ 150-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-16
1:155

ARTICLE III
Recycling
[Adopted 12-17-1990 by L.L. No. 7-1990]
§ 150-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MIXED RECYCLABLES — Those recyclable materials, such as metal cans
and glass and plaster bottles, which can be commingled for collection.
RECYCLABLES OR RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those items of household
or business use which shall be designated from time to time by the Village
of Suffern or the Superintendent of Public Works as materials which have
recyclable value.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — Any and all cans, bags, boxes, dumpsters, bins,
containers or special use containers of whatever size, which may, from
time to time, be specified or approved by the Village of Suffern or the
Superintendent of Public Works as appropriate or required for the purpose
of transferring recyclable materials from the ownership or possession of
private parties to the ownership and possession of the Village, or the lawful
designees of the Village, for the purpose of recycling.
§ 150-18. Separation required; pickup.
A. All residents and businesses which may be the subject of recycling
directives from the Village of Suffern or the Superintendent of Public
Works shall not commingle their recyclable materials, thereafter, with
other household or business waste, trash or garbage.
B. Mixed recyclables (cans, bottles and similar items as defined from time
to time) shall be deposited by Village residents or businesses in the
recycling containers designated for that purpose. Newspapers,
cardboard and bulk items shall be bagged or tied into bundles in such
fashion and with such material as shall be specified or approved, from
time to time, by the Village or the Superintendent of Public Works.
Newspapers, cardboard and bulk items shall not be placed in
containers provided for use with mixed recyclables.
C. On the days designated for pickup, the recyclables shall be deposited at
curbside to be available for pickup by the Village. In container districts
they shall be deposited as directed by the condominium or cooperative
management.
D. In curbside removal districts, the regulations of § 150-2A, C and D of
Article I hereof shall apply to recycling containers as well.
E. It shall be a violation of this article to mix or have mixed with the
recyclables at time of pickup any nonrecyclable material or to
commingle recyclable materials designated for separate collection.
§ 150-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-19
1:157
§ 150-19. Ownership.
§ 150-20. Penalties for offenses.
A. The materials designated, from time to time, as recyclable materials by
the Village of Suffern or the Superintendent of Public Works shall
become and are hereby declared to be the property of the Village of
Suffern from the time they are placed at the curbside for collection.
B. In the case of recyclables placed by residents of container districts in
community containers provided for recycling purposes or in other
designated areas, the recyclables shall become the property of the
Village of Suffern from the time material is placed by the residents in
the community recycling container or in the designated areas.
C. All unauthorized persons are forbidden to remove any materials from a
recycling container placed at curbside for collection or from a
community collection container or designated collection area at any
time. Authorized persons in curbside districts are the employees of the
Village of Suffern Department of Public Works engaged in the collection
of recyclables on behalf of the Village, or designees of the Village,
engaged for that purpose. Authorized persons in the container districts
shall be the employees of the Village, or Village designees, if collection
is being made by or on behalf of the Village, or such other persons who
may be designated or contracted, from time to time, by the cooperative
corporation or the managers of the condominium association.
D. Nothing herein shall be construed as the arrogation of private property
to public use without due compensation. Nothing herein shall prohibit
private individuals or local businesses from privately recycling, selling
or redeeming their own recyclables. The delivery of recyclables for
curbside collection or the depositing of recyclables in community
containers or at designated collection places shall constitute the
abandonment of such materials as private property and is deemed to be
a conscious and knowledgeable transfer of ownership from the donor to
the Village at the time of such deposit.
A. A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable per
occurrence as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions.
B. Nonexclusiveness of remedy. The violation of § 150-19C of this article is
declared to be an offense separate and distinct from the crime of petit
larceny. A charge under § 150-19C shall not preclude prosecution under
the larceny provisions of the Penal Law of the State of New York for the
same offense. A violation of § 150-19C of this article may also involve
the violation of § 168-3 of the Code of the Village of Suffern as a
separate offense if the facts so warrant.
C. Appearance tickets for violations of this article may be issued by any
police officer of the Village of Suffern or by the Code Enforcement
§ 150-19 SUFFERN CODE § 150-20
1:158
Officer of the Village of Suffern or any person engaged and authorized
to do so by the Suffern Village Board.
§ 150-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-20
1:159
Chapter 154
GRILLS, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 96.
§ 154-1. Title.
This chapter shall be cited and may be referenced hereinafter as the
"Outdoor Grill Law."
§ 154-2. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern hereby determines that,
because of the possibility of fire created by the use of outdoor grills placed
on wooden decks extending from dwellings in multiple-residence-type
buildings, the use of such outdoor grills without protective fire-retarding
deck covering constitutes a fire hazard.
§ 154-3. Definitions and word usage.
A. Where not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present
tense include the future, words in the plural number include the
singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and
words and their derivatives shall have the meanings given herein:
DECK — Any outdoor extension constructed wholly or partially of wood
and attached to a dwelling in a multiple dwelling.
FIRE-RETARDING DECK COVERING — Any type of asbestos, asbestostype
material of the like, certified to be fire-retardant by the New
York Fire Underwriters' Laboratories or equivalent recognized testing
organization.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any structure having therein two or more
residences, apartments, cooperatives or condominiums which are
attached or semiattached to one another and which may be entered
directly from the street or through a common vestibule or entranceway.
OUTDOOR GRILL — Any portable-type burner used for preparation of
food.
§ 150-20 SUFFERN CODE § 154-4
1:160
§ 154-4. Use of grills restricted.
No person shall use an outdoor grill placed on a deck of multiple dwelling
unless such outdoor grill is first placed and kept on a fire-retardant deck
covering. Such deck covering shall cover an area immediately beneath the
outdoor grill and from a distance of at least 36 inches from the outdoor grill
or to the periphery of the deck, whichever is the lesser, but in no event shall
the grill be less than two feet from the structure.
§ 154-5. Right of entry.
The Fire Inspector of the Village of Suffern is hereby empowered to enter
upon the premises of any multiple dwelling, as defined by this chapter, for
the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
§ 154-6. Penalties for offenses.38
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable as follows:
Chapter 158
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS, TRANSPORTATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 96.
§ 158-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHEM-CARD — A poster prepared by the Manufacturing Chemists
Association, depicting the name of the hazardous material, the potential
hazards and the appropriate action to be taken in case of accident.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — The following materials are defined as
"hazardous materials": acrolein; acrylonitrile; ammonia; ammonia,
anhydrous; boron trifluoride; bromine; carbon disulfide; chlorine;
A. A warning for the first violation shall be issued to the person found
using an outdoor grill without a fire-retardant deck covering, as well as
to the person named as tenant or owner of the cooperative or
condominium.
B. For each succeeding violation, a person using an outdoor grill without
the fire-retardant deck covering, as well as the person named as tenant,
cooperative owner or condominium owner, shall be fined as provided in
§ 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 154-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-1
1:161
dimethylamine; dimethyl ether; demethyl sulfate; epichlorohydrin; ethyl
chloride; ethylene; ethylenimine; ethylene oxide; fluorine; hydrogen, liquid;
hydrogen chloride; hydrogen cyanide; hydrogen fluoride; hydrogen sulfide;
liquid petroleum gas; methane, liquid; methylamines, anhydrous; methyl
bromine; methyl chloride; methyl ethyl ether, methyl mercaptan;
monomethylamine; nitric acid, fuming; nitrogen tetroxide; oleum/sulfur
trioxide; phosgene; phosphorus trichloride; propane/LPG; sulfur dioxide;
sulfur trioxide; titanium tetrachloride; trimethylamine; and vinyl chloride.
§ 158-2. Transport along certain highways prohibited.
All motor vehicles transporting hazardous materials are hereby excluded
from the streets and highways of the Village of Suffern, except transport is
not prohibited on state highways nor on the following streets between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.: Ramapo Avenue.
§ 158-3. Exception.
This chapter shall not prevent deliveries to consumers of hazardous
materials by motor vehicles transporting not more than 500 gallons.
§ 158-4. Notification of Police Department required.
All carriers of hazardous materials must notify the Suffern Police
Department at least one hour before transporting any hazardous material
into or through the Village of Suffern.
§ 158-5. Display of chem-card.
All vehicles transporting a hazardous material into or through the Village of
Suffern must display the appropriate chem-card prominently in at least two
places on the vehicle.
§ 158-6. Waiver. [Added 1-26-1981 by L.L. No. 1-1981]
A. The Mayor of the Village of Suffern is authorized to grant a waiver of
the provisions of this chapter for specified deliveries or transportation
of hazardous materials by vehicles owned by Interstate Commerce
Commission registered companies if an emergency exists, upon such
conditions as he deems appropriate.
B. In determining whether an emergency exists, the Mayor shall consider
the following:
(1) If a situation exists or is imminent which will endanger the health,
safety or welfare of the residents of the Village of Suffern and the
granting of a waiver will eliminate or diminish the danger.
(2) If adequate alternatives exist negating the necessity for the
issuance of a waiver.
§ 158-1 SUFFERN CODE § 158-6
1:162
§ 158-7. Penalties for offenses.39
Each and every violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000.
Chapter 162
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Landlord-Tenant Review Board — See Ch. 28.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 96.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 100.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 127.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 150.
Littering — See Ch. 168.
(3) The extent of the danger created by the issuance of a waiver and
the precautions which must occur if a waiver is issued.
(4) The time of day of the activity for which the waiver is sought, the
anticipated route of travel and destination, the traffic in the area
and the type of material to be transported.
C. If a waiver is issued, the Mayor shall cause the Chiefs of the Village of
Suffern Police Department and the Fire Department to be notified of the
type and quantity of the material to be transported, the route of travel
and the time at which the material will be transported. The Chiefs of the
Police Department and of the Fire Department or a member of their
Department appointed by the respective Chief will accompany the
vehicle transporting the hazardous substance while it is in the Village of
Suffern.
D. Within 72 hours after the transportation of the hazardous substance
through the Village of Suffern has been completed, the applicant for the
waiver shall file with the Suffern Police Department a description of the
type and quantity of hazardous material transported, times of presence
in the Village of Suffern, occurrence of unusual events and description
of the vehicle used to deliver the material, together with its license
plate, the name and address of the driver and any other relevant
information regarding the event.
E. The Mayor shall file a report with the Village Clerk within one week
after his decision on a requested waiver, setting forth his reasons for
granting or denial of a waiver and any conditions imposed.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 158-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-1
1:163
§ 162-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "Village
of Suffern Housing Local Law."
§ 162-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Word usage. Words used in the present tense include the future; words
used in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the
singular number includes the plural; and the plural number the
singular. The words "dwelling," "dwelling unit" or "premises" include
the words "or any part thereof."
B. Terms defined. Certain words or terms in this chapter are defined for
the purposes hereof as follows:
APPROVED — Approved by the Housing Inspector appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Board of Trustees to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground
but having less than 1/2 of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground.
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
but having less than 1/2 or more of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground.
DWELLING — Any building or structure or part thereof which is used
or intended to be used for living or sleeping.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping and cooking.
EXTERMINATION — The control or elimination of insects, rodents
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing
or making inaccessible materials that may serve to harbor pests, by
blocking their access to a dwelling or by any other recognized and legal
pest-elimination methods approved by a health officer of the Village of
Suffern pursuant to appropriate local laws.
FIRST STORY — That story of a dwelling at or next above the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
GARBAGE — The animal and/or vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water-closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or
communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
HOUSING INSPECTOR — The Housing Inspector of the Village of
Suffern appointed pursuant to this chapter.
§ 162-1 SUFFERN CODE § 162-2
1:164
§ 162-3. Compliance required.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling for the
purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein which does not comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 162-4. Sanitation.
INFESTATION — The presence within or around a dwelling or in or
near waste disposal containers of any insects, rodents or other pests.
LIGHT HOUSEKEEPING — The use of a room or rooms for combined
living, sleeping and dining purposes by individuals or groups of persons
having part of a dwelling, such as stairs or halls, in common but living
independently of each other and doing their cooking upon the premises,
whether in the same or in other units, as distinguished from a dwelling
unit or apartment having normal kitchen and toilet facilities.
LIGHT HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — The room or rooms occupied for light
housekeeping purposes by one individual or group of persons living
independently of other such individuals or groups.
OCCUPANT — Any legally responsible person who has charge, care or
control of a building or part thereof in which dwelling units are leased
or let.
OWNER — Any legally responsible person who, alone or jointly or
severally with others:
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
PLUMBING — Water pipes, mechanical garbage-disposal units, waste
pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers and clothes-washing
machines, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, catch basins, drains,
vents and other similar supplied fixtures, including all connections to
water- or sewer lines.
RUBBISH, BURNABLE — Combustible waste material, except garbage,
but including paper, rags, cartons and boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches and yard trimmings.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, arranged, furnished or provided by or under
control of the owner or operator.
Has legal title to any dwelling, with or without actual possession
thereof; or
(1)
Has charge, care or control of any dwelling as owner or agent of
the owner or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix,
trustee or guardian of the owner. Any such person thus
representing the owner shall be bound to comply with the
provisions of this chapter to the same extent as if he were the
owner.
(2)
§ 162-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-4
1:165
§ 162-5. Light, ventilation and heating.
A. Sink, flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower in
dwellings.
(1) Every dwelling unit shall contain:
(a) A kitchen sink in good working condition, properly connected
to an approved water and sewer system.
(b) A room or rooms affording privacy and equipped with a flush
water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower in good
working condition, properly connected to an approved water
and sewer system.
(2) No such sanitary facilities shall be located in a basement or cellar,
except by written approval of the Housing Inspector.
(3) No water closet shall be of the flush-hopper, frostproof-hopper,
privy or similar type.
B. Access to bathrooms and water closets. Access to each bathroom or
water-closet compartment shall be provided without requiring passage
through a sleeping room, bathroom or water-closet compartment of
another dwelling.
C. Floors and ventilation of bathrooms and water closets.
(1) Every water-closet compartment and bathroom shall be floored
with a surface which is impervious to water and which can be easily
kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2) Every bathroom and water-closet compartment shall be provided
with windows meeting the requirements for light and ventilation of
habitable rooms prescribed in § 162-5 or with an approved
mechanical or gravity ventilation system affording adequate
ventilation and maintained in good working condition at all times.
D. Piped hot and cold running water.
(1) Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required
under this chapter shall be connected to and supplied with hot and
cold running water.
(2) Within one year after the effective date of this chapter, every
dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are
properly installed and connected to waterlines maintained in safe
and good working condition and of sufficient capacity to supply an
adequate amount of water at every required kitchen sink, lavatory
basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120° F.
A. Window area and ventilation.
§ 162-4 SUFFERN CODE § 162-5
1:166
§ 162-6. Floor space and cellar occupancy.
(1) Every habitable room shall have at least one window which can be
easily opened facing directly to outdoor open space. The minimum
total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable
room shall be 10% of the floor area of such room unobstructed by
any portion of structure or wall less than five feet from the outside
of such window.
(2) The total openable window area for each habitable room shall be
equal to at least 45% of the required window area.
B. Screening.
(1) Every outer door, openable window or other outside opening of a
dwelling shall be supplied with screen doors with self-closing
devices or with screens for protection against flies, mosquitoes or
other insects when required by the Housing Inspector.
(2) Every basement or cellar window used for ventilation and every
other opening to a basement or cellar which might afford an entry
for rodents shall be barred with strong screen of at least onefourth-
inch mesh or such other device as will prevent such entry,
when required by the Housing Inspector.
C. Electrical outlets. Every habitable room shall contain at least one flooror
wall-type electric convenience outlet and one ceiling electric lighting
fixture or two electric convenience outlets, and every water-closet
compartment, bathroom or hall, furnace room or laundry room shall
contain at least one wall- or ceiling-type electric light fixture. Every
electrical outlet and fixture shall be properly installed and maintained
in good and safe working condition and connected to an approved
source of electric power in a safe and approved manner.
D. Public hall lighting. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple
dwelling shall be lighted to at least one footcandle on the floor and
stairs at all times.
E. Heating facilities. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are
properly installed and vented and maintained in safe operating
condition, and all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water-closet
compartments in each dwelling unit therein shall be heated to a
temperature of at least 68° F. (36° C.) at a distance of 18 inches above
floor level and three feet from an outside wall. [Amended 1-23-1978
by L.L. No. 2-1978]
A. Floor space.
(1) Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 100 square feet of floor
space for the first occupant thereof and at least 75 additional
square feet of floor space for every additional occupant, in addition
§ 162-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-6
1:167
to the floor area included in water-closet compartments,
bathrooms, halls and passageways.
(2) Every room occupied by one person for sleeping purposes shall
contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room
occupied by more than one person for sleeping purposes shall
contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each person
occupying said room. [Amended 11-3-2008 by L.L. No.
17-2008; 7-11-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
(3) Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than
permitted by the following minimum area requirements: [Added
8-24-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
Space 1 to 2 Occupants
3 to 5
Occupants
(square feet)
6 or More
Occupants
(square feet)
Living
room
None 120 150
Dining
room
None 80 100
Kitchen 50 square feet 50 60
(a) The minimum occupancy area required herein shall not be
included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum
occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall
comply with Subsection A(2) above.
B. Access to sleeping rooms. No dwelling unit shall be so located or
arranged that access thereto requires passage through a habitable
room or another dwelling unit.
C. Ceiling height of habitable rooms. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every
habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 1/2 feet.
The floor area of any part of a room where the ceiling height is less than
five feet shall not be considered as part of the required floor area.
D. Basement or cellar occupancy. No basement space shall be used as a
habitable room or dwelling unit unless:
(1) The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are well drained and protected against
dampness.
(2) The total window area in each room is not less than 15% of the floor
area of the room as measured between stops and is entirely above
the grade of the ground adjoining each window area.
(3) The total openable window area of each habitable room is 45% of
the required window area.
§ 162-6 SUFFERN CODE § 162-6
1:168
§ 162-7. Structural and plumbing soundness; egress.
§ 162-8. Responsibilities of owners and occupants for general
cleanliness and trash disposal.
(4) All heating equipment or other equally hazardous equipment is
separated from the dwelling unit by a standard partition.
(5) Access can be gained to the unit without passage through a furnace
room. No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room of a
dwelling unit.
A. Structural soundness.
(1) Members. Every foundation, door, outer wall, ceiling and roof shall
be weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, shall be capable of
affording privacy and shall be kept in good repair.
(2) Openings. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway or
stairway shall be weathertight, watertight and rodentproof and
shall be kept in good working condition and repair.
(3) Stairs and porches. Every inside and outside stair and handrail and
every porch and porch rail shall be so constructed as to safely
support the maximum load that normal use may require and shall
be kept in safe condition and good repair at all times. The Housing
Inspector may require a handrail for each stair if deemed
necessary.
B. Mechanical soundness of plumbing. All plumbing shall be properly
installed and maintained in sanitary condition, free from defects, leaks
and obstructions.
C. Safe egress for dwellings. Every dwelling unit shall have at least one
unobstructed means of ingress and egress leading to safe open space at
ground level and to a public street or alley. Where there is more than
one dwelling unit on a second story or where there are more than two
stories, a minimum of two approved exitways shall be provided for
every occupied story above or below the first story; except, however,
that a second story may be served by a single stairway if such stairway
is enclosed by one-hour fire-resistant materials where such second
story does not exceed 2,400 square feet in floor area and the distance
from the dwelling units to the stairway is less than 50 feet.
A. Owner and owner-occupant responsibility. Every owner or owneroccupant
shall be responsible for the cleanliness of all parts of a
dwelling and premises shared in common by more than one family and
for provision of the following utilities and services, except where such
responsibility is assumed by an operator or an occupant by agreement:
(1) Provision of garbage and trash disposal facilities or containers
where the dwelling exceeds two units.
§ 162-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-8
1:169
§ 162-9. Discontinuance of services or utilities.
Upon the discontinuance of gas or electric service for cause by a public
utility company or upon discontinuance of any municipal or other service
for cause, the Housing Inspector shall be notified and shall thereupon take
immediate steps to have the responsible person correct conditions leading
to such discontinuance of services, if possible. Because such utilities and
services are essential for the health, safety and welfare of the occupants
of any dwelling, no dwelling may continue to be occupied after removal
or discontinuance of any service, facility, equipment or utility, except for
temporary interruptions during actual repair work or during temporary
emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the Housing
Inspector. This section shall not be construed to prevent the cessation or
discontinuance of any such service upon order of the Housing Inspector or
any other authorized official.
§ 162-10. Dangerous dwellings.
(2) Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests, except that where
only one dwelling unit is infested, the occupant of such infested
unit shall be responsible for its extermination unless the dwelling is
not maintained in a reasonably ratproof or insectproof condition.
(3) Provision of all other facilities, utilities, service of conditions
required by this chapter.
B. Occupant responsibility. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall be
responsible for keeping the occupied area and premises and all
plumbing equipment and facilities in a clean, safe and sanitary
condition at all times. Rubbish and garbage shall be disposed of or
stored in proper containers in a neat and sanitary manner unless
disposed of or stored by the owner or owner-occupant as provided in
Subsection A of this section.
A. All dwellings or parts thereof which have any of the following defects
shall be deemed "dangerous dwellings" and shall be condemned as unfit
for human habitation:
(1) Those whose interior or exterior bearing walls or other vertical
structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent as to
weaken the structural support they provide.
(2) Those which, excluding the foundation, show 33% or more of
damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members or
50% or more of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting
enclosing or outside walls or covering.
(3) Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or
roofs or in which the same are overloaded or which have
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
§ 162-8 SUFFERN CODE § 162-10
1:170
§ 162-11. Entry or inspection of dwellings.
(4) Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as
no longer to provide shelter from the elements and which have
become dangerous to the life, safety, morals or general health and
welfare of the occupants or the people of the Village.
(5) Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary, vermin-infested or obsolete that they are likely to cause
sickness or disease or injury to the health, morals, safety or general
welfare of those living therein or of the people at large.
(6) Those which lack light, air and sanitation facilities as required by
this chapter to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare
of persons living therein.
(7) Those which lack the facilities required by this chapter for egress
in case of fire or panic or those which have insufficient stairways,
elevators, fire escapes or other means of communication required
herein.
(8) Those having parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall
and injure occupants, the public or other property.
B. Declaration of nuisance and orders.
(1) All dangerous dwellings or parts thereof, within the terms of this
chapter, are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be
vacated and repaired or demolished.
(2) In any case where a dangerous dwelling is 50% or more damaged
or decayed or deteriorated from its original structure or where it
cannot be repaired so as to comply with the terms of this chapter, it
shall be ordered vacated and demolished. Dwellings ordered
vacated shall be vacated in accordance with the provisions of
§ 162-12.
A. The Housing Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units and
premises located within the Village of Suffern in order to safeguard the
health and safety of the occupants of such dwellings and of the general
public. For this purpose and upon showing proper identification, the
Housing Inspector is authorized to enter, examine and survey at any
reasonable hour all dwellings, dwelling units and premises, and the
owner, occupant or the person in charge thereof shall give the Housing
Inspector free access thereto for the purpose of such inspection.
B. Every occupant of a dwelling shall give the owner thereof or his agent
or employee access to any part of such dwelling or its premises at any
reasonable hour for the purpose of making any repairs or alterations
which are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this
chapter or any lawful order issued pursuant thereto.
§ 162-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-11
1:171
§ 162-12. Notice of violations; hearings; emergencies; vacation or
demolition.
C. No officer, agent or employee of the Village of Suffern shall be
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his duties under this chapter.
A. Notices of violation.
(1) Form and service of notice.
(a) Whenever the Housing Inspector determines that there has
been a violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give
notice of such violation to the person or persons responsible
therefor and order compliance with this chapter as hereinafter
provided. Such notice and order shall be in writing on an
appropriate form and shall include:
[1] A list of the violations, with reference to the section of the
chapter violated, and an order as to the remedial action
required to effect compliance with this chapter.
[2] Specification of a reasonable time for performance.
[3] Advice concerning the procedure for appeal.
(b) Such notice and order shall be served upon the owner,
occupant or agent in person; provided, however, that the notice
and order shall be deemed to be properly served if such owner,
occupant or agent is sent a copy thereof by registered mail to
his last known address and a copy is posted in a conspicuous
place in or on the dwelling affected.
(2) Whenever the Housing Inspector determines that a dwelling is a
dangerous dwelling, as defined in § 162-10, he shall:
(a) Affix upon the door or entrance to such dwelling a printed
placard declaring that such dwelling is unfit for human
habitation and is ordered vacated. No person shall deface or
remove such placard from any dwelling which has been
condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as
such. The Housing Inspector shall remove the placard
whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation
and placarding were based have been eliminated.
(b) Serve notice, as provided herein, to the owner and occupant or
lessee of any building found by him to be a dangerous dwelling
within the standards set forth in § 162-10 that:
[1] The owner must vacate and repair or demolish said
building in accordance with the terms of the notice and
this chapter.
§ 162-11 SUFFERN CODE § 162-12
1:172
[2] The occupant or lessee must vacate said building or, with
the consent of the owner, may order it vacated in
accordance with the notice and order and remain in
possession.
B. Hearings.
(1) Any person affected by a notice and order issued in connection with
the enforcement of this chapter may request and shall be granted a
hearing on the matter before the Housing Board of Review,
provided that such person shall file in the office of the Housing
Inspector a written petition requesting the hearing and setting
forth his name, address, telephone number and a brief statement of
the grounds for the hearing of for the mitigation of the order. Such
petition shall be filed within 10 days after the date the notice and
order are served. Upon receipt of the petition, the Housing
Inspector shall set a time and place for a hearing before the
Housing Board of Review and shall give the petitioner written
notice thereof. Said hearing shall be held within a reasonable time
after a petition has been filed, and the petitioner shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and to show cause why the notice and
order should be modified or withdrawn. The failure of the
petitioner or his representative to appear and to state his case at
such hearing shall have the same effect as if no petition were filed.
(2) After the hearing, the Housing Board of Review, by a majority vote,
shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending on its
findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter have been
complied with, and the petitioner and the Housing Inspector shall
be notified, in writing, of such findings.
(3) The proceedings of the hearing, including the findings and decision
of the Housing Board of Review and the reasons thereof, shall be
summarized in writing and entered as a matter of public record in
the office of the Village Clerk. Such record shall also include a copy
of every notice and order issued in connection with the case.
C. Orders to vacate.
(1) Where a notice of violation and order to comply have been served
pursuant to this chapter and upon reinspection at the end of the
time specified in compliance and if no petition for a hearing has
been filed, if it is found that the violation or violations have not
been remedied, the Housing Inspector may order the dwelling or
parts thereof affected by the continued violations vacated in
accordance with the following procedure:
(a) Dwellings shall be vacated within a reasonable time, not to
exceed 60 days.
§ 162-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-12
1:173
§ 162-13. Housing Board of Review.
(b) Vacated dwellings shall have all outer doors firmly locked and
basement, cellar and first-story windows barred or boarded to
prevent entry.
(c) Vacated dwellings shall not again be used for human habitation
until written approval is secured from the Housing Inspector.
(2) If a dwelling or part thereof is not vacated within the time specified
in the order of vacation, the Housing Inspector shall seek a court
order in a court of competent jurisdiction for the vacation of such
dwelling or part thereof.
D. Emergency order. Whenever the Housing Inspector finds that an
emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the health
and safety of the residents or of the public, he may issue an order so
stating, and, notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, such
order shall take effect and shall be complied with immediately. Upon
petition to the Housing Board of Review, the petitioner shall be afforded
a hearing pursuant to Subsection B of this section.
E. Vacation and demolition.
(1) If the owner, occupant or lessee fails to comply with the order of
the Housing Inspector or the action of the Housing Board of Review
after hearing, the Housing Inspector shall cause such dwelling or
part thereof to be vacated and repaired or demolished as the facts
may warrant and shall, with the assistance of the Village Attorney,
cause the costs of such repair or demolition to be charged against
the land on which the building existed as a lien on the property,
said charge to be included on the real property tax or to be
recovered in a suit of law against the owners.
(2) In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate
danger to the life or safety of any person unless a dangerous
dwelling, as defined herein, is immediately vacated and repaired or
demolished, the Housing Inspector shall cause its immediate
vacation and repair or demolition. The costs of such emergency
repair or demolition shall be collected in the same manner as
provided in Subsection E(1) of this section.
A. A Housing Board of Review is hereby created to conduct the hearings
authorized by this chapter. Such Housing Board shall consist of five
members to be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Board of
Trustees for overlapping terms of three years each, except that the
members of the first Board shall be appointed two for one year, two for
two years and one for three years, respectively. Each member of the
Board shall serve until a successor is appointed. All members of the
Board shall be citizens of the United States and residents of the Village
of Suffern.
§ 162-12 SUFFERN CODE § 162-13
1:174
§ 162-14. Identification and notification of owners of rental units.
[Added 11-13-1978 by L.L. No. 10-1978; amended 9-21-1992 by L.L.
No. 7-1992]
B. The Housing Board of Review shall:
(1) Adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent with this chapter, elect
its own officers and keep a record of all proceedings, including the
vote of each member on each case heard. No member of the Board
shall take part in any hearing or determination in which he has,
directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Three
members of the Board in attendance at any meeting shall constitute
a quorum.
(2) Interpret the intent of this chapter in specific cases where, upon
appeal, it clearly appears that, by reason of special conditions,
undue hardship would result from the literal application of any
section of this chapter. Where such undue hardship is clearly
demonstrated, the Board may permit a variance from the
applicable section, provided that the dwelling will vary only a
reasonable minimum from the literal provision of this chapter and
will comply generally with the spirit and intent of the regulations as
to sanitation, safety and rehabilitation. Any such variance shall be
permitted only by the concurring vote of at least three members of
the Board.
A. Identification of owners of rental units. The owner of any dwelling
which contains three or more rental dwelling units shall file with the
Village Clerk before January 1 of each year a statement identifying the
owner and superintendent or agent, if any, of each dwelling, the
address and telephone number of each and whether the owner resides
on the premises on a permanent basis. This information shall be
conspicuously posted in the lobby or entrance area of each such
dwelling. In addition, the owner must furnish to the Village Clerk before
January 1 of each year a telephone number at which the owner or an
agent may be reached 24 hours per day.
B. Notification to owner. Whenever the Police Department, Fire
Department, ambulance service or other emergency service is required
to respond to property described in § 162-14A of this chapter, the Police
Department shall notify the owner by telephone of such incidents as
soon as is practicable, at the telephone number provided by the owner
pursuant to § 162-14A of this chapter. The Police Department shall
subsequently provide written notification to the owner of the incident at
the address specified pursuant to § 162-14A of this chapter. The
provisions of this subsection are not intended to create a duty on the
part of the Village to any property owner, tenant or resident.
§ 162-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-15
1:175
§ 162-15. Interpretation.
The provision of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
to protect the health, safety, morals and welfare of the people of the Village,
and where this chapter imposes greater requirements than imposed by
other provisions of law or ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
§ 162-16. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No.
3-1990; 1-8-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
Chapter 165
LIFE AND SAFETY FEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Landlord-Tenant Review Board — See Ch. 28.
Outdoor grills — See Ch. 154.
Housing standards — See Ch. 158.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 205.
Zoning — See Ch. 266.
§ 165-1. Legislative intent.
Numerous multifamily tax-exempt residential developments exist in the
Village of Suffern. Statistically these developments have produced an
extraordinary demand on the Village's emergency services. It is the intent of
the Board of Trustees in enacting this chapter that an annual life and safety
fee be established in order to permit the Village to continue to provide the
same excellent level of service to these developments. Recognizing that it
would be inequitable to impose such a fee on established developments,
the annual fee will be applicable only to new developments that have
not received a building permit as of the effective date of this chapter.
In adopting this chapter, the Board of Trustees utilizes the provisions of
§ 10(ii)(a)(9-a), 10(ii)(a)(12) and 10(ii)(e)(3) of the Municipal Home Rule
Law.
§ 165-2. Annual life and safety fee.
A. Any person failing to comply with a lawful order pursuant to this
chapter or committing an offense against any provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $5,000,
or by community service in an amount deemed appropriate by the
court, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by any
combination of the same.
B. The continuation of an offense against the provisions of this chapter
shall constitute, for each week the offense is continued, a separate and
distinct offense hereunder.
§ 162-15 SUFFERN CODE § 165-2
1:176
Chapter 168
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush and weeds — See Ch. 93.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 150.
Housing standards — See Ch. 162.
Parks — See Ch. 193.
§ 168-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Village of Suffern Anti-Litter
Ordinance."
§ 168-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. An annual life and safety fee of $250 per unit per year shall be charged
to the owners of real property located in the Village of Suffern which:
(1) Consist of four or more attached or multifamily residential dwelling
units;
(2) Are owned by an entity which is exempt from the payment;
(3) Has occupants who generally reside in the units for more than a
month at a time and/or are tenants pursuant to an oral or written
lease or other arrangement.
B. The annual life and safety fee will not apply to properties for which a
permanent building permit has been legally and properly issued prior to
the effective date of this chapter.
A. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
B. Terms defined. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given
herein:
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection
receptacle as required and authorized in the Village Garbage Local
Law.40
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 150, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse, Art. I.
§ 165-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-2
1:177
§ 168-3. Litter in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk
or other public place within the Village except in public receptacles or in
authorized private receptacles for collection.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited,
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by
general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office
Department of the United States in accordance with federal statute or
regulation and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording
officer as provided by general law, and, in addition thereto, shall include
any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not fewer
than four issues per year and sold to the public.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or
any other public area in the Village owned or used by the Village and
devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk,
driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant
to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys
or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds and buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except
body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial
wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
VILLAGE — The Village of Suffern.
§ 168-2 SUFFERN CODE § 168-4
1:178
§ 168-4. Placement of litter in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.
§ 168-5. Sweeping litter into gutters.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Village the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.
§ 168-6. Responsibility of merchants. [Amended 7-9-2007 by L.L.
No. 9-2007]
§ 168-7. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the Village or upon private
property.
§ 168-8. Trucks causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Village
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
A. No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep, deposit
or cause to be removed to or into the gutter, sidewalk, street or other
public place litter, refuse, garbage, gum or any abandoned or discarded
matter of any kind.
B. The owner, tenant, occupant or person in charge of a place of business
shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter, refuse,
garbage, gum or any abandoned or discarded matter of any kind.
C. The owner, tenant, occupant or person in charge of a place of business
shall cause all litter, refuse, garbage, gum or abandoned or discarded
matter of any kind to be removed forthwith upon their deposit or upon
notice from a Village of Suffern Police Officer, Code Enforcement
Officer or agent or employee of the Village of Suffern.
D. The owner, tenant, occupant or person in charge of a place of business
shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of all distractions,
displays, bicycles, obstacles and other objects which interfere with or
impede pedestrian passage or otherwise diminish the area of the
sidewalks available for public use and shall ensure that trees, signs or
other public property is not utilized for the chaining, parking or storage
of bicycles or other matter.
§ 168-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-8
1:179
other public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the Village, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in
any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.
§ 168-9. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit in any park within the Village except in
public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park
or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
herein.
§ 168-10. Litter in bodies of water.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream
or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the Village.
§ 168-11. Posting notices on public property.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device
calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree or upon any public structure or building, except as
may be authorized or required by law.
§ 168-12. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the Village, whether owned by such person or not, except that the
owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
§ 168-13. Responsibility of private property owner.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 168-14. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Village, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 168-15. Notice of violation; abatement by Village; collection of
costs. [Amended 10-12-1978 by L.L. No. 7-1978]
§ 168-8 SUFFERN CODE § 168-15
1:180
A. Notice to remove. The Superintendent of Public Works or the Housing
Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner or
the agent of such owner of any open or vacant private property within
the Village to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's
property which is dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare.
Such notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to said owner at his
last known address.
B. Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare within 10 days after receipt of written
notice as provided for in Subsection A above or within 20 days after the
date of such notice in the event that the same is returned to the Village
by the Post Office Department because of its inability to make delivery
thereof, provided that the same was properly addressed to the last
known address of such owner or agent, the Superintendent of Public
Works or the Housing Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to
pay for the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the Village.
C. Charge included in tax bill. When the Village has effected the removal
of such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost
thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the date
of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior thereto,
shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular tax
bill forwarded to such owner by the Village, and said charge shall be
due and payable by said owner at the time of payment of such bill.
D. Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due the
Village is not paid by such owner within 10 days after the disposal of
such litter, as provided for in Subsections A and B above, then, and in
that case, the Superintendent of Public Works or the Housing Inspector
shall file a sworn statement with the Village Clerk showing the cost and
expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the
location of the property on which said work was done. The recordation
of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the
property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in
principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until
final payment has been made. Said costs and expenses shall be
collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. Sworn
statements recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be
prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with
and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily and shall be
full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement,
plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or
described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as
provided by law.
§ 168-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-16
1:181
§ 168-16. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-9-1985 by L.L. No.
5-198541]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions. Each day such violation
is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable hereunder. In addition to all other persons
authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the Village of Suffern
Parking Authority parking enforcement aides are authorized to enforce the
provisions of §§ 168-5 and 168-6 of this chapter.
Chapter 175
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 69.
Dogs — See Ch. 122.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 197.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 200.
Quarry and blasting — See Ch. 209.
§ 175-1. Intent.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern hereby declares its intent
to prevent unreasonably loud and disturbing noises as they are deemed to
be detrimental to the life, health, welfare and good order of the people of
the Village of Suffern. By this enactment the Board of Trustees tends to
promote the health, safety, morale and welfare of the people of the Village of
Suffern and, in the exercise of its police powers in this regard, the Board of
Trustees hereby enact the following chapter. It is the intention of the Board
of Trustees that this chapter be liberally construed so as to effectuate the
purposes described in this section.
§ 175-2. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Animal of any type or species which which is owned,
harbored or maintained by a person.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — That level of sound which, in each context
described in § 175-1, either:
A. Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal auditory sensitivities;
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 168-16 SUFFERN CODE § 175-2
1:182
PERSON — An individual or a corporation.
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY — A line along the ground surface, and its
vertical extension, which separates the real property owned or controlled
by one person from that owned or controlled by another person, including
intrabuilding real property divisions.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — An area designated for any residential use pursuant
to the Zoning Law of the Village of Suffern,42 or any area improved by a
dwelling.
VIBRATION — An oscillatory motion of particles described by displacement,
velocity or acceleration with respect to a given reference point.
WEEKDAY — Any Monday through Friday which is not a state or federal
legal holiday.[Amended 11-10-2014 by L.L. No. 9-2014]
§ 175-3. Prohibited noises.
Each of the following is declared to constitute a violation of this section:
Is clearly audible outside the residential, real property boundary from
which it originates;
B.
Is loud, disturbing, unusual, unreasonable and unnecessary as well as
audible outside the structure or the real property boundary from which
it originates.
C.
A. Amplified sound. The using, operating of or permitting to be used or
operated any device for producing, reproducing or amplifying sound,
including but not limited to a radio, tape player or television, in such a
manner as to create a noise disturbance.
B. Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn, signaling
device or alarm (except as a danger warning pursuant to § 375 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York) which results in a
harsh or loud sound or repetitive sounds for any unreasonable or
unnecessary periods of time so as to create a noise disturbance.
C. Shouting and yelling. Shouting, yelling, singing, calling, hooting or
whistling so as to create a noise disturbance.
D. Engines. The operation, including the stationary idling, of any engine,
including but not limited to an automobile, truck, motorcycle,
motorbike, motorboat or minibike engine so as to create a noise
disturbance.
E. Heavy equipment. The operation of any pile driver, bulldozer,
pneumatic hammer, grinder, noise or other construction equipment
which creates a noise disturbance, except between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. on weekdays and except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest
of public safety.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 175-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-3
1:183
§ 175-4. Presumptive evidence.
F. Construction. Any construction, excavation, demolition, alteration or
repair which creates a noise disturbance, except between 8:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. on weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Saturdays and
Sundays and except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public
safety. [Amended 11-10-2014 by L.L. No. 9-2014]
G. Domestic equipment. The operation of or permitting to be operated any
power saw, drill, sander, router, lawn or garden device, leaf or domestic
equipment so as to create a noise disturbance except between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on
Saturdays and Sundays. [Amended 11-10-2014 by L.L. No. 9-2014]
H. Machinery. The operation of any machinery, equipment, pump, fan, airconditioning
apparatus or other mechanical device in such a manner as
to create a noise disturbance.
I. Loading and unloading. The loading and unloading of any materials,
equipment, garbage cans or the handling of bales, boxes, crates,
containers or similar objects so as to create a noise disturbance.
J. Domestic animals. The howling, barking, squawking or other sounds of
domestic animals which occurs so frequently or for such an
unreasonable duration so as to create a noise disturbance.
K. Explosives, firearms and similar devices so as to create a noise
disturbance.
L. Vibration. The operating or permitting the operation of any device that
creates vibration which is above the vibration perception threshold of
an individual beyond the property where the source is located. For the
purposes of this section, "vibration perception threshold" means the
minimum ground or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to
cause a normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct
means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of
moving objects.
A. The use of any sound-producing, sound-reproducing or soundamplifying
device, machinery, domestic equipment, heavy equipment or
engine so as to cause the sound produced thereby to be audible outside
the building or beyond the boundary of the real-property where it
originates between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following
day shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
B. Barking, squawking, whining, neighing or any other domestic animal
sound which is audible at a point beyond the real property boundary
from which such sound emanates and which continues for over 30
minutes between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
§ 175-3 SUFFERN CODE § 175-5
1:184
§ 175-5. Exceptions.
The following sounds shall not be deemed to be a violation of this chapter:
§ 175-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Police Department.
§ 175-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of violation under the Penal Law and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions.
Chapter 177
NUMBERING OF PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 96.
Housing standards — See Ch. 162.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 239.
Zoning — See Ch. 266.
A. Sounds created by church bells or chimes.
B. Sounds created by any government agency by the use of public warning
devices.
C. Sounds created by lawn mowers between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Saturdays and
Sundays. [Amended 11-10-2014 by L.L. No. 9-2014]
D. Sounds created by public utilities in carrying out the operation of their
franchises.
E. Sounds connected with sporting events of any public or private school
or authorized carnivals, fairs, exhibitions, parades, etc., allowed by
permit of the Board of Trustees.
F. The use of loudspeakers in connection with voter registration projects
and, within 30 days prior to an election, the use of loudspeakers in
connection with election campaigns between 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.,
prevailing time.
G. Safety devices. Safety devices required to be operative on machinery or
equipment.
§ 175-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-1
1:185
§ 177-1. Legislative intent.
The Rockland County Legislature has authorized the installation of an "E
911" system within the County, which is intended to reduce the response
time for emergency services in every Town and Village throughout the
County, thereby resulting in a benefit to the health, safety and welfare of
all residents. In order to accomplish this purpose, the Board of Trustees
of the Village of Suffern recognizes the need to require that all parcels of
real property within the Village be numbered and that the numbers must be
conspicuously placed on said parcels so as to be identifiable for response by
emergency services.
§ 177-2. Assignment of numbers.
The Building Inspector of the Village of Suffern shall have authority to
assign numbers to every parcel of real property within the Village. Such
numbers shall be sequential, with odd numbers on one side of a street
and even numbers on the other side. In the event a parcel of vacant real
property is legally able to be subdivided, such parcel shall be allocated as
many numbers as may be anticipated to be necessary to accomplish the
purpose of this chapter. All property owners assigned a new number shall
be notified in writing of the number assigned to the property owned.
§ 177-3. Location of numbers.
§ 177-4. Responsibility of owner of property.
Within 30 days after notification that a number has been assigned to a
parcel of real property, the owner of said real property or the agent of
such owner shall place or cause to be placed on such real property the
number or numbers assigned to such real property. Such owner or agent
shall be required to maintain the placement of such number or numbers in
accordance with such section.
A. The number or numbers assigned to a parcel of real property as set
forth in § 177-2 of this chapter shall be conspicuously shown by
placement on the principal building situated on the lot. Such numbers
shall be placed on the side of the building facing the street upon which
the property is situated. In the event the principal building on a lot is
set back more than 50 feet from the street line, the number or numbers
shall be placed upon a mailbox, gate post, fence or other appropriate
place so that it shall be visible from the street.
B. Numbers on residential buildings shall be not less than three inches in
height. Numbers on nonresidential buildings shall be not less than four
inches in height. All numbers shall be clearly visible and shall be in a
contrasting color to the building or place upon which it is affixed.
§ 177-1 SUFFERN CODE § 177-5
1:186
§ 177-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any owner of real property or the agent of such owner who violates any
of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $200. Each week on which such violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 177-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State.
Chapter 181
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. A275.
§ 181-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Village of Suffern.
PARADE — Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant,
procession and demonstration of any kind or any similar display in or upon
any street, park or other public place in the Village, conducted by more than
25 persons.
PARADE PERMIT — A permit as required by this chapter.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
VILLAGE — The Village of Suffern.
§ 181-2. Permit required; exceptions; fee.
A. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade
unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the Village Clerk.
B. Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to the following:
(1) Funeral processions.
(2) Wedding processions.
(3) Students going to and from school or classes or participating in
educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school
§ 177-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-2
1:187
§ 181-3. Filing of application; contents; late applications; referral.
authorities. This exception does not apply to parades organized
by a school or any body thereof more than 24 hours prior to its
occurrence.
(4) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
C. The fee for the permit shall be as set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees in the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Village of Suffern.43
A. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application
with the Village Clerk on forms provided by the Village Clerk.
B. Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed not less
than 10 days nor more than one year before the date on which it is
proposed to conduct the parade.
C. Contents.
(1) The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the person or
persons seeking to conduct such parade.
(b) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of
the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organization.
(c) The name, address and telephone number of the person who
will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its
conduct.
(d) The date when the parade is to be conducted.
(e) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
(f) The approximate number of persons who and animals and
vehicles which will constitute such parade, the type of animals
and a description of the vehicles.
(g) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(h) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed.
(i) The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 181-2 SUFFERN CODE § 181-3
1:188
§ 181-4. Standards for permit issuance.
The Chief of Police shall recommend that a permit be issued when, from
a consideration of the application and from such other information as may
otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
(j) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at
any such assembly area or areas.
(k) Any additional information which the Village Clerk shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a
permit should issue.
(2) If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any
person other than on the application, the applicant for such permit
shall file a communication, in writing, from the person proposing to
hold the parade authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on
his behalf.
D. Late applications. The Clerk, where good cause is shown therefor, shall
have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed
less than 10 days before the date such parade is proposed to be
conducted.
E. Referral. The Village Clerk shall refer each application for a parade
permit to the Chief of Police for review.
A. The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.
B. The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the Village to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the Village.
C. The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the Village other than that to be occupied by the proposed
line of march and areas contiguous thereto.
D. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of or ambulance services to areas contiguous to such
assembly areas.
E. The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting
equipment en route to a fire.
F. The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
G. The parade is not designed to be held purely for private profit.
§ 181-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-5
1:189
§ 181-5. Time limit for decision; denial.
The Village Clerk shall act upon the application for a parade permit within
five days after the filing thereof. If an application is denied, he shall mail to
the applicant, within five days after the day upon which the application was
filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit.
§ 181-6. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the Board of Trustees. The appeal shall be taken within five days
after notice. The Board of Trustees shall act upon the appeal within 14 days
after its receipt. Late applications rejected under § 181-3D may be appealed
as soon as the Board of Trustees convenes.
§ 181-7. Alternate permits.
The Village Clerk, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be
empowered, on recommendation of the Chief of Police, to authorize the
conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from
that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate
permit shall, within seven days after notice of the action of the Clerk, file a
written note of acceptance with the Clerk. An alternate parade permit shall
conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit
under this chapter.
§ 181-8. Notice to officials.
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the Clerk shall send a
copy thereof to the following:
§ 181-9. Contents of permit.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
§ 181-10. Duties of permittee.
A. The Mayor.
B. The Village Attorney.
C. The Chief of Police.
A. The starting time.
B. The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the
parade.
C. The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof.
D. Such other information as the Clerk shall find necessary to the
enforcement of this chapter.
§ 181-5 SUFFERN CODE § 181-10
1:190
§ 181-11. Interference with parade.
§ 181-12. Revocation of permit.
The Clerk shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
hereunder upon a violation of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.
§ 181-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions.
Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
Chapter 185
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 117. Peace and good order — See Ch. 197.
§ 185-1. Legislative intent.
The Board of Trustees has become aware of the increased incidents of acts
of vandalism, criminal mischief and similar offenses perpetrated by minors.
A. A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws.
B. Possession of permit. The parade chairman or other person heading or
leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person
during the conduct of the parade.
A. Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede
or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person,
vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade.
B. Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the
vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons
are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade.
C. Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police shall have the authority,
when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of a route of
a parade. The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street
unposted in violation of this chapter.
§ 181-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-1
1:191
It is believed that increased parental responsibility for the actions of their
children and wards is essential for the effective prevention and control of
such juvenile offenses. Therefore, this chapter is promulgated to provide
means for alleviating this problem and to ensure the safety of the property
of the residents and taxpayers of the Village of Suffern.
§ 185-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms
specified have the meanings ascribed to them:
LEGAL GUARDIAN — A person appointed guardian or given custody of a
minor by a court of this state.
MINOR — A person who is above the age of eight years but not yet 18 years
of age.
§ 185-3. Acts deemed in violation.
The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such
parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to
the contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and
said minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts described below
with the knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, in violation
of this chapter, upon the occurrence of the events described in Subsections
A, B and C below:
§ 185-4. Penalties for offenses.44
Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punished as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions.
Chapter 189
A. An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian
shall be adjudicated to be in violation of any state or Village ordinance,
local law, law or statute prohibiting willful and malicious acts causing
injury to property within the Village of Suffern.
B. Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice of
such adjudication, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, from the court having jurisdiction of the matter or by
personal service, with a certificate of personal service returned from
the Police Department of the Village of Suffern following said
adjudication.
C. If, at any time within one year following receipt of the notice set forth in
Subsection B above, said minor is arrested and said arrest results, at
any time, in an adjudication that he is in violation of any state or Village
law, ordinance or statute as described in Subsection A above.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 185-1 SUFFERN CODE § 185-4
1:192
PARKING AREAS, COMMERCIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 254.
§ 189-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
COMMERCIAL PARKING AREA — Any area set aside for the use of the
public for the purpose of permitting the parking of vehicles by patrons
of retail or wholesale establishments, entertainment or commuter services
where such area for having parking provides for parking more than 10
vehicles. This shall not be construed to apply to any property owned by the
Village of Suffern or the Village of Suffern Parking Authority.
OWNER — The person, corporation, partnership, association or other
organization having fee title to a commercial parking area or any lesser
interest therein, including a lessee for a term of years.
PARK OR PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
VEHICLE — Any device upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported.
§ 189-2. Paving and drainage.
All commercial parking areas shall be paved in accordance with
specifications determined by the Village of Suffern Planning Board or, if no
such determination is made, shall be paved with a hardtop surface upon a
suitable subgrade satisfactory to the Superintendent of Public Works. The
base shall be properly drained and the construction shall be sufficiently
drained and construction shall be sufficiently constructed to support the
contemplated traffic load in accordance with specifications determined by
the Village of Suffern Planning Board or, if no such determination is made,
to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 189-3. Maintenance.
Every owner shall maintain the commercial parking area clear and free
from ice, debris, rubbish and other obstructions. Every owner shall repair
and maintain the surface of said commercial parking areas so that they will
be free from holes, obstructions. Every owner shall repair and maintain the
surface of said commercial parking areas so that they will be free from
holes, obstructions and other hazards.
§ 185-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-4
1:193
§ 189-4. Administration and enforcement.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall administer and secure compliance
with this chapter.
§ 189-5. Order for remedying.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall order, in writing, the remedying
of all conditions found to exist in violation of this chapter and shall state in
the violation order a reasonable time for compliance therewith.
§ 189-6. Penalties for offenses.45
Any person failing to comply with a violation order within the time stated
therein shall be punished as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General
Provisions. Each week of continuance of a violation shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense hereunder.
Chapter 193
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 73.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 150.
Littering — See Ch. 168.
Noise — See Ch. 175.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 197.
§ 193-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Suffern
Ordinance Regulating Conduct in Public Parks."
§ 193-2. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L.
No. 3-1990]
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
PARK — A park, reservation, ball or sports field, playground, swimming
pool, recreation area, lake or any other area in the Village devoted to
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 189-4 SUFFERN CODE § 193-2
1:194
§ 193-3. Prohibitions.
No person in a park shall:
active or passive recreation and open to one or more segments of the
public.[Amended 8-11-2008 by L.L. No. 11-2008]
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
VILLAGE — The Village of Suffern.
A. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or
remove any buildings, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or
paving material, waterlines or other public utilities or parts or
appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary
or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers or
other structures, equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
B. Litter or deface any rest room or washroom or misuse any furniture or
equipment installed therein.
C. Displace or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any
soil, rocks, stones, trees, shrubs or plants or make any excavation by
pool, equipment blasting or other means or agency.
D. Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains,
railings, fences or upon any other property not designated or
customarily used for such purposes.
E. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, swimming pool or other body of
water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer
or drain flowing into such water any substance, matter or thing, liquid
or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
F. Dump, discard, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper,
boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or other refuse or trash. No
such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to
any park or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but it shall be placed
in the proper receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles
are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away
from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly
disposed of elsewhere.
G. Swim, bathe or wade in any waters, waterways or pools in or adjacent
to any park except in such waters and in such places as are provided
therefor and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth
or may be hereafter adopted, nor shall any person frequent any waters
or places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or
bathing or congregate thereat when such activities are prohibited upon
§ 193-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-3
1:195
§ 193-4. Alcoholic beverages. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No.
3-1990]
Except as hereinafter provided, no person, while in a park, shall have
in his possession alcoholic beverages of any type or shall drink alcoholic
beverages of any type, and no person in a park shall be under the influence
of alcoholic beverages of any type. The Board of Trustees may, in its
discretion, allow organized groups to use alcoholic beverages on stated
occasions and for specified periods of time.
§ 193-5. Conduct of persons.
No person in a park shall sleep or loiter on the seats or benches or other
areas or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or
indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending
to a breach of the public peace.
§ 193-6. Closing of parks.
§ 193-7. Enforcement. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall
have the authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation
thereof.
a finding that such use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise
inadvisable. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
H. Frequent any waters or places designated for the purpose of swimming
or bathing or congregate thereat except during such hours of the day as
shall be designated for such purposes for each individual area.
[Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
I. Picnic or lunch in a place other than one designated for that purpose.
J. In Hallett Park, play basketball, softball or any other sport or activity
requiring the use of a ball and bat. [Added 5-28-1986 by L.L. No.
4-1986]
A. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public at
any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular
intervals, daily or otherwise, and no one shall enter such park at any
time that it is so closed. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
B. No person shall be allowed on the premises of any park between dusk
and dawn, unless permission has specifically been granted in writing by
the Recreation Director. [Added 6-12-1972; amended 10-24-1977
by L.L. No. 12-1977; 9-9-1985 by L.L. No. 7-1985; 8-11-2008 by
L.L. No. 11-2008; 1-3-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 193-3 SUFFERN CODE § 193-8
1:196
§ 193-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No.
3-1990]
Any person or persons violating any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions,
for each violation.
Chapter 197
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 73.
Curfew — See Ch. 117.
Noise — See Ch. 175.
Parks — See Ch. 193.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 200.
§ 197-1. Disorderly acts.
Every person found intoxicated in any street or public place within the limits
of this Village; all persons who shall by noisy, riotous or tumultuous conduct
disturb the quiet and peace of the Village or of any meeting or assembly
therein or of any considerable number of inhabitants thereof; all persons
who shall publicly use any profane, vulgar, indecent or obscene language in
any public street or place in said Village; every person who shall willfully
and maliciously break, mar, injure, remove or deface any building, fence,
awning, gate, sign, signboard, lamp, electric light, telephone or telegraph
pole or any attachment thereto or any tree, shrubbery or other ornamental
thing in said Village; every person who shall remove from or pile up before
any door or on any sidewalk or street, square or public place in said Village
boxes or casks or other things or who shall willfully tear down, destroy or
mutilate any notice or handbill lawfully posted in said Village; every person
who shall incite or induce dogs to fight in any of the streets or public places
of said Village; and every person who shall attempt to obstruct the operation
of the Fire Department of said Village or of any fireman engaged in the
discharge of his duties as such shall be deemed and is hereby declared
to be a disorderly person, and such act or acts shall constitute disorderly
conduct.46
§ 197-2. Breach of the peace.
Any person who, with intent to provoke a breach of the peace or whereby a
breach of the peace may be occasioned, commits any of the following acts
shall be deemed to have committed the offense of disorderly conduct:
46.Editor's Note: Former § 13A-3, which followed this section and dealt with penalties for
offenses, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 193-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-2
1:197
§ 197-3. Loitering. [Amended 11-26-1973]
A. Uses offensive, disorderly, threatening, abusive or insulting language,
conduct or behavior.
B. Acts in such a manner as to annoy, disturb, interfere with, obstruct or
be offensive to others.
C. Congregates with others on a public street and refuses to move on
when ordered by the police.
D. By his actions, causes a crowd to collect, except when lawfully
addressing such a crowd.
E. Shouts or makes a noise either outside or inside a building during the
nighttime to the annoyance or disturbance of any considerable number
of persons.
F. Interferes with any person in any place by jostling against such person
or unnecessarily crowding him or by placing a hand in the proximity of
such a person's pocket, pocketbook or handbag.
G. Stations himself on the public streets or follows pedestrians for the
purpose of soliciting alms or who solicits alms on the public streets
unlawfully.
H. Frequents or loiters about any public place soliciting men for the
purpose of committing a crime against nature or other lewdness.
I. Causes a disturbance in any streetcar, railroad car, omnibus or other
public conveyance by running through it, climbing through the windows
or upon the seats or otherwise annoying passengers or employees
therein.
J. Stands on sidewalks or street corners and makes insulting remarks to
or about passing pedestrians or annoys such pedestrians.
K. Is engaged in some illegal occupation or who bears an evil reputation
and with an unlawful purpose consorts with thieves and criminals or
frequents unlawful resorts. In any prosecution under this subsection,
the fact the defendant is engaged in an illegal occupation or bears an
evil reputation and is found consorting with persons of like evil
reputation, thieves or criminals shall be prima facie evidence that such
consorting was for an unlawful purpose.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or
remain idle, either alone and/or in consort with others, in a public place
in the Village in such manner so as to:
(1) Obstruct any public street, highway, sidewalk or any other public
place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or
impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic and/
or pedestrians.
§ 197-2 SUFFERN CODE § 197-3
1:198
§ 197-4. Penalties for offenses.47
In addition to any other penalty or remedies herein provided, each and
every violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 1-12 of
Chapter 1, General Provisions.
Chapter 200
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 168.
Noise — See Ch. 175.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 197.
Fees — See Ch. A275.
(2) Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing
which is an obstruction to or interference with the free and
uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully
conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such
public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted
ingress, egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto.
B. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated
in Subsection A herein, a police officer or any law enforcement officer
shall order that person or persons to stop causing or committing such
conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses
to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
C. Definitions. The following words, when used in this section, have the
meanings as set out herein:
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location, and shall
include the concept of spending time idly, to be dilatory, to linger, to
stay, to saunter, to delay, to stand around and shall also include the
colloquial expression "hanging around."
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the general public has access and
a right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purposes,
but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the
public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store,
shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public
grounds, areas or parks.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 197-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-1
1:199
§ 200-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to preserve the public peace and good
order in the Village of Suffern and to contribute to the public welfare and
good order of its people by enforcing certain regulations and restrictions on
canvassers and solicitors in order to prevent fraud, crime and unethical and
dishonest business practices within the Village of Suffern.
§ 200-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR — Includes itinerant vendors of merchandise
who shall go from door to door or place to place in this Village selling,
causing to be sold, offering for sale or taking orders for present or future
delivery of merchandise of any description whatever. For the purpose of this
chapter, a "canvasser" or "solicitor" shall also be deemed to be one who is
not in the business of selling goods but who makes surveys for research
purposes, analysis, opinion polls, rating data and any other work which
of its nature involves a door-to-door or place-to-place activity and shall
include persons going from door to door or place to place for the purpose
of soliciting contributions or donations for any person or organization.
For purposes of this chapter, real estate brokers, and sellers of energy
and utility-type services shall be deemed to be canvassers or
solicitors.[Amended 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 6-2017]
MERCHANDISE — Includes magazines, periodicals, books and orders or
contracts for a service, home improvement or alterations.
§ 200-3. Registration required.
No person shall canvass, solicit or call from door to door or place to place
in the Village of Suffern without first registering with the Village Clerk.
§ 200-4. Exemptions.
A. Nothing herein contained shall require the licensing of honorably
discharged soldiers, sailors or marines of the military and naval
services of the United States who have obtained a license from the
County Clerk in connection with § 32 of the General Business Law,
except that they shall be required to comply with § 200-11 and confine
activities to the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
B. This chapter shall not apply to sales by any member of the Boy Scouts of
America, Girl Scouts of America or similar Village-based youth
organizations; school groups; churches; fraternal organizations; a duly
organized volunteer ambulance or fire company or district or an
auxiliary thereof; or other bona fide charity who is acting on behalf of
said organization, group, company, district or corporation where the
organization shall have provided notice to the Village Clerk at least five
§ 200-1 SUFFERN CODE § 200-4
1:200
§ 200-5. Application information.
Each registrant shall, at the time of registering, file with the Village Clerk,
on a form to be provided by the Village of Suffern, an application, in writing,
which shall give the following information and be signed and affirmed by
the applicant under the penalties of perjury:
§ 200-5.1. List of persons not wanting delivery of unsolicited
material. [Added 11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 6-2017]
days before the first activity on its behalf with the dates of the activity
and the name and address of the person in charge.
C. Political activity shall be exempt from the terms of this chapter.
A. The name, age and physical description of the applicant.
B. A complete permanent home and local address of the applicant and the
telephone number at such address.
C. The name and address of the organization or person for whom
solicitation is being made and the telephone number at such address.
D. A description of the nature of the business and the goods, services or
wares to be sold and sufficient information to determine the business he
is to transact.
E. The days, dates and route of his business or solicitation in the Village of
Suffern, which, unless special permission is granted by the Village
Clerk, shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
F. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a
crime, misdemeanor or disorderly conduct offense and where and when
so convicted, the nature of the offense and the penalty, if any.
G. The make, model, year, color and license plate number of automobiles
used by the applicant during the period of solicitation in the Village and
the number of his driver's license and the state of issuance.
A. The Village Clerk shall maintain a list of addresses of the owners,
occupants, tenants or persons in charge of private premises who have
notified the Village Clerk that they do not wish to be visited by
canvassers or solicitors or receive delivery of unsolicited newspapers or
advertising matter. The Village Clerk shall revise said list when notified
that an individual desires to withdraw a prior notification that he
refuses to receive delivery of the aforementioned materials or visits
from canvassers and solicitors. All notifications herein to the Village
Clerk must be in writing. Whenever the Village Clerk ascertains that
the ownership or tenancy of any premises has changed, by virtue of a
request for a water meter reading or otherwise, for which the owner,
tenant or person in charge has filed a refusal of delivery of advertising
matter or unsolicited newspaper and campaign material, the Village
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-5.1
1:201
§ 200-6. Individual registration required.
A separate registration must be made for every solicitor, agent or employee
conducting business or soliciting within the Village limits.
§ 200-7. Registration certificate.
Each registrant, upon being so registered, shall be issued a registration
certificate by the Village Clerk, upon which shall be impressed the Official
Seal of the Village of Suffern and the period for which said certificate shall
be valid, but in no event to exceed 30 calendar days from the date of
issuance.
§ 200-8. Display of registration certificate.
Each registrant shall carry the registration certificate at all times when
conducting business in the Village and shall exhibit it to any citizen or
Village official upon request. At the conclusion of the period for which
the registration certificate was issued, said registration certificate shall be
returned to the Village Clerk.
§ 200-9. Revocation of registration certificate.
The Village Clerk may, at any time for a violation of this chapter or any
other ordinance or any law, revoke any registration certificate. When a
registration certificate is revoked, no refund of any portion of the
registration fee shall be made. Notice of such revocation and the reason
therefor shall be in writing and shall be served by the Village Clerk upon
the person named in the application or by mailing the same to the address
Clerk shall revise the aforementioned list by deleting said address from
the list. The list compiled and the written requests for nondelivery shall
be available for inspection pursuant to Article 6 of the Public Officers
Law.
B. The Village Clerk shall furnish a copy of the aforementioned list to each
person who is issued a certificate of registration at the time said
certificate of registration is issued and shall mail a copy of said list to
the address specified in the registration statement filed pursuant to this
chapter. The Village Clerk shall mail a revised list to the address
specified in the registration statement on or about the first day of each
month if there are any deletions or additions to said list.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to visit a person on this list or
distribute an unsolicited newspaper or advertising material to any
person who has refused delivery thereof pursuant to this chapter after
personal delivery of the list containing the addresses of those persons
refusing delivery thereof to a person filing a registration statement and
from a date 15 days after a revised list has been mailed to a distributor
pursuant to Subsection B herein.
§ 200-5.1 SUFFERN CODE § 200-9
1:202
given in the application. A copy of the revocation order shall be part of the
Village Clerk's records.
§ 200-10. Transfer of registration certificate prohibited.
No registration certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued.
§ 200-11. Prohibitions.
Every person to whom a registration certificate is issued under the terms of
this chapter shall be governed by the following rules and regulations:
§ 200-12. Registration fee.
The fee for each registration certificate shall be as set by resolution of
the Board of Trustees in the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Village of
Suffern.48 All persons involved in canvass or solicitation must obtain his or
her individual certificate.
§ 200-13. Appeals.
In the event that an application for canvassing or soliciting is incomplete, it
shall be disapproved and be returned to the applicant for completion. The
applicant may appeal to the Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern,
which shall set a time and place for a hearing, which hearing shall be held
within 15 days after a request for an appeal has been filed with the Village
A. He shall not falsely or fraudently misrepresent the quantity, character
or quality of any article offered for sale.
B. He shall not blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other noisy device to
attract public attention to his wares or shout or cry out his wares.
C. He shall not stand or permit the vehicle used by him to stand in any
public place or street for more than 10 minutes or in front of any
premises for any time if the owner or lessee objects.
D. He shall not create or maintain any booth or other obstruction upon any
street or public place for the purpose of selling or exposing for sale any
goods, wares or merchandise.
E. He shall not sell any merchandise within 250 feet of any school between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days.
F. He shall not enter or attempt to enter the house or apartment of any
resident in the Village without an express invitation from the occupant
of the house or apartment.
G. He shall not conduct himself in such a manner as to annoy or harass any
person while soliciting within the Village.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 200-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-13
1:203
Clerk and at which hearing the applicant will be given an opportunity to
present his reasons why the registration certificate should be issued. The
decision of the Board of Trustees is final.
§ 200-14. Transient retail businesses.
No person, whether acting as principal or as agent, shall conduct a transient
retail business in any store, tent, booth or from any wagon or pushcart in
this Village for the sale of goods which shall be represented or advertised as
a bankrupt stock or as assigned stock or as goods damaged by fire, water or
otherwise or by any such representation or device without first taking out
a license therefor from the Clerk of this Village, the fee for which is hereby
fixed in an amount set by resolution of the Board of Trustees in the Standard
Schedule of Fees of the Village of Suffern.49 The license shall not be issued
for a period less than one month and shall be renewed monthly during the
continuance of such business.
§ 200-15. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating the terms of this chapter, whether as an individual,
principal or agent or employee or another, shall, upon conviction, be subject
to the penalties as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions.
Chapter 205
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush and weeds — See Ch. 93.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 150.
Numbering of property — See Ch. 177.
Tree removal — See Ch. 251.
§ 205-1. Purpose; short title.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide basic and uniform property and
maintenance standards governing the condition and maintenance of all real
property in the Village of Suffern.
§ 205-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls,
or within exterior or party walls, and a roof, affording shelter to persons,
animals or property.
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 200-13 SUFFERN CODE § 205-2
1:204
COURT — An open and unoccupied space on a lot which is enclosed on at
least three sides by walls of a building.
FACADE — The face or front of a building.
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
JUNKED VEHICLE — Any vehicle, including a trailer, which is without a
currently valid license plate or plates and which is either dismantled, partly
dismantled, inoperative or in an abandoned condition.
LOT — A plot, tract, premises or parcel of land without buildings or
structures located thereon, as surveyed and apportioned for sale or other
purpose.
MUNICIPALITY — A County, Town or Village.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction framed of
component structural parts, which exists for occupancy or use, including
architectural embellishments.
UNOCCUPIED HAZARD — Any building or part thereof which remains
unoccupied for a period of more than six months, with either doors,
windows or other openings broken, removed, boarded or sealed up.
YARD — An open space on the same lot which contains a building and
is located between the building line and the lot line which the particular
building line faces.
§ 205-3. Maintenance standards.
A. Yards and open areas. The owner, occupant or other person having
charge of any premises shall maintain the yards and open areas thereof
in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Surface and subsurface water shall be drained to prevent damage
to buildings and structures and to prevent the development of
stagnant water. Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets,
stormwater sewers and sanitary sewers or other satisfactory
drainage systems shall be provided and utilized. No roof, surface or
sanitary drainage shall create a structural safety or health hazard
by reason of construction, maintenance or manner of discharge.
(2) Fences and other accessory structures shall be maintained in a safe
and nondeteriorated condition.
(3) Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas
shall be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use
and other conditions. Any holes or other hazards that may exist
shall be filled, and necessary repairs or replacement shall be made.
(4) Yards, courts, vacant lots and open areas shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition free from litter, debris, rubbish, garbage,
junk, vermin, rodent harborage and infestation and health, safety
§ 205-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-3
1:205
and physical hazards of any kind. They shall be maintained in a
manner that will prevent dust or other particles from being blown
about the neighborhood. Open wells, cesspools or cisterns shall be
securely closed or barricaded from access to the public.
(5) Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth which, by
reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage,
constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof shall be
removed upon compliance with the provisions of Chapter 251 of the
Code of the Village of Suffern, when applicable. Heavy
undergrowth and accumulation of plant growth which is unsightly,
noxious or detrimental to health shall be eliminated or removed.
Trees, hedges, bushes, shrubs and vegetation of any kind shall be
kept pruned.
(6) It shall be unlawful to park or store or permit to be parked or stored
in any yard or open area of a premises any motor vehicle that is
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, junked, substantially damaged or
unregistered or which is not intended to be used or in no condition
for legal use upon the public highway.
(7) All fences and planting areas installed on the premises shall be
maintained by the owner of the property. Such maintenance shall
include, but not be limited to, the replacement of trees and shrubs
which may die and/or otherwise be destroyed, the maintenance and
cutting of lawns and the replacement and/or repair of fences which
may be in disrepair.
B. Buildings and structures. The owner, operator or occupant shall
maintain each and every part of the building or structure free of all
nuisances and any hazards to the safety of the occupants, pedestrians
and all persons utilizing the premises or abutting roadways and
maintain accessory structures and appurtenant equipment in attractive
condition and good repair, capable of performing the function for which
the same was designed or intended to be used, including but not limited
to the following:
(1) Exterior surfaces of buildings and structures that are not
inherently resistant to deterioration shall be sealed and regularly
treated with a protective coating of paint or other suitable
preservative sufficient to prevent deterioration and to maintain a
neat and orderly appearance. All such surfaces shall be maintained
free of excessive flaking, peeling and crumbling.
(2) Every exterior wall, roof and porch or appurtenance thereto shall
be maintained in a manner so as to prevent collapse of the same or
injury to the occupants of the building or to the public.
(3) All buildings and structures shall be kept in a clean, sanitary and
safe condition, free from litter, debris, rubbish, garbage, junk,
vermin, rodents and health and safety and physical hazards of any
kind. No building shall, except as provided in § 205-3B(10) or in an
§ 205-3 SUFFERN CODE § 205-3
1:206
emergency or ongoing construction, be boarded up in part or whole
except by permission of the Superintendent of Public Works.
(4) Foundations of every building and structure shall be maintained
structurally sound and in good repair so as to prevent the
accumulation of moisture within the space enclosed by such
foundation, and such foundation and any window or door thereon
shall be protected against the entrance of rodents.
(5) Roofs of every building or structure shall be maintained
weathertight and be equipped with gutters and downspouts to
ensure that drainage does not cause excessive erosion, ponding or
water damage and does not create a nuisance on public or private
property and that does not cause undue heat loss from occupied
areas. All roofs, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in a
good state of repair.
(6) The exterior of every building and structure and all appurtenances
thereto, both above and below the roofline, shall be maintained in
good repair in a safe condition and weathertight so as to resist
decay or deterioration from any cause.
(7) All exposed surfaces shall be maintained free of damaged,
disintegrating, crumbling, broken or missing materials, excessive
pitting or corrosion and unsafe defects, and all broken or missing
glass panes shall be replaced.
(8) The exterior of every building and structure shall be maintained
free of buckled, sagging, broken, partially missing, rotted or
decayed walls, doors, windows, porches, balconies, steps,
stairways, railings, balusters, chimneys and decorative trim. The
exterior of every building and structure shall be maintained so that
the appearance of the premises shall not constitute a blighting
factor for adjoining property.
(9) Every repair to and replacement of a portion of the exterior of a
building and structure or part thereof or appurtenances thereto
shall match and conform to the overall exterior design and
appearance of such structure.
(10) The owner of a vacated building shall take such steps and perform
such acts as may be required of him from time to time by the
Village's Superintendent of Public Works to ensure that the
building and its adjoining yards remain safe and secure and do not
present a hazard to adjoining property or to the public. All openings
shall be provided with painted exterior-grade plywood closures,
securely fastened.
(11) Buildings and structures shall be maintained in such condition so
that they shall not become an unoccupied hazard as defined in this
chapter. All graffiti or defacing shall be removed and the surface
finish restored within a five-day period.
§ 205-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-3
1:207
§ 205-4. Registration.
The owner of any dwelling which contains two or more renters or boarders
shall file with the Village Clerk before January 1 of each year a statement
identifying the owner and superintendent or agent, if any, of each dwelling,
the address and telephone number of each, whether the owner resides on
the premises on a permanent basis and the number of renters or boarders
residing thereat. This information shall be conspicuously posted in the lobby
or entrance area of each such dwelling. In addition, the owner must furnish
to the Village Clerk before January 1 of each year a telephone number at
which the owner or an agent may be reached 24 hours per day and advise
the Village Clerk of any changes within 24 hours of such change.
§ 205-5. Enforcement and compliance; notice of violation.
(12) All signs, awnings and lighting systems shall be maintained in a
completely operable, clean, sightly, nondeteriorated and safe
condition.
(13) Fuel-burning, heat-producing equipment shall be installed and
maintained so that the emission or discharge into the atmosphere
of smoke, dust particles, odors or other products of combustion will
not create a nuisance or be detrimental to the health, comfort,
safety or property of any person.
(14) Chimneys, flues and their supports shall be installed and
maintained so as to be structurally safe, durable, smoke-tight,
noncombustible and capable of withstanding the action of flue
gases without softening, cracking, corroding or spalling.
(15) Air-conditioning units which are over or adjacent to any public
opening or sidewalk shall direct their condensation and runoff
away from the same.
(16) If a sign is removed from the exterior of a building or structure, the
area that was covered by the removed sign and now left exposed,
even if a new sign is installed, shall be cleaned, maintained and
repaired so that the exterior of that building or structure shall have
a uniform color and texture.
(17)Windows in retail/commercial stores in the CB Zoning District as
designated on the Zoning Map of the Village of Suffern shall not be
obstructed, cluttered or blocked, and in no event may more than
10% of the area of any such window be covered with signs,
announcements, merchandise or obstructions of any kind or
nature.
A. Any owner, tenant or occupant of any property in violation of this
chapter shall remove such offense when ordered to do so within five
days of the service of written notice as provided in Subsection B below
or such shorter time as may be directed therein.
§ 205-3 SUFFERN CODE § 205-5
1:208
§ 205-6. Notice of violation; abatement by Village; collection of
costs.
B. All written notices under this section shall be served on the owner,
tenant or occupant of any property by posting a copy of such violation
notice upon the front portion of the property or upon the main structure
and by mailing a copy of such notice by ordinary mail to the owner of
the property as shown on the latest assessment rolls of the Village. In
the case of any person responsible for the creation of an offense
existing upon a public street or public property, notice may be
personally served on such person or mailed by ordinary mail to such
person at such person's last known address.
C. This chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer,
Building Inspector, Fire Inspector, Superintendent of Public Works and/
or their deputies, assistants or designees; by any police officer of the
Village of Suffern or by any other person authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Notice to remove. The Code Enforcement Officer or any other person
authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter is hereby
authorized and empowered to notify the owner or the agent of such
owner of any property within the Village to take specified action to
remedy any violation of this chapter within a specified period of time.
Such notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to said owner at his
last known address, or by personal service.
B. Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified to act as directed within the specified period
of time or within 20 days after the date of such notice in the event that
the same is returned to the Village by the post office because of its
inability to make delivery thereof, provided that the same was properly
addressed to the last known address of such owner or agent, the Village
is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake the appropriate
action to remedy the condition.
C. Charge included in tax bill. When the Village has effected the removal
of such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost
thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the date
of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior thereto,
shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular tax
bill forwarded to such owner by the Village, and said charge shall be
due and payable by said owner at the time of payment of such bill.
D. Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due the
Village is not paid by such owner within 10 days after the disposal of
such litter, as provided for in Subsections A and B above, then, and in
that case, a sworn statement shall be filed with the Village Clerk
showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work
was done and the location of the property on which said work was done.
The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and
§ 205-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-6
1:209
§ 205-7. Penalties for offenses.
§ 205-8. Conflicts with other legislation.
Where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any
provisions of any other local law or ordinance, the provision or requirement
which is more restrictive or which establishes the higher standard shall
prevail.
§ 205-9. Severability.
The invalidity of any word, section, clause, paragraph, sentence, part or
provision of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other part of this
chapter which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
Chapter 209
QUARRYING AND BLASTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 175.
privilege on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for
the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for
collection, until final payment has been made. Said costs and expenses
shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of
taxes. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions
hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have
been complied with and that the work has been done properly and
satisfactorily and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the
amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the
property designated or described in the statement and that the same is
due and collectible as provided by law.
A. Any person failing to comply with a lawful order pursuant to this
chapter or committing an offense in violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding
$5,000, or by community service in an amount deemed appropriate by
the court, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by
any combination of the same. [Amended 1-8-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
B. The continuation of an offense against the provisions of this chapter
shall constitute, for each week the offense is continued, a separate and
distinct offense hereunder.
C. Failure to comply with the direction of any official of the Village of
Suffern when notice has been provided in accordance with § 205-7 shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense hereunder.
§ 205-6 SUFFERN CODE § 205-9
1:210
§ 209-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as a "Quarrying and Blasting Law of the Village
of Suffern."
§ 209-2. Legislative intent.
This chapter is intended to enhance the public safety, peace and good order
and welfare of the people of the Village of Suffern through the regulation of
quarrying and the monitoring of blasting in the Village of Suffern.
§ 209-3. Employment of licensed blaster required.
No person or corporation shall engage in quarrying in the Village of Suffern
unless they have in their continuous employ a blaster who is a holder
of a blaster's license issued by the State of New York and maintained
continuously in force. A photocopy or other clear reproduction of the
blaster's license or licenses currently in force shall be kept continuously on
file with the Village Clerk.
§ 209-4. Liability insurance.
§ 209-5. Hours.
A. Every person or corporate entity engaged in blasting activities shall
maintain continuously in force a liability and property damage
insurance policy in an amount not less than $1,000,000/$3,000,000.
[Amended 12-12-1988 by L.L. No. 4-1988]
B. Any person or corporate entity required to provide public liability
coverage shall file with the Village Clerk a certificate of insurance
showing the name of the insurance company, the amount, the name of
the insured, the proper corporate name and the corporate address of
the insured and the name and address of the agent or broker through
whom it was placed and who is responsible for attesting to the
existence of the coverage.
A. It shall be unlawful to blast before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. on any
day of the year.
B. It shall be unlawful to carry on any excavation or stone-crushing
operation before 7:00 a.m. on any day of the year and after 7:00 p.m. or
beyond the official local hours of daylight, whichever may be later, nor
shall any stone crushing, excavation or blasting be done on Sunday,
except with the written approval of the Superintendent of Public Works.
C. In addition to the aforementioned, it shall be unlawful to conduct any
quarrying operations whatsoever before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. on
any day of the year. "Quarrying operations" shall be deemed to include,
§ 205-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-5
1:211
§ 209-6. Allowable limits.
but not be limited to, the loading of trucks or the transportation of any
product or material resulting from quarrying or blasting operations.
[Added 9-9-1985 by L.L. No. 6-1985]
A. Blasting activities shall be so conducted that ground vibration, airborne
noise or maximum total energy ratio measured at the nearest structure
or building not owned or leased by the individual or corporation
conducting the blasting does not exceed the standards established by
this chapter.
B. Ground vibrations emanating from any blast, at a distance measured by
the distance from the blast to the closest structure or building not
owned or used by the entity conducting the blast, shall not exceed 0.75
inches per second for frequencies less than 40 hertz (Hz) or 1.92 inches
per second for frequencies of 40 hertz or more. [Amended
12-12-1988 by L.L. No. 4-1988]
C. Airborne noise emanating from blasting activities shall not exceed a
one-hundred-twenty-decibel scale at the location aforesaid.
D. The maximum total energy ratio shall not exceed 1.0 at the location
aforesaid.
E. Maximum poundage. [Amended 12-12-1988 by L.L. No. 4-1988]
(1) In the absence of monitoring by approved instrumentation, in order
to restrict vibrations to the levels specified therein, the maximum
charge per delay (expressed in pounds) may not exceed (D/60) x (D/
60), where D (expressed in feet) is the distance from the blast site
to the closest structure or building not owned or used by the entity
conducting the blast.
(2) The following table illustrates said requirement at the distances
shown therein:
Quarry Blasting Quantity-Distance Table
Distance from Blast Area to
Nearest Structure, Neither
Quarry-Owned nor Leased
(feet)
(D/60)2
Maximum Poundage per
Delay Interval
100 3
200 11
300 25
400 44
500 69
600 100
§ 209-5 SUFFERN CODE § 209-6
1:212
§ 209-7. Blasting records.
§ 209-8. Seismograph and air pressure records.
Quarry Blasting Quantity-Distance Table
Distance from Blast Area to
Nearest Structure, Neither
Quarry-Owned nor Leased
(feet)
(D/60)2
Maximum Poundage per
Delay Interval
700 136
800 178
900 225
1,000 278
1,200 400
(3) A contemporaneous log of all such blasts must be maintained, and
proof of compliance with said standards shall be furnished to the
Village of Suffern upon demand.
A. A record shall be kept of every blast and showing the amount of total
powder and total number of holes, and all records shall be retained at
least until the end of the calendar year next following the year in which
the record is made. All such records shall be open to inspection by the
Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of Suffern, and one copy
of each shall be furnished to him without charge at his request. At least
one copy of the records required by this section shall be maintained at
the quarry, mine office or construction blasting site at all times.
B. The recorded data shall include:
(1) The number of holes.
(2) The kind and quantity of explosives.
(3) The kind of blasting caps and delay interval.
(4) The date and time of firing.
(5) The name of the person in responsible charge of loading and firing
and the blasting permit number.
(6) The signature of the blaster making the report.
(7) The name and location of the quarry or construction site.
A. The Superintendent of Public Works may order, on his initiative and
without prior consent, four recordings of the seismic and air pressure
effects of the blasting activity of any regular quarrying operation within
the Village during the course of each calendar year.
§ 209-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-8
1:213
§ 209-9. Notice of proposed blast.
B. Seismograph and air pressure readings of blasts shall be taken by a
qualified person regularly or frequently employed in the business of
seismograph readings, competent to qualify as an expert witness to the
results.
C. The recorded data shall include the following:
(1) Identification of instrument used.
(2) Name of observer.
(3) Name of interpreter.
(4) Distance and direction of recording station from area of detonation.
(5) Type of ground at recording station or location in structure.
(6) Maximum amplitudes for all components, as well as resultant for all
recorded frequencies of vibrations.
(7) Duration of motion in excess of 0.001 of an inch.
(8) Frequency of ground motion in cycles per second.
(9) Maximum energy ratio or particle velocity.
(10) A copy of the photographic records of seismograph readings.
D. If any such monitoring shall disclose an apparent violation of the limits
established by this chapter, the Superintendent of Public Works may
require four additional recordings. All recording shall be at the expense
of the corporation or person conducting the activity but under the
exclusive supervision, schedule and control of the Superintendent of
Public Works of the Village of Suffern. Any additional blasts found to
exceed the limits of this chapter shall occasion an additional series of
four recordings.
A. No charge of explosives may be detonated by any blaster within the
Village of Suffern unless the blaster or responsible official of the
organization conducting the activity shall, not less than 24 hours before
the scheduled blast and during the course of regular Village business
hours, have advised the Superintendent of Public Works of the
proposed blasting date and anticipated time.
B. The advisory may be oral. The Superintendent of Public Works shall
maintain a log of such calls in a book reserved for that purpose. The log
shall indicate the date and hour the advisory was received, from whom
received, by whom received and the date and anticipated time of the
blast.
§ 209-8 SUFFERN CODE § 209-10
1:214
§ 209-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-10-1979 by L.L. No.
7-1979; 12-12-1988 by L.L. No. 4-198850]
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply
therewith shall be a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine which shall not
exceed $2,000 or imprisonment not exceeding three months, or both such
fine and imprisonment; and each day such violation shall be permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. The enforcement of this chapter
by the imposition of a fine or imprisonment as aforementioned shall not
prevent the Village of Suffern from enforcing this chapter by injunctive
action or by any other authorized means.
§ 209-11. Authority to waive requirements.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall have the authority to waive any
of the requirements of this chapter when such waiver is requested, in
writing, and when the granting of the waiver, in his opinion, would not be
detrimental to the general health, welfare and safety of the residents of the
Village of Suffern.
Chapter 213
RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 22. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 53.
§ 213-1. Purpose and scope.
A. The People's right to know the process of government decisionmaking
and the documents and statistics leading to determinations is basic to
our society. Access to such information should not be thwarted by
shrouding it with the cloak of secrecy or confidentiality.
B. This chapter provides information concerning the procedures by which
records may be obtained in the Village of Suffern.
C. Personnel of the Village of Suffern shall furnish to the public the
information and records required by the Freedom of Information Law51
and those which were furnished to the public prior to its enactment.
50.Editor's Note: The amendment of the penalty provisions of this section by L.L. No. 4-1988
further provided that pursuant to the authority of Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10,
Subdivision 1(ii)e(3), the Board of Trustees exercises its authority to amend the Village
Law, and, to the extent that it is inconsistent with Village Law § 20-2006, Subdivision 1-a,
the Board of Trustees exercises such authority to supersede Village Law § 20-2006.
Subdivision 1-a.
51.Editor's Note: See § 84 et seq. of the Public Officers Law.
§ 209-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-1
1:215
§ 213-2. Designation of records access officer.
§ 213-3. Designation of fiscal officer.
D. Any conflicts among laws governing public access to records shall be
construed in favor of the widest possible availability of public records.
A. The Mayor of the Village of Suffern is responsible for any compliance
with the regulations herein. He designates the Village Clerk of the
Village of Suffern as records access officer.
B. The records access officer is responsible for:
(1) Maintaining an up-to-date subject matter list.
(2) Assisting the requester in identifying the requested records if
necessary.
(3) Upon locating the records, taking one of the following actions:
(a) Make records promptly available for inspection.
(b) Deny access to the records in whole or in part and explain, in
writing, the reasons therefor.
(c) In the event that any requests cannot be met because such
records are being used for current work purposes, advise the
requester of such fact and make every effort to arrange a
specific time when such records will be available.
(d) In the event that a question arises as to the nature of the
records in that public viewing of such records may result in an
unwarranted invasion of a citizen's personal privacy or may
result in a disclosure of material that must be confidential to
promote effective law enforcement or for any other reason
which, in the opinion of the records access officer, is valid to
promote the public interest while consistent with the Freedom
of Information Law, confer with the Village Attorney before
determining if such records shall be made available for
inspection.
(4) Upon receiving a request for copies of records, making the copy
available upon payment or offer to pay established fees, if any, or
permitting the requester to copy those records.
(5) Upon request, certifying that a transcript is a true copy of the
records copied.
(6) Upon failure to locate records, certifying that the Village of Suffern
is not legal custodian for such records or the records for which the
Village of Suffern is the legal custodian cannot be found.
§ 213-1 SUFFERN CODE § 213-3
1:216
§ 213-4. Location of records.
The Village of Suffern designates the Village Clerk's office, Municipal
Building, 44 Washington Avenue, Suffern, New York, as the location where
records shall be available for public inspection and copying.
§ 213-5. Hours for public inspection.
The Village of Suffern shall accept requests for public access to records and
shall produce records during all hours regularly opened for business. These
hours are Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
§ 213-6. Requests for access to records.
A. The Village Treasurer is designated fiscal officer by the Village of
Suffern. He is the person charged with certifying the payroll. He shall
respond to requests for an itemized record setting forth the name,
address, title and salary of each officer and employee of the Village of
Suffern.
B. The Village Treasurer shall make the payroll items listed above
available to any person, including bona fide members of the news
media, as required under § 88, Subdivision (1)(g), (1)(i) and (10) of the
Freedom of Information Law.52
A. Where a request for records is required, such request may be oral or in
writing. However, written requests shall not be required for records
that have been customarily available without written request.
B. Response to requests.
(1) The records access officer will respond promptly to a request for
records, except under extraordinary circumstances. Such
responses must be made no more than five working days after
receipt of the request by the records access officer, whether the
request is oral or in writing.
(2) If, for any reason, more than five working days are required to
produce records, the records access officer will acknowledge
receipt of the request within five working days after the request is
received. The acknowledgement will include a brief explanation for
the reason for the delay and an estimate of the date production will
be forthcoming.
C. Subject matter list.
(1) The records access officer will maintain and make available for
public inspection and copying a current list by subject matter of all
records produced, filed or first kept or promulgated after
52.Editor's Note: For current provisions, see § 84 et seq. of the Public Officers Law.
§ 213-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-6
1:217
§ 213-7. Denial of access to records.
§ 213-8. Fees.
September 1, 1974. The list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit
the requester to identify the file category of the record sought.
(2) The subject matter list will be updated periodically, and the date of
the most recent updating will appear on the first page. The
updating of the subject matter list will not be less than semiannual.
D. So that the records access officer can locate records within a
reasonable period of time, a request for access to records should be
sufficiently detailed to identify the records. Where possible, the
requester should supply information regarding dates, titles, file
designations or other information which may help identify the records.
E. A request for any or all records falling within a specific category shall
conform to the standard that records be identifiable.
F. No records will be removed by the requester from the office where the
record is located without the permission of the records access officer.
A. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern shall hear appeals for
denial of access to records under the Freedom of Information law.53
B. Denial of access shall be in writing, stating the reason therefor and
advising the requester of his or her right to appeal to the Board of
Trustees.
C. If the records access officer fails to provide requested records promptly,
as required in § 213-6B of this chapter, such failure shall be deemed a
denial of access by the records access officer.
D. The time for deciding an appeal by the Board of Trustees shall
commence upon receipt of written appeal identifying:
(1) The date and location of requests for records.
(2) The records to which the requester was denied access.
(3) The name and return address of the requester.
E. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern shall inform the
requester of its decision in writing within seven days of receipt of an
appeal.
F. A final denial of access to a requested record, as provided for in
Subsection E of this section, shall be subject to court review as
provided for in Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law.
53.Editor's Note: See § 84 et. seq. of the Public Officers Law.
§ 213-6 SUFFERN CODE § 213-8
1:218
Chapter 215
RENTAL PROPERTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 96.
Housing standards — See Ch. 162.
§ 215-1. Definitions; interpretation of terms.
A. Regulations of the Committee on Public Access to Records54 provide
that the fee for copying records shall not exceed $0.25 per page for
photocopies not exceeding 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches.
B. The Village of Suffern shall charge $0.25 per page for photocopies not
exceeding 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches. In cases where size of photocopies
exceed 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches, the fee for photocopying shall not
exceed the actual copying cost, which is the average unit cost for
copying the record.
A. As used in this article, these terms shall have the meanings indicated as
follows:
ACTION or PROCEEDING — Any action or proceeding which may be
instituted in the Justice Court of the Village of Suffern or the County
Court of the County of Rockland or the Supreme Court of the County
of Rockland or any court of competent jurisdiction with an alleged
violation of any law of the Village of Suffern.
BUILDING — Any improved real property, residential or mixed-use
(commercial-residential), located within the Village of Suffern that is
non-owner-occupied.
IDENTIFICATION OF BUILDING — It is required that the house
number be placed on the building in a conspicuous place.
OWNER — Any individual or individuals, partnership or corporation
or any similar type of business organization, whether for profit or
otherwise, in whose name title to a building stands, including a
mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other person, firm or corporation
directly or indirectly in control of the property.
PROCESS — A summons, appearance ticket or any notice, mandate or
any other paper process issued under any provision of the Code of the
Village of Suffern or any law or regulation of the State of New York.
54.Editor's Note: The Committee on Public Access to Records it now referred to as the
"Committee on Open Government" pursuant to L. 1983. c. 80.
§ 213-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-1
1:219
§ 215-2. Registration of owner.
§ 215-3. Landlord registration statement.
RENTAL PROPERTY — Includes all properties which are either rented,
leased, let or hired out to be occupied for residential or mixed use
(commercial-residential), and are non-owner-occupied.
B. For any rental property to be considered owner-occupied, the owner
must demonstrate to the Building Department that all individual
owners, all partners, or all shareholders of a corporation actually have
their principal residence at the rental property and reside therein on a
full-time basis, it being the actual domicile of all individual owners, all
partners, or all shareholders. At the request of the Village of Suffern,
any owner who claims to occupy the rental property shall provide a
sworn affidavit providing the necessary information to support his or
her claim that the premises are owner-occupied.
A. The owner of a property constituting a rental property shall register the
same with the Building Department within 60 days of the effective date
of this article on a form approved by the Building Department. This
form shall be known as a "landlord registration statement" which shall
be signed by the owner under oath.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner to offer any unit for rent, or to rent
any unit, or to allow any rental unit to be occupied without having first
registered pursuant to this chapter as required herein within the time
prescribed for such registration and to have obtained a permit therefor.
Failure to receive notice of the registration deadline will not excuse
failure to register rental property. It is the owner's responsibility to
fulfill the requirements of this chapter.
A. Every owner of a rental property as above defined shall file with the
Building Department, within 60 days after the adoption of this chapter,
a landlord registration statement on forms to be supplied by the
Building Department, containing the following:
(1) A description of the premises by street number and section, block
and lot number, including tax identification number.
(2) The owner's name, residential address, and mailing address,
together with his/her business telephone number, home phone
number, cell phone number, fax number, as well as e-mail address,
or, if such owner is a corporation, the name and address of such
corporation and the name, residence, business address, together
with the residence, business telephone numbers, cell phone
numbers, fax numbers and e-mail addresses, if any, of all officers.
(3) Proof of residency of each owner.
(4) A description of the structure, including the number of rental
dwelling units in the structure.
§ 215-1 SUFFERN CODE § 215-3
1:220
(5) A floor plan depicting the location, use and dimension of each room
situated within the dwelling unit.
(6) The number of persons intended to be accommodated by, and to
reside in, each such rental dwelling unit.
(7) The name of each person that is and/or will be occupying the
premises intended for rental occupancy.
(8) A copy of the most recent deed and real property tax bill,
confirming the ownership of record of the dwelling unit.
(9) A certification that all municipal real property taxes, Village water
and sewer fees and any other Village fees or charges relating to the
property are paid and a copy of the current real property tax bills
and water and sewer bills, with evidence that the same are paid in
full.
(10) Designation of a managing agent. In the event the owner does not
reside in Rockland County, then the owner must designate a
managing agent. If a managing agent is required, then the owner
shall provide the following information to the Building Department:
the name, residence, business and e-mail address and residence,
business and fax telephone numbers of a natural person, 18 years
of age or over, who actually resides within the County of Rockland,
and who shall be designated by such owner as a managing agent
responsible for and in control of the maintenance and operation of
such dwelling, and who shall be designated as the person upon
whom process may be served on behalf of the owner. The managing
agent and/or owner shall keep a current record of all the tenants,
and their names and addresses, who are renting, leasing or living in
the premises. There shall be endorsed upon such statements a
written consent to such designation signed by such managing
agent. An owner who is a natural person and who meets the
requirements of this subsection as to the location of the residence
or place of transacting business of a managing agent may
designate himself/herself as such managing agent.
(11) Each application shall be executed by and sworn to under oath by
the owner of the dwelling unit.
(12) The owner shall, at all times, keep this information updated, and
when there is a change in ownership, a change in the managing
agent, a change in tenant(s), or a change in any information set
forth on the registration form, the owner shall update the
information by amending the landlord registration statement
within 15 days from the date of any such change.
(13) Any designation as managing agent made pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall remain in full force and effect until
changed or terminated as hereinafter provided.
§ 215-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-3
1:221
B. Upon completion and execution and submission of the landlord
registration statement as aforesaid, said registration shall be reviewed
by the Building Department or its designee for adequacy. Should the
Building Department and/or its designee determine that said
application is incomplete, defective or untruthful for any reason, said
application shall be marked "rejected" and returned to the filer with an
explanation of the reason(s) for rejection. A rejected application shall
not be deemed to comply with the following provisions of this article.
C. It shall be the responsibility of each owner to timely notify the Building
Department whenever the information provided in the landlord
registration statement has become outdated or for any reason is no
longer accurate.
D. Where, after filing of any landlord registration statement in relation to
any rental property under the applicable provisions of this chapter, the
owner of such property shall have granted or transferred his/her right,
title or interest therein or in any part thereof, such owner shall file with
the Building Department within 15 days after such grant or transfer a
written statement which, under oath, shall contain the name and
residence, business addresses, business and home telephone, cell
phone numbers, fax numbers and e-mail of the grantee, transferee or
other successor of such right, title or interest, or if such grantee,
transferee or successor is a corporation, the name and address of such
corporation, including the names of all officers, their addresses,
business and residence phone and cell numbers as well as e-mail
addresses and fax numbers.
E. Where, after the filing of any landlord registration statement with the
Building Department pursuant to the applicable provisions of this
chapter, any change other than a designation of a different managing
agent or a change of ownership or interest occurs in any name,
residence or any business address of a list of officers required to be
included in such statement, the owner, within 15 days after such
change, shall file in duplicate, on forms to be furnished by the Building
Department, a statement under oath setting forth the particulars of
such change so as to supply the information necessary to make
currently correct the last landlord registration statement filed pursuant
to the applicable provisions of this section.
F. An owner may terminate such designation by filing with the Building
Department a sworn written statement designating a new managing
agent made in conformity with the provisions hereinabove cited.
G. Any landlord registration statement or designation of a managing agent
required to be filed with the Building Department by any owner of a
rental property under the provisions of this section shall be signed by
such owner, or if such owner is a corporation, by an officer thereof, or if
such owner is a partnership, by a partner thereof, and said statements
must be sworn to under the penalties of perjury.
§ 215-3 SUFFERN CODE § 215-3
1:222
§ 215-4. Inspection requirements.
§ 215-5. Application for search warrants.
At the request of the Building Department, the Village Attorney or his
deputy or designee is authorized to make application to any other court of
competent jurisdiction for the issuance of a search warrant to be executed
by a police officer in order to conduct an inspection of any premises
believed to be subject to the registry jurisdiction of this chapter. The
Building Department may seek a search warrant whenever the owner and/
H. A new application for a rental occupancy permit shall be filed whenever
a dwelling unit or portion thereof has become vacant and the owner
intends to permit a new tenant or other person to take up residence. No
additional fee will be required if the owner is registering a change in
tenancy only under an existing valid rental occupancy permit.
I. Any such landlord registration statement or designation of a managing
agent shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statement therein
contained, in any criminal or civil prosecution instituted by the Village
of Suffern or by any proper prosecutorial agency against the owner or
managing agent of a rental property.
A. The Building Department or its authorized designee or agent shall
make provisions for inspections of each rental property which is subject
to the provisions of this chapter and shall notify each owner and/or
managing agent of each rental property as to the time and place of such
inspection. The inspection shall take place at a minimum of every 12
months. The inspection shall be for the purpose of determining
compliance with all applicable rules and regulations concerning safety
and maintenance of all rules and regulations applicable to said rental
property, including the Code of the Village of Suffern and all other such
rules and regulations and laws of the State of New York. The owner and/
or managing agent may refuse to allow inspections of any dwelling unit
contained in the rental property. In such event, the Building
Department may apply for a search warrant. In addition, the Building
Department may deny a permit with respect to any such property. In
addition, the owner and/or managing agent shall be obligated to review
with the Building Department and its designee or agent the contents of
the landlord registration statement to determine if all said information
is up-to-date, complete and accurate in all respects.
B. Any inspection report issued pursuant to Subsection A of this section
which reveals the presence of a violation shall be remedied by the
owner within the time stated in the report. Failure to bring any building
and/or rental property into conformance with such report and/or to
remedy within the time set forth therein shall constitute a violation of
this chapter, it being expressly understood that this provision shall not
constitute the exclusive remedy of the Village of Suffern, but shall be an
addition thereto.
§ 215-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-5
1:223
or managing agent fails to allow inspections of any dwelling unit contained
in the rental property where there is a reasonable cause to believe that
there is a violation of this chapter or a violation of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or of any code of the Village of
Suffern.
§ 215-6. Enforcement.
Without limitation on any available remedy, the Village of Suffern shall have
a choice of enforcing this chapter by seeking civil penalties or by instituting
a criminal proceeding or may choose to do both.
§ 215-7. Service of papers; notice of violations.
A. Criminal proceeding. A summons or appearance ticket for any violation
of this chapter may be served in the County of Rockland as defined
within the meaning of New York Criminal Procedure Law § 150.40. In
the event that the owner does not reside in the County of Rockland,
then the owner shall be obligated to designate a managing agent who
maintains a bona fide residence in the County of Rockland.
B. A designating managing agent of an owner may be served with a notice
of violation, order of remedy, order of violation, an appearance ticket or
other service of process, whether criminal or civil, pursuant to and
subject to the provisions of law as if actually served upon the owner.
C. No owner who designates a managing agent pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter may assert the defense of lack of notice or lack of in
personam jurisdiction based solely upon the service of process upon his
designated agent.
A. Service of papers and notice of violations shall be:
(1) By delivering to and leaving a copy of the same with any person or
persons violating or who may be liable under any of the several
provisions of this chapter; and
(2) By registered or certified mail to the most current address on file in
the landlord registration statement upon the owner and/or
managing agent; and
(3) If none is on file, to the most current address in the Village Receiver
of Taxes Office by registered or certified mail to the owner and/or
managing agent; and if such person or persons cannot be served by
any of the aforesaid methods after diligent search shall have been
made for him/her or them, then such notice or order may be served
by posting the same in a conspicuous place upon the rental
property where such violation is alleged to exist, or to which such
notice may refer, or which may be deemed unsafe or dangerous,
which shall be the equivalent of personal service of said notice
upon all parties, including the owner and/or managing agent for
whom such search shall have been made; or
§ 215-5 SUFFERN CODE § 215-7
1:224
§ 215-8. Rental permit required; fees.
§ 215-9. Revocation or suspension of permit.
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or suspended by
the Building Department after notice to the owner, setting forth the basis
for the suspension or revocation and an opportunity for the owner to be
heard upon a finding by the Building Department that the requirements of
this chapter or any conditions of said permit have been violated or that the
premises are not being maintained in accordance with the requirements
of any applicable law, rule or regulation. Any person who claims to be
aggrieved by any such suspension or revocation may file with the Village
Clerk a letter setting forth the basis for his/her contention that the
suspension or revocation is erroneous within five days after receipt of
(4) By any other method or service authorized pursuant to Article III of
CPLR.
B. Notice by mail to owners residing out of state. If the person or persons
or any of them to whom said notice is directed do not reside in the
County of Rockland and have no known place of business therein, the
same may be served by delivering to or leaving with such person or
persons or either of them a copy of said notice; if said person or persons
cannot be found with a due-diligence search, then by posting a copy of
the same in a manner aforesaid and depositing a copy thereof in a post
office in the Village of Suffern, enclosed in a sealed wrapper addressed
to said person or persons at his/her last known place of residence with
the postage paid thereon, and said posting and mailing a copy of said
notice shall be equivalent to personal service of said notice.
A. Rental permits.
(1) No rental property and/or building as defined herein shall be
occupied by anyone, including any tenants, without a valid rental
permit.
(2) The Building Department shall issue such permit after receipt of a
valid landlord registration statement which complies with all of the
requirements set forth herein. No rental permit shall be issued for
any property for which there are outstanding real property taxes,
water or sewer fees or any other outstanding amount owed with
respect to the property to the Village of Suffern. Such rental permit
shall be valid until such time as the owner or any new owner is
required to file a new landlord registration statement.
(3) The owner and/or managing agent must present the previous rental
permit at the time that the new landlord registration statement is
submitted.
B. The fee schedule applicable to the inspections required by this chapter
shall be set forth in the Standard Schedule of Fees.
§ 215-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-9
1:225
any such notice of suspension or revocation. The Board of Trustees shall
promptly provide an opportunity for the appellant to be heard, either in
writing or in person, and shall either affirm, reverse or modify the
suspension or revocation.
§ 215-10. Penalties for offenses.
Violations of this chapter will constitute an offense within the meaning of
the Penal Law of the State of New York, punishable as provided for herein.
In addition, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
municipal infraction and will be subject to applicable penalties under this
chapter, and the Village of Suffern may choose to enforce this chapter as a
criminal or civil matter, or both. Any owner who violates, disobeys, neglects
or refuses to comply with any of the terms of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $500. Each week a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense and so subject the owner to an additional fine
of up to $500. In addition, if the Village of Suffern chooses to proceed
under this chapter as a criminal offense, the violation of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine of up to $500 and/or up to 30 days in jail, it being
understood that each week a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense subjecting the offender to additional weekly fines of up to $500 and/
or additional jail sentences of up to 30 days.
Chapter 220
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 239.
Water — See Ch. 261.
Fees — See Ch. A275.
§ 215-9 SUFFERN CODE § 215-10
1:226
ARTICLE I
Infiltration Inflow Management Program
[Adopted 5-8-2006 by L.L. No. 3-200655]
§ 220-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this article is to reduce wet-weather peak inflow to the
sewage treatment plant to avoid violation of the Village's SPDES permit and
to reserve plant capacity for Village development requirements. In order to
avoid a moratorium or delay construction until the Village's sanitary sewer
infiltration and inflow work is complete, developers may contribute to offset
their new flow contribution and thereby accelerate the Village's ability to
make the required infiltration and inflow improvements.
§ 220-2. I/I contribution.
In order to create a fund sufficient to fund the required infiltration and
inflow work and improvements, an "I/I fee" in an amount set forth in the
Village of Suffern Standard Schedule of Fees shall be paid as a condition of
issuance of a certificate of occupancy or issuance of a wastewater discharge
permit or amendment thereto, except for one- and two-family homes, by any
person, corporation, or entity who:
§ 220-3. Application form; computation of fee; disposition of fees.
An applicant for site plan approval or subdivision approval and any
significant industrial user who proposes to increase wastewater flow above
existing permit limits shall complete an application regarding sewage
system flow on a form provided by the Village. Based on the fee set forth
in the Standard Schedule of Fees, the Superintendent of the Department
of Public Works shall compute the I/I fee, which shall be paid prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The fees so received shall be
maintained in a dedicated trust account to be used only for the purposes set
forth herein, including studies, engineering and construction to eliminate or
minimize infiltration and inflow.
A. Increases wastewater flow above the permit limits established for
significant industrial users; or
B. Is required to obtain site plan approval and is determined during the
review to have a substantial increase in wastewater flow as compared
to the existing use; that is, an increase of more than 2,000 gallons per
day.
55.Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former Arts. I and II as Arts. II and III.
§ 220-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-3
1:227

ARTICLE II
Sewer Use
[Adopted 5-29-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985]
§ 220-4. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of
terms and phrases as used in this article shall be as follows:
ACT OR THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Regional Administrator of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency or the Commissioner of the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation in the
event that the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation is delegated approval authority responsibility.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — May be a
principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the
industrial user is a corporation; a general partner or proprietor, if the
industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or a duly
authorized representative of the individuals designated above.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure five days at 20° C., expressed in terms of weight
and concentration (milligrams per liter).
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the
building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to a public sewer.
CHRONIC VIOLATIONS OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE LIMITS —
Those, in 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a sixmonth
period, which exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum
limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter.[Added
10-4-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010]
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus any additional pollutants
identified in the treatment work's SPDES permit if such pollutants are
treated to the degree required by the SPDES permit.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — Refers to the Superintendent of Public
Works of the Village of Suffern.
§ 220-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-4
1:229
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use to which
the only pollutant added is heat, such as air conditioning, cooling or
refrigeration.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the State of New York.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United
States Environmental Protection Agency or the Administrator or other
duly authorized official of said Agency.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a onetime basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as
campers, chemical toilets, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — All pollutants other than compatible
pollutants.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE — The introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works from any nondomestic source
regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL USER OR USER — A source of indirect discharge.
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of the treatment works,
its treatment, processes or operations, which contributes to a violation
of any requirement of the Village SPDES permit. The term includes
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the treatment works
in accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345), or any
criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act or more stringent state criteria.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies to a specific
category of industrial users.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or ground water.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section.
§ 220-4 SUFFERN CODE § 220-4
1:230
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated
by the context.
pH — The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the
concentration of hydrogen ions, expressed in grams per liter of
solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste discharged into water.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National
Pretreatment Standard, imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature
of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or
in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants to the
treatment works.
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — A user is in significant
noncompliance if its violation(s) meet(s) one or more of the following
criteria:[Added 1-3-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those, in 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during
a six-month period, which exceed (by any magnitude) the daily
maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter.
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period, which equal or exceed
the product of the daily maximum limits multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease; TRC
= 1.2 for all other pollutants);
(2)
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or long-term average) that the Superintendent of Public Works
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering
the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or
has resulted in the Superintendent of Public Works need to exercise
emergency authority;
(4)
§ 220-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-4
1:231
SIGNIFICANT USER — Any user of the Village wastewater disposal
system who:
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
SPDES PERMIT — The State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
permit issued by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation pursuant to Titles 7 and 8 of Article 17 of the
Environmental Conservation Law.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
STATE — The State of New York.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control
mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(5)
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
(6)
(7) Failure to report accurately any noncompliance;
Any other violation which the Superintendent of Public Works
determines will adversely affect the implementation or operation of
the local pretreatment program.
(8)
Is subject to promulgated categorical pretreatment standards
(NRDC Consent Decree Industries);
(1)
Is found to have significant impact, either singly or in combination
with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment
system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality or air
emissions generated by the system;
(2)
Is a manufacturing industry using, on an annual basis, more than
10,000 pounds or 1,000 gallons of raw material containing priority
pollutants or substances of concern and discharging a measurable
amount of these pollutants to the sewer system; or
(3)
Contributes more than 5% of the flow or load carried by the
treatment plant.
(4)
§ 220-4 SUFFERN CODE § 220-4
1:232
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Public Works or other
such person designated by the Village to supervise the operation of its
treatment works or his duly authorized representative,
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TECHNICAL REVIEW CRITERIA (TRC) VIOLATIONS — [Added
10-4-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010]
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the EPA
pursuant to Section 307a of the Act.
TREATMENT WORKS — The Village of Suffern wastewater treatment
plant, including any sewers that convey wastewater to the treatment
plant.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the Village treatment system.
Those, in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period, which equal
or exceed the product of the daily maximum limits multiplied by the
applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease; TRC
= 1.2 for all other pollutants);
(1)
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or long-term average) that the Superintendent of Public Works
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering
the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
(2)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or
has resulted in the Superintendent of Public Works need to exercise
emergency authority;
(3)
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control
mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(4)
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
(5)
(6) Failure to report accurately any noncompliance;
Any other violation which the Superintendent of Public Works
determines will adversely affect the implementation or operation of
the local pretreatment program.
(7)
§ 220-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-4
1:233
§ 220-5. Deposit of waste on land prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, deposit or permit to be deposited in
an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the Village
of Suffern any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable
waste.
§ 220-6. Discharge of polluted waters prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Village of
Suffern any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters.
§ 220-7. Construction and maintenance of septic tanks, privies and
cesspools.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage within the Village.
§ 220-8. Private disposal systems.
Except where specifically permitted by the Superintendent, there shall be
no private disposal system in the Village of Suffern. Where permitted, they
shall be properly constructed, operated and maintained and shall be subject
to all the rules and regulations established by the Superintendent, as well
as to all requirements of the State and County Departments of Health.
§ 220-9. Permit for building sewers required.
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent of Public Works.
VILLAGE — The Village of Suffern, New York.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and
stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which
is contributed into or permitted to enter the treatment works.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation or
drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which
are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any
portion thereof.
B. Word usage. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 220-4 SUFFERN CODE § 220-10
1:234
§ 220-10. Application for permit; fee. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L.
No. 3-1990]
The property owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the Village. The permit application shall be supplemented by
any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Superintendent of Public Works. A permit and inspection
fee as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees in the Village Standard
Schedule of Fees56 shall be paid to the Village of Suffern at the time the
application is filed.
§ 220-11. Fee for installation and connection. [Amended 3-12-1990
by L.L. No. 3-1990]
An installation and connection fee as set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees in the Village Standard Schedule of Fees57 shall be paid to the
Village of Suffern by the property owner or his agent at the time that an
application is made for the replacement or installation of any sewer service
connection, in addition to any other fees required herein.
§ 220-12. Separate sewer for each building required; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, then the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer. The Village assumes no
responsibility for damages resulting from installation of such sewers or for
difficulties arising from the operation thereof.
§ 220-13. Use of old sewers; inspection.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent of
Public Works, to meet all requirements of this article.
§ 220-14. Building sewer specifications and installation
requirements.
A. Pipes. The building sewer shall be cast-iron soil pipe conforming to
ASTM Specification A74-69; PVC sewer pipe meeting the requirements
of ASTM Specification D-3034 (SDR 35) Type PSM polyvinyl chloride, or
equal, or other suitable material approved by the Superintendent of
Public Works. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the
building sewer that is located within 10 feet of a water service pipe
shall be constructed of cast-iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast-iron
pipe with leaded joints may be required by the Superintendent of Public
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. A275. Fees.
§ 220-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-14
1:235
Works where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If
installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of castiron
soil pipe, except that nonmetallic material may be approved if laid
on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the Superintendent
of Public Works.
B. Size and slope. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject
to the approval of the Superintendent of Public Works, but in no event
shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch
pipe shall be not less than 1/4 inch per foot, unless approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
C. Elevation; depth. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be
brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No
building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any
bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be
sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be
laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible.
Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and
fittings.
D. Excavations and backfilling. All excavations required for the installation
of a building sewer shall be open-trench work unless otherwise
approved by the Superintendent of Public Works. Pipelaying and
backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification
C12-19, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been
inspected.
E. Joints and connections. All joints and connections shall be gastight and
watertight. The type of joint and method of installation shall be suitable
to the type of pipe employed and is subject to the approval of the
Superintendent of Public Works.
F. Connection to public sewer. In the absence of a suitably located Ybranch
a special sewer pipe connection fitting shall be installed. Such
fitting shall be subject to approval by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
G. Notice of connection; supervision required. The applicant for the
building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent of Public Works
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent of Public Works. All work for the installation of such
service lines shall be performed by a contractor possessing a current
plumbing license issued by the County of Rockland. [Amended
7-11-2011 by L.L. No. 12-2011; 6-10-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
H. Guarding of excavations; restoration. All excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so
as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and
§ 220-14 SUFFERN CODE § 220-14
1:236
§ 220-15. Service outside Village. [Added 5-28-1986 by L.L. No.
3-1986]
No sewage service shall be provided to any premises located outside the
Village of Suffern unless, upon application to the Board of Trustees, the
Board of Trustees determines that exceptional or unusual circumstances
exist and that it would be in the best interests of the Village of Suffern to
allow such service. If the Board of Trustees permits such service, it shall
determine the rate to be charged for said service in an amount not less than
twice the charge to users located within the Village of Suffern.
§ 220-16. Discharge of certain waters prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water
or unpolluted industrial process water to a building sewer or building drain
which, in turn, is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 220-17. Discharge of unpolluted drainage.
Stormwater, industrial cooling water, unpolluted process waters and all
other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designed as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the Superintendent of Public Works. Anyone discharging
cooling water or unpolluted process water shall also apply for an SPDES
permit issued by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation. Such discharge shall be subject to all state and federal
regulations.
§ 220-18. Prohibited wastes. [Amended 10-4-2010 by L.L. No.
8-2010; 1-3-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
The discharge of the following wastes into public sewers is prohibited:
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the Village.
A. Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity,
are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interactions with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to
the treatment works or its operation. This includes, but is not limited to,
wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.)
using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. Prohibited materials
include but are not limited to: gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene,
toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides.
B. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in
a sewer or other interference with the operation of the treatment
works, such as but not limited to grease, garbage with particles greater
than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal entrails or tissues, paunch
§ 220-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-18
1:237
§ 220-19. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
§ 220-20. Specific pollutant limitations.
manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper,
wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing
wastes.
C. Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 9.0 or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the
treatment works.
D. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly
or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the
sewers for their maintenance and repair. This includes, but is not
limited to, pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
E. Any wastewater having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.) or in
such quantities as to result in a temperature of the influent to the
treatment works exceeding 104° F. (40° C.), unless USEPA, upon
request of the Village of Suffern, approves alternate temperature limits.
F. Any slugs or pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD,
etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will
cause interference.
G. Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW,
but in no case discharges with pH lower than 5.0, unless the works are
specifically designed to accommodate such discharges.
H. Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the POTW.
A. More stringent limitations. Upon promulgation of the Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standard for a particular industrial
subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations
imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall
immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article.
B. Modification of Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The
Village may modify the federal pollutant discharge limits if the
requirements contained in Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations
Section 403.7, General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New
Sources of Pollution, are fulfilled and approval from the approval
authority is obtained.
§ 220-18 SUFFERN CODE § 220-20
1:238
§ 220-21. Accidental discharges and slugs.
A. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the
following:
Constituent
Limitations
(milligrams per liter)
Ammonia 40
Methylene-blue (active
substances)
50
Arsenic 0.025
Cadmium 0.005
Chromium 0.35
Copper 0.30
Cyanide 0.50
Lead 0.05
Mercury 0.01
Nickel 2.0
Silver 0.002
Zinc 1.0
Volatile organics
Chloroform 0.10
1, 1, 1, — Trichloroethane 7.0
Methylene chloride 2.0
Toluene 0.70
Total organic halogens 4.0
Polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs)
None
B. In the event that an industrial discharge represents less than 1% of the
total flow rate to the treatment facility, the implementation of the single
concentration discharge limit shall be at the discretion of the
Superintendent of Public Works.
C. State regulations and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
when they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations
or those in this article.
A. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances, including slugs, regulated by
this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's own cost and
expense. In the case of an accidental discharge or a slug, it is the user's
§ 220-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-21
1:239
§ 220-22. Charges and fees.
The Village may adopt charges and fees to provide for the recovery of
costs from users of the Village's wastewater disposal system for the
implementation of the program established herein. These may include:
§ 220-23. Wastewater contribution and discharge permits.
own cost and expense. In the case of an accidental discharge or a slug,
it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify
the treatment works of the incident. A notice shall be permanently
posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge or slug.
B. Within five days following an accidental discharge or slug, the user
shall submit to the Superintendent a detailed written report describing
the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to
prevent similar future occurrences.
A. Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
pretreatment program.
B. Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
C. Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction.
D. Fees for permit applications.
E. Fees for filing appeals.
F. Fees for consistent removal by the Village of pollutants otherwise
subject to federal pretreatment standards.
G. Other fees as the Village may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
A. Permit required. All existing significant users contributing to the
treatment works shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit within
180 days after the effective date of this article, and all significant users
proposing to contribute to the treatment works shall obtain a
wastewater discharge permit before connecting.
B. Permit application.
(1) Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall
complete and file with the Village an application in the form
prescribed by the Village and accompanied by a fee as established
by resolution of the Board of Trustees in the Village Standard
Schedule of Fees.58 Existing users shall apply for a wastewater
contribution permit within 30 days after the effective date of this
article, and proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 220-21 SUFFERN CODE § 220-23
1:240
connecting to or contributing to the treatment works. In support of
the application, the user shall submit such information as may be
deemed necessary by the Village to evaluate the permit application.
This includes but is not limited to the following: [Amended
3-12-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
(a) Standard Industrial Classification number according to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the
Budget, 1972, as amended.
(b) A description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be
discharged.
(c) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those mentioned in §§ 220-16 through 220-21 of this
article, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory.
(d) Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by any Village, state or
federal pretreatment standards and a statement regarding
whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis. If not, the user shall provide a schedule which
will show how it intends to effect the necessary changes to
meet such standards.
(2) The Village will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of
the data furnished, the Village may issue a wastewater contribution
permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
C. Permit modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation of a
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater
contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised
to require compliance with such standard within the time prescribed by
such standard.
D. Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the Village. Permits
may contain the following:
(1) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
(2) Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
(3) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities.
§ 220-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-23
1:241
§ 220-24. Compliance reports.
(4) Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule.
(5) Compliance schedules.
(6) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports. (See § 220-24.)
(7) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge, as specified by the Village, and affording
Village officials access thereto.
(8) Requirements for notification of the Village of any new introduction
of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume
or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into
the wastewater treatment system.
(9) Requirements for notification of slug discharges.
(10) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Village to ensure
compliance with this article.
E. Permit duration.
(1) Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed
five years. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of
180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The
terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification
by the Village during the term of the permit. The user shall be
informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days
prior to the effective day of change. Any changes or new conditions
in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.
(2) A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or
transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or
a new or changed operation without the approval of the Village.
A. Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a
new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the treatment works, any user subject to such
standards shall submit to the Superintendent a report indicating the
nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the
regulated process and the average and maximum daily flow for these
process units. The report shall state whether the applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, what additional action is necessary to bring the user
into compliance. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
§ 220-23 SUFFERN CODE § 220-24
1:242
§ 220-25. Measurements, tests and analyses.
§ 220-26. Control manhole.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property served by
a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide and maintain at
his expense a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole shall
be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 220-27. Right of entry for inspection and testing.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Village
and United States Environmental Protection Agency and New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation representatives bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties at
reasonable times for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the public sewers. They
shall also have the right to set up on the user's property such devices
as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations and may at
reasonable times have access to conduct sampling or metering operations
representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified
professional.
B. Periodic compliance reports. Any user subject to a pretreatment
standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard or,
in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into
the treatment works, shall submit to the Superintendent periodic
compliance reports indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment
standards. Such reports shall be submitted during the months of June
and December unless required more frequently in the pretreatment
standards or by the Superintendent.
A. Except where otherwise required by the Administrator pursuant to
Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 and
amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the
Administrator, all measurements, tests and analyses of the
characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this
article shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Sewage and shall be determined from
suitable samples collected at the control manhole provided for herein.
In the event that no such special manhole has been required, the
sampling point shall be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
B. Sampling methods, locations, times, durations and frequencies are to
be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the
Superintendent.
§ 220-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-27
1:243
and may at reasonable times have access to and copy any records and
inspect any monitoring equipment or method required by this article or any
permits issued thereunder. Where a user has security measures in force, the
user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that
such personnel will be permitted to enter without delay.
§ 220-28. Pretreatment facilities.
Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the
Village or to comply with a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard
shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed
plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to the Village for review and shall be acceptable to the Village
before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facility as necessary to provide an acceptable effluent under
the provisions of this article.
§ 220-29. Confidential information.
§ 220-30. Permit suspension; legal action.
A. The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees are authorized
to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater
collection system.
B. Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs
and from inspectors shall be available to the public or other
governmental agency without restriction unless the industrial user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Village that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection
as trade secrets of the user. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
Confidential information shall be available to any governmental agency
for uses related to the Village's Sewer Use Local Law, SPDES permit
and/or pretreatment program, provided that such information shall be
used by the agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the information.
A. The Superintendent may suspend the wastewater treatment service
and/or a wastewater contribution permit when, in his opinion, such
suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the
environment, cause interference to the treatment works or cause the
Village to violate any condition of its SPDES permit.
§ 220-27 SUFFERN CODE § 220-30
1:244
§ 220-31. Permit revocation.
Any user who violates the following conditions of this article or applicable
state and federal regulations is subject to having his permit revoked as
provided for herein:
§ 220-32. Show-cause hearing.
B. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater contribution
permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the
event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the Village may take such steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate severance of the sewer connection.
C. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into
the Village's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of
this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements or any order of
the Village, the Village Attorney may commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Supreme Court of
Rockland County.
A. Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge or any failure of a user to report
significant changes therein.
B. Refusal of reasonable access to a user's premises for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring.
C. Violation of conditions of the permit.
A. The Village may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized
discharge to enter the treatment works to show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be
served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held
by the Board of Trustees regarding the violation, the reasons why the
action is to be taken and the proposed enforcement action and directing
the user to show cause before the Board of Trustees why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall
be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, at least 10 days before the hearing. Service may be made on
any agent or officer of a corporation.
B. The Board of Trustees may itself conduct the hearing and take the
evidence or may designate a Village official to:
(1) Issue in the name of the Board of Trustees notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such
hearings.
(2) Take the evidence.
§ 220-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-32
1:245
§ 220-33. Damaging or tampering with sewage works.
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is part of the municipal sewage works. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct.
§ 220-34. Written notice of violation.
Any person found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this article,
except § 220-33, shall be served by the Village with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
§ 220-35. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an
amount not less than $300 nor more than $1,000 for each violation. Each
day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate
offense.
§ 220-36. Liability for loss or damage.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable
to the Village for expense, loss or damage occasioned the Village by reason
of such violation.
§ 220-37. Falsification of information.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or wastewater
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations, to
the Board of Trustees for action thereon.
C. At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be
under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded,
will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the
hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
D. After the Board of Trustees has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following
a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances
are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary
and appropriate may be issued.
§ 220-32 SUFFERN CODE § 220-37
1:246
permit or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate
any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both.
§ 220-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-37
1:247

ARTICLE III
Sewer Rents
[Adopted 4-12-1982 by L.L. No. 4-1982]
§ 220-38. Legislative intent.
It is the intention of the Village of Suffern to provide, by the adoption of this
article, for the establishment and imposition of sewer rents for the Village
of Suffern as authorized by Article 14-F of the General Municipal Law, to
ensure a proportional distribution of operation and maintenance costs to
each user and to utilize the sewer rents as the principal source of revenue
for the operation and maintenance of the sewer system and treatment plant
and for payment of principal and interest for all obligations in connection
with capital expenditures for the sewer system and treatment plant.
§ 220-39. Sewer Rent Fund.
Revenues derived from collection of sewer rents, including penalties and
interest shall be credited to a separate fund to be denominated as the
"Sewer Rent Fund," and moneys contained in such fund shall be used
and expended in accordance with the provisions of § 453 of the General
Municipal Law of the State of New York and in accordance with the
following priorities set forth in § 453 of the General Municipal Law:
§ 220-40. Sewer rent based on water usage.
A. For the payment of the costs of operation, maintenance and repairs of
the sewer system and treatment plant.
B. For the payment of the interest on and amortization of or payment of
indebtedness which has been or shall be incurred for the construction
of the sewer system and treatment plant.
C. For the construction of sewage treatment and disposal works with
necessary appurtenances, including pumping stations, or for the
extension, enlargement or replacement of or additions to such sewer
systems or part or parts thereof.
A. The Board of Trustees shall impose a scale of charges for the use of the
sewer system and treatment plant on or prior to May 1 and November 1
of each year. The amount of the sewer rents shall be based on the
consumption of water and shall apply to all users of the Village of
Suffern sewer system and treatment plant. [Amended 10-28-1997 by
L.L. No. 8-1997]
B. The Board of Trustees may semiannually determine by amendment to
this article to change the amount of the sewer rent applicable to the
Village of Suffern. Said change, if any, shall be determined prior to May
1 and November 1 and shall be billed to users of the sewer system and
treatment plant at the same time, or as close to the same time as is
practical, as the Village water bills are rendered. [Amended
§ 220-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-40
1:249
§ 220-41. Surcharges.
6-13-1983 by L.L. No. 4-1983; 7-18-1994 by L.L. No. 8-1994;
12-20-1995 by L.L. No. 8-1995; 10-28-1997 by L.L. No. 8-1997]
C. The sewer rent shall be based upon the amount of water consumed by a
user, as determined in the last water consumption meter reading made
in or about April of each year. [Amended 4-9-1984 by L.L. No.
3-1984; 7-18-1994 by L.L. No. 8-1994; 12-20-1995 by L.L. No.
8-1995; 10-28-1997 by L.L. No. 8-1997]
D. The Board of Trustees shall determine the annual sewer rent by
application of the following formula: the total anticipated cost for
operation and maintenance of the sewer system and treatment plant
and the payment for principal and interest for payment of indebtedness
incurred for the construction of the sewer system and treatment plant
less miscellaneous revenues divided by the total water consumed in the
Village as shown by the water consumption readings which form the
basis of the previous May water bills. The quotient so determined shall
be the annual sewer rent rate for the year, and the annual sewer rent
due from each user shall be determined by multiplying the quotient by
the water consumed by each user during the six-month period, as
shown on the previous May water bills. The semiannual sewer rent due
from each user shall be determined by dividing the annual sewer rent
due from each user by two. [Amended 7-18-1994 by L.L. No.
8-1994; 12-20-1995 by L.L. No. 8-1995]
E. A minimum yearly sewer rent shall be established by the Board of
Trustees and may be revised, from time to time, by amendment of this
article. Said minimum rate shall be utilized only in cases of new
construction for which a full six-month history of water consumption as
shown on an August water bill is not available.
F. Whenever a user conveys property which is subject to a sewer use
charge and the vendor so notifies the Village, the Village shall prorate
the charge to the owner of the premises based upon the previous
August water reading and the portion of the billing period for which the
user owned the premises.
G. If no water reading can be made because the user or owner refuses to
admit representatives of the Village to read the water meter, or if no
reading can be made or if the reading is erroneous because the water
meter was broken or malfunctioned, the bill of the uses shall be
estimated, such estimate being based upon the history of usage at said
premises.
A. In order to ensure a proportional distribution of the operation and
maintenance cost to each user, any user who shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any wastewater which contains a five-day biochemical
oxygen demand, as defined in § 220-4 of the Code of the Village of
§ 220-40 SUFFERN CODE § 220-41
1:250
§ 220-42. Sewer Rent Appeal Board.
§ 220-43. Collection.
Suffern, greater than 400 parts per million by weight shall be
surcharged in accordance with Subsection B herein.
B. Any user who violates the standard set forth in Subsection A herein
shall, in addition to its sewer rent, pay a surcharge computed as
follows:
surcharge = sewer rent x (average daily BOD - 400)/400 x 0.20
C. The surcharge shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as
the sewer rent. The methodology for establishment of the surcharge is
shown in Appendix A (§ 220-48).
A. An appeal board to be known as the "Sewer Rent Appeal Board" and to
be composed of three members, to be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Board of Trustees, is hereby created. The terms of the
first three members shall be staggered such that the term of a member
will expire at the end of each official year for three years, the first such
term expiring on April 4, 1983. Upon the expiration of the term of each
of the three persons first appointed, the term of appointment shall be
for three years.
B. Any individual or legal entity may appeal to the Sewer Rent Appeal
Board if he or it believes that a substantial portion of the water
delivered to its premises, upon which the current bill has been
rendered, has been utilized or diverted on a regular or continuing basis
such that it has not flowed into the sewer system or if he or it can
demonstrate a significant change in water usage since the water meter
reading upon which the sewer rent is based. The burden of proof shall
be upon the appellant to demonstrate that a substantial portion of the
water delivered was utilized or diverted on a regular or continuing
basis such that it has not flowed into the sewer system or that there has
been a significant change in water usage since the water meter reading
upon which the sewer rent is based. Based upon the evidence presented
to the Sewer Rent Appeal Board, it may determine that only a
percentage of the volume of water delivered shall be used in
determining the user's sewer rent. All such appeals must be filed in the
office of the Village Clerk by August 15. A decision of the Sewer Rent
Appeal Board becomes final when filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
The decision of the Appeal Board shall be sent to the appellant.
A. Bills shall be rendered semiannually on or about May 15 and November
15 of each year and are due and payable within 30 days from such
billing date. [Amended 7-18-1994 by L.L. No. 8-1994; 12-20-1995
by L.L. No. 8-1995]
§ 220-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-43
1:251
§ 220-44. Rents established; minimum rent. [Last amended
4-11-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016, effective 6-1-2016 ]
§ 220-45. Toxic pollutants.
Any user who discharges a toxic pollutant which causes an increase in the
cost of managing the effluent or the sludge at the wastewater treatment
plant shall pay for such increased costs.
§ 220-46. Inconsistent agreements.
The sewer rental charge established herein shall take precedence over any
terms or conditions between the Village and users which are inconsistent
with the requirements of the article.
B. All sewer rent bills not paid within 30 days from the billing date shall be
assessed a late charge of 10% of the gross amount of the bill and an
additional penalty of 2% of the sewer rent due and late charges if not
paid within 90 days of the date due. [Amended 4-11-2005 by L.L. No.
3-2005]
C. The sewer rents shall constitute a lien upon the real property served,
and the lien shall be prior and superior to every other lien or claim,
except the lien of an existing tax, assessment or other lawful charge
imposed by or for the State of New York or a political subdivision
thereof, and may be enforced as provided in § 452, Subdivision 4, of the
General Municipal Law.
A. The sewer rent shall be established and may be changed by local law
following a public hearing thereon. The sewer rate shall be $7.93 per
100 cubic feet of water consumed for properties located in the Village
of Suffern.
B. The minimum sewer rent shall be $25 per billing period.
C. The Board of Trustees may allow properties located outside the
corporate limits of the Village of Suffern to access and utilize the Village
sewage system if it is determined that all aspects of the system possess
sufficient excess capacity. If it is subsequently determined that any
aspect of the system is insufficient, the Village may terminate such
outside the Village access upon such notice as the Board of Trustees
deems to be reasonable. Such outside users shall be charged at the rate
of $8.61 per 100 cubic feet of water used as reflected on the bill
provided by their water supplier. Such user shall provide copies of such
water bills to the Village Clerk within five days of receipt of the same in
order for the Village to calculate the applicable sewer rent. If the
outside user fails to do so, the Village will render an estimated sewer
rent. If such outside user fails to provide such water bill upon demand,
the Village may terminate service upon 30 days' written notice. In any
event, the minimum bill chargeable to an outside user shall be $25 per
billing period.
§ 220-43 SUFFERN CODE § 220-47
1:252
§ 220-47. Construal of provisions.
This article shall be construed in a manner consistent with the provisions of
Article 14-F of the General Municipal Law.
§ 220-48. Appendix A.
Appendix A
Formula for Surcharge for BOD5 in Excess of Average
Concentration Assumed as 400 Milligrams Per Liter
Total annual budget = X
Portion for debt service = 0.35X
Portion for operation and
maintenance of collection
system =
0.05X
Portion for treatment = 0.60X
Assume BOD5 affects only
salaries and energy
Salaries at 66% of treatment
cost =
0.66
(0.6X)
Energy at 10% of treatment
cost
0.10
(0.6X)
Estimated effect of BOD5 on
salaries =
50%
Estimated effect of BOD5 on
energy =
50%
Therefore, salary surcharge
= 0.50 x 0.66 (0.6X) =
0.198X
And energy surcharge =
0.50 x 0.10 (0.6X) =
0.030X
Therefore, surcharge = 0.2 x
sewer rent x
BOD5 – 400
400
0.228X
§ 220-49. Public notification. [Added 10-4-2010 by L.L. No. 8-2010;
amended 1-3-2011 by L.L. No. 1-2011]
The Village of Suffern shall provide public notification in the daily
newspaper with the largest circulation in the area of users which were
in significant noncompliance of local or USEPA pretreatment standards or
requirements since the last such notice. The frequency of such notices shall
be at least once per year.
§ 220-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-49
1:253
Chapter 224
SHOPPING CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 168.
Commercial parking areas — See Ch. 189.
Fees — See Ch. A275.
§ 224-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to eliminate danger and inconvenience to the
public caused by the abandonment of shopping carts in public places such
as streets and sidewalks within the Village of Suffern, where the abandoned
carts may become an obstacle to traffic and a hazard to pedestrians.
§ 224-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall be included in the words or phrases used:
ABANDON — Leaving, discarding, dumping, throwing or placing of
personal property in public places.
CART OR SHOPPING CART — Any rolling or nonrolling basket or
container and any part or parts thereof commonly used in supermarkets
or self-service stores as a conveyor of goods, wares and merchandise.
OWNER — The merchant or purveyor of foods or other goods who
provides patrons with shopping carts and the person responsible for
cart-tag identification under the provisions of this chapter.
PERSON — A natural person of either sex, a corporation, a partnership,
an association, a joint-stock company, a society and all other entities
capable of being sued.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, crosswalk, thoroughfare, offstreet
parking area, parking field, municipal parking facility, park,
parking space, sidewalk, vacant lot, plot, parcel of land and all other
space or places available to or used by the general public.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works of the Village of Suffern.59
VILLAGE — The incorporated area of the Village of Suffern.
B. Word usage. The words "or" and "and," as used herein, may be
construed interchangeably where such meaning is necessary to
effectuate the purpose of this chapter.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 220-49 SUFFERN CODE § 224-3
1:254
§ 224-3. Seizure and removal of abandoned carts.60
The Superintendent and Department of Public Works employees are hereby
authorized to seize and remove or cause to be removed any abandoned
shopping cart from any public place within the Village, without notice, and
shall take or cause the same to be taken to a facility within the Village for
redemption or disposition as hereinafter provided.
§ 224-4. Redemption.
§ 224-5. Disposal.
A. Whenever the Superintendent removes or causes to be removed any
shopping carts having identification of ownership or right of possession,
notice of the removal shall be sent by certifed mail, return receipt
requested, advising of the removal, the facility to which it was removed
and the amount necessary to redeem the article.
B. Any shopping carts removed from public places within the Village may
be redeemed by the owner thereof any time prior to the disposal by the
Village by tendering to the Department of Public Works during regular
business hours at its office the sum as set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees in the Standard Schedule of Fees61 for each day or part thereof
that said property is held by the Village after the owner has been duly
notified by certified mail.62
C. The Department of Public Works shall require satisfactory proof of
ownership or lawful right to possession of the property sought prior to
release. Any return of property by the Department of Public Works to a
person claiming the same pursuant to this chapter shall be an absolute
defense to the Village against any other person claiming the same.63
A. The Department of Public Works may dispose of all articles of personal
property held by the Village for a period in excess of 14 days at a public
auction held pursant to notice.64
B. Public notice of the auction shall be given by publication once in a
newspaper designated by the Board of Trustees as an official
newspaper for that purpose and by posting on the signboard
maintained by the Village Clerk at least five days prior to the auction
and shall contain the time and place of the auction, together with a brief
description of the articles offered for sale.
C. In the event that the property or part thereof remains unsold at the
public auction, the Department of Public Works may reoffer the same
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 224-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 224-5
1:255
Chapter 226
SIGN CONTRACTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 266. Fees — See Ch. A275.
§ 226-1. License required.
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of erecting,
altering, repairing or restoring signs for any of which signs a sign permit
is required by the applicable sections of the Code of the Village of Suffern
shall be required to register the name of such person, firm or corporation
with the Village Clerk and obtain a license as provided herein.
§ 226-2. Application procedure.
for sale at another public auction or may sell or otherwise dispose of
any unsold articles in any manner permitted by law. Any sale or other
disposition shall be without liability on the part of the Village to the
owner of the property or other person having an interest therein.65
D. All proceeds received from the redemption and sale of the personal
property as hereinbefore provided are to be applied to the account of
the Department of Public Works in order to defer the cost of enforcing
the provisions of this chapter.66
A. Application for the registration and obtaining of a license by
contractors shall be submitted to the Village Clerk on forms supplied by
him/her and, in addition to any other pertinent information he may
reasonably deem necessary, shall include:
(1) A statement giving the corporate name or firm name of the
contractor.
(2) In the case of a firm, corporation or partnership, the name and
address of the principal office of said firm or corporation and the
names and addresses of all officers, directors, managerial
employees and stockholders owning, of record or beneficially, 5%
or more of the outstanding stock of any class of said corporation.
(3) In the case of a partnership, the names and addresses of all parties,
whether general, special or limited.
B. Additional information.
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 224-5 SUFFERN CODE § 226-2
1:256
§ 226-3. Fee.
§ 226-4. Standards; sign permit required.
All work shall be done in accordance with the applicable codes and laws of
the Village of Suffern. A contractor may not erect any sign in the Village of
Suffern (except specifically exempted signs set forth in the sign regulations)
unless a sign permit therefor has been obtained from the Planning Board
of the Village of Suffern. It shall be the responsibility and obligation of the
contractor to either obtain a sign permit for each sign to be erected or to
verify that a sign permit has been issued therefor. The contractor shall only
(1) This application shall also contain the number of years such person,
firm or corporation has been in the contracting business at the
current location or any prior locations, including the addresses of
any such prior locations, if any.
(2) The application shall indicate, for both the current and any prior
periods of time or locations at which a contracting business has
been conducted, all other trade names, if any, by which any such
contracting business was conducted or in which any of the persons
listed in answers to Subsection A(2) above were part of for each
such prior business.
C. The application shall contain a statement that the applicant has read
and is fully familiar with the sign regulations of the Village of Suffern,67
and that he understands that all signs erected in the Village of Suffern
shall comply with those regulations.
D. The applicant shall be approved and the license issued or disapproved
within 15 days after filing.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall be licensed under this chapter or
be licensed after revocation of a license pursuant to § 226-5 of this
chapter unless and until there has been a determination by the Code
Enforcement Officer that the applicant is capable of compliance with
the requirements hereof and has demonstrated sufficient capability and
proficiency in his or its past business history to justify a reasonable
belief that such compliance will occur and unless and until there is paid
to the Clerk, to the order of the Village of Suffern, an annual fee as set
by resolution of the Board of Trustees in the Standard Schedule of
Fees.68
B. Any person, firm or corporation whose license has been revoked three
times shall be presumed not capable or proficient in his or its trade and
shall not be permitted to be licensed under this chapter.
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Also, see Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 226-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-4
1:257
erect a sign in compliance with a duly issued sign permit. The workmanship
shall conform to generally accepted good practice in the trade.
§ 226-5. Grounds for revocation of license.
The Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Suffern shall revoke the
license of any contractor licensed hereunder who shall be guilty of any one
or more of the following acts or omissions:
§ 226-6. License revocation procedure.
A. Fraud or misrepresentation or concealment of a material fact in the
information given upon initial issue of a license or upon licensing after
revocation.
B. Violation of the applicable sections of the Code of the Village of Suffern
or any other ordinance or statute which governs the activities or nature
of work performed by the contractor in the erection, alteration or
maintenance of signs.
C. Erecting a sign without having obtained sign approval from the
Planning Board.
D. Violation of the provisions of a sign approval or permit.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer may file a complaint against any licensed
contractor. Such complaint shall be in writing and signed by the person
filing the same. The complaint shall contain a statement of facts setting
forth the specific fact relating to the violation of this chapter of the
Village of Suffern Code or any local law, ordinance or statute pertaining
to the erection, alteration or maintenance of signs.
B. Upon a complaint being filed in the manner and form herein prescribed,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall forthwith issue a notice, in writing,
directing the contractor in question to file a written answer within 10
days after the service of notice, answering the charges or showing
cause, if any, why his license should not be revoked. A copy of the
complaint shall be served with said notice.
C. Failure of the contractor in question to file a written answer within said
10 days may be deemed an admission by him of the commission of the
act or violations cited in the complaint, and his license thereupon may
be revoked forthwith by the Code Enforcement Officer, without further
evidence.
D. In the event that the contractor in question shall file a written answer
within the time period prescribed in the notice, a hearing shall be
scheduled, notice of which hearing shall be served no less than 10 days
prior to the date fixed for the hearing. Said hearing shall be held by and
before the Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern, who shall
thereafter make all decisions as to fact and law concerning revocation
of the license. At the hearing, the Code Enforcement Officer and
§ 226-4 SUFFERN CODE § 226-6
1:258
§ 226-7. Service of notices.
Whenever notice is required or permitted to be given by any section of this
chapter, such notice may be effected by personal service upon the licensee,
if an individual, or any general partner, if a partnership, or upon any
corporate officer, if a corporation, or alternatively, to any of the foregoing
by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last address listed in
the Village Clerk's office in conjunction with the registration information.
It shall be the duty of each licensed contractor to keep the Village Clerk
advised of any subsequent change of address. Upon failure of a contractor
to comply with this requirement, any notice returned with the notation
"Unknown," "Moved" or "Not Claimed" shall be deemed proper service of all
notices required by this chapter.
§ 226-8. Procedure for relicensing after revocation.
Any person, firm or corporation whose license has been revoked under the
provisions of § 226-6 of this chapter may apply to be relicensed and have
his/her name or its name reentered upon the registration list, upon filing
the following:
§ 226-9. Penalties for offenses.70
Any person, firm or corporation or his/her or its respective agents, servants
or employees who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties in § 1-12 of Chapter 1,
General Provisions. Every week that such person, firm or corporation or
his/her or its respective agents, servants or employees shall fail to comply
licensee shall each have the right to appear personally or by counsel
and cross-examine witnesses and produce witnesses and evidence in
their behalf. Counsel is required if the licensee is a corporation. A
certified court reporter shall be present at the contractor's expense,
and a complete transcript shall be presented to the Board of Trustees
of the Village of Suffern at no cost if an appeal is taken.
A. Certification by the Code Enforcement Officer to the effect that all
violations with reference to which the revocation was secured have
been corrected.
B. Proof that all loss caused by the act or omission for which the license
was revoked has been fully satisfied and that all conditions imposed by
the decision of the revocation have been complied with.
C. Payment of a license fee as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees in
the Standard Schedule of Fees.69
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Also see Ch. A275, Fees.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 226-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-9
1:259
with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate and additional
offense against the provisions thereof.
Chapter 228
SITE PLAN REGULATIONS
GENERAL REEFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 96.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 239.
Zoning — See Ch. 266.
Zoning and planning application fees — See
Ch. 267.
§ 226-9 SUFFERN CODE § 226-9
1:260
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 228-1. Statutory authority. [Amended 9-25-1996 by L.L. No.
5-1996]
Pursuant to § 7-725-a of the Village Law as amended, § 266-59 of the
Zoning Local Law of the Village of Suffern (hereinafter referred to as
the "Zoning Law")71 delegates final authority to the Planning Board for
approval of any site plan required by the Zoning Law. These regulations are
adopted pursuant to § 7-725-a of the Village Law to establish procedures
and standards for review of site plan applications.
§ 228-2. Applicability.
A. The provisions of these regulations apply to site plans required by
§ 266-59 of the Zoning Law of the Village of Suffern.
B. Site plan required. Except for one-family and two-family dwellings,
approval of a site plan by the Planning Board is required for:
(1) The development or redevelopment of any property or structure for
a new use;
(2) The expansion or relocation of any existing use;
(3) The paving of nonresidential parking areas and associated
driveways; or
(4) Any change of use of a property or structure.
C. Change of use. A change of use of a building, structure or lot is
interpreted for purposes of this chapter as:
(1) A change that results in a difference in the numerical listing or the
use column (permitted, accessory or special permit) for a use as
specified in § 266-22, Schedule of General Use Requirements;72
(2) A change in the off-street parking standards for a use as specified
in § 266-22, Schedule of General Use Requirements;
(3) A change in a building's facade.
D. Where site plan approval is required, applications for the issuance of a
building permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate of use must be
accompanied by a copy of the approved site plan bearing the signature
of the Planning Board Chairman. The continued validity of any
certificate of occupancy or certificate of use shall be subject to
continued conformity with such approved site plan and conditions.
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
72.Editor's Note: The Schedule of General Use Requirements is located at the end of Chapter
266, Zoning.
§ 228-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-2
1:261
§ 228-3. Definitions.
Definitions of terms used in these regulations shall be as set forth in Article
II of the Village of Suffern Zoning Law.73
Revisions of approved site plans shall be subject to the same approval
procedure.
E. Change of signage. A change of signage shall require sign plan approval
in accordance with § 228-26B.
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 228-2 SUFFERN CODE § 228-3
1:262
ARTICLE II
Considerations for Actions
§ 228-4. Specific considerations.
In considering and acting upon site plans, the Planning Board shall take
into consideration the recommendations of the Village Development Plan,
the public health, safety and welfare, the comfort and convenience of the
public in general and of the residents, employees, visitors and patrons of
the proposed development and of the immediate neighborhood in particular,
and may prescribe such appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be
required in order that the result of its action shall, to the maximum extent
possible, encourage the most appropriate use of land, taking into account:
A. The size, location, height, bulk, appearance, character, arrangement
and suitability of all buildings and facilities.
B. The safety, adequacy and convenience of vehicular and pedestrian
thoroughfares, parking and loading areas and areas related thereto.
C. The topography, landscaping and open spaces in relation to each other,
to the design of buildings and structures on the site, to pedestrian and
to vehicular traffic and to the protection of adjacent properties.
D. Appropriate levels of lighting to assure the safe movement of vehicles
and persons and their security, provided that such lighting shall not
create an undesirable impact on neighboring properties and streets.
E. Adequate design, construction and maintenance of stormwater
drainage systems to prevent the occurrence of periodic or continuous
downstream flooding.
F. The adequate provision of water supply, sanitary facilities, drainage
facilities and other similar services.
G. The adequate provision of fire protection, police protection, emergency
services and other community facilities and services.
H. Adequate access to the handicapped.
I. Adequate access to the rear of structures from public parking lots.
J. Appropriately screened locations for the storage, collection and
disposal of solid waste.
K. The adequate identification of establishments through appropriate
signage providing reasonable information to the public and which is in
harmony with the design of the site and buildings and with neighboring
properties.
L. The physical constraints imposed by natural resources, ensuring that
proper safeguards will be implemented to minimize impacts, including
§ 228-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-4
1:263
but not limited to soil erosion and sedimentation and air and water
pollution.
§ 228-4 SUFFERN CODE § 228-4
1:264
ARTICLE III
Procedure
§ 228-5. Schematic plan.
A. Formal applications for site plan approval may be preceded by the
submission of a schematic (or conceptual) plan. The purpose of the
schematic plan is to afford the applicant the opportunity to consult
early and informally with the Planning Board before preparation of a
complete and detailed site plan. The applicant may submit a schematic
plan as many times as may be necessary for presentation to the
Planning Board.
B. The schematic plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board not less
than three weeks prior to the date of the Planning Board meeting at
which it is to be considered and shall be accompanied by a narrative
summary. The narrative summary shall provide a description of the
project which the applicant desires to undertake, the purpose of said
project, a characterization of the neighborhood in which the project is
proposed to be located and the project's conformity with same and a list
of approvals and/or variances and exceptions from the Zoning Law74
required to develop said project. The narrative summary for subsequent
submissions shall identify how prior comments have been satisfied.
C. At the Planning Board meeting, the Board shall review the schematic
plan and may schedule a field inspection of the site. The Board shall
notify the applicant of any suggested changes prior to the preparation
of a complete site plan.
D. The schematic plan shall contain sufficient information for the Planning
Board to determine the general nature of the proposal and its effects on
the Village, including at least the following:
(1) The name and address of the owner.
(2) The name and address of the engineer or architect preparing the
plan.
(3) Property boundaries.
(4) North point, scale and date.
(5) Site location map.
(6) Streets on and adjacent to the property.
(7) Significant topographical and physical features.
(8) Proposed general layout of buildings, driveways, parking and
loading areas and buffer areas.
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 228-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-5
1:265
§ 228-6. Site plan application.
A complete site plan application for site plan approval, including any
information required, shall be submitted to the Planning Board not less than
three weeks in advance of the Planning Board meeting at which the site plan
is to be reviewed.
§ 228-7. Site plan review and approval.
(9) Bulk table, identifying noncomplying items or those needing a
variance. (Refer to Attachment A for Bulk Table format.)75
(10) Any additional information recommended by the Planning Board.
A. The applicant shall submit all application materials outlined below in as
much detail as necessary to enable the Planning Board to come to a
conclusion as to the merits of the application.
(1) One copy of the site plan application with an affidavit of ownership.
(2) Ten copies of the narrative summary of the proposed plan and
history of the property, including identification of any changes
made from the schematic plan.
(3) One copy of the Applicant Notice Form.
(4) A letter from the Building Inspector, not less than 60 days old,
stating whether or not any violations exist on the property.
(5) One copy of 809 Affidavit. (Refer to Attachment B.76)
(6) One copy of Owner's Consent Affidavit. (Refer to Attachment C.77)
(7) Ten copies of the site plan with the information listed in § 228-5D of
these regulations in addition to any other information required by
the Planning Board. More copies may be required depending on the
number of referrals to be made for review and recommendations of
approval.
(8) Ten copies of single-line building floor plans and elevations.
(9) Three sets of color photos depicting the streetscape immediately
adjacent to the project site, including any adjacent buildings.
(10) Long Environmental Assessment Form, Part 1, pursuant to the
State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA)78 and other
SEQRA documentation which may be required by the Planning
Board.
75.Editor's Note: Attachment A is located at the end of this chapter.
76.Editor's Note: Attachment B is located at the end of this chapter.
77.Editor's Note: Attachment C is located at the end of this chapter.
78.Editor's Note: See Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 228-5 SUFFERN CODE § 228-7
1:266
§ 228-8. Public hearing. [Amended 9-25-1996 by L.L. No. 5-1996]
A public hearing shall be held on a site plan application unless said hearing
is waived by the Planning Board. Any hearing shall be held within 62 days
of the date of receipt of a complete application. The Planning Board shall
cause notice of said hearing to be mailed to the applicant or his authorized
representative at least 10 days prior to said hearing.
§ 228-9. Public hearing notice.
The Village shall publish notice of the public hearing in the official
newspaper not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days prior to the date
of the public hearing. The applicant shall mail said notice not less than
10 days prior to the hearing to owners of property abutting or across the
street from said property. The applicant shall cause two signs on each road
frontage, or one sign for every one 100 feet of road frontage, whichever
is greater, to be posted on said property, indicating the date and purpose
of the public hearing. The form of such notices shall be prescribed by the
Planning Board, and the cost of such notice shall be paid by the applicant. At
the public hearing the applicant shall submit an affidavit of mailing, which
shall include a list of the property owners to whom the notice of hearing
was sent.
(11) A list of any covenants, deed restrictions, easements or other
reservations of land relative to the site, in addition to that not able
to be shown on the final site plan.
(12) Two copies of the Cost Estimate Form. (Refer to Attachment D.79)
(13) All required federal, state and County permits (United States Army
Corps of Engineers, New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation, New York State Department of Transportation, New
York State Thruway Authority, Rockland County Drainage Agency,
Rockland County Planning Department, Rockland County Highway
Department, Rockland County Health Department).
(14) A certified check, payable to the "Village of Suffern," in accordance
with the Standard Schedule of Fees.80
B. The Planning Board will review the proposed plan and may grant
approval in accordance with § 228-14, with such conditions as are
necessary to ensure conformity of said plan with the general and
specific criteria set forth in this chapter, the Zoning Law81 and other
applicable rules and regulations of the Village of Suffern.
79.Editor's Note: Attachment D is located at the end of this chapter.
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 228-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-10
1:267
§ 228-10. Public hearing procedure.
The public hearing procedure shall be as follows:
A. Sign-in sheets (optional, for use at hearings on major proposals). At the
discretion of the Chairman, sign-in sheets may be required. During the
public comment portion of the hearing, speakers will be called in the
order shown on the sign-in sheets.
B. Hearing opened.
(1) The Chairman opens the hearing, explaining the purpose of the
hearing and the history of the proposal before the Board.
(2) Affidavit of posting, publication and mailing are noted.
(3) Reports in the file are noted.
(4) Comments of the other municipal agencies are noted.
C. Applicant's presentation. The applicant, his technical representatives,
attorneys, etc. make their presentation.
D. Consultant reports. Consultants, agencies, etc., present a short
summary of their reports in the file.
E. Public comment.
(1) Names are called from the sign-in sheet, in order, until the sheet is
exhausted.
(2) Each speaker shall state his name and address.
(3) Each person may speak once; the maximum time allocated is five
minutes. The Chairman may allow additional opportunities to
speak.
(4) Any questions asked will be answered by the appropriate party, as
directed by the Chairman.
(5) When the public has concluded, the applicant is permitted to
comment.
(6) Any member of the public wishing clarification may ask for such at
this time, with a time limit of three minutes.
F. Close or adjournment of public hearing.
G. Board discussion of application.
H. Board action. The options available to the Board are:
(1) Approve the application.
(2) Approve the application with conditions.
§ 228-10 SUFFERN CODE § 228-10
1:268
§ 228-11. Referrals.
The Planning Board may submit copies of the site plan application to the
following agencies for information, review and comment regarding facilities
under their jurisdiction and to any other Village, County, state or federal
agency with jurisdiction:
§ 228-12. Fees.
The fee for site plan review shall be in accordance with the Standard
Schedule of Fees of the Village of Suffern.82
§ 228-13. Compliance with the State Environmental Quality Review
Act.
Prior to the approval of the site plan, the Planning Board shall have
determined whether the action it is reviewing may have a significant effect
on the environment in accordance with the regulations adopted pursuant
to § 8-0113 of the Environmental Conservation Law to implement the
provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA). Fees
for SEQRA processing are in addition to other fees required by these
regulations as set forth in the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Village of
Suffern.
§ 228-14. Planning Board decision. [Amended 9-25-1996 by L.L. No.
5-1996]
(3) Deny the application.
(4) Reserve decision or adjourn to a future meeting.
A. The Village of Suffern Building Inspector.
B. The Village of Suffern Department of Public Works.
C. The Suffern Fire Department.
D. The Rockland County Drainage Agency.
E. The Rockland County Planning Department.
F. The Rockland County Highway Department.
G. The New York State Department of Transportation.
H. The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
I. The New York State Thruway Authority.
J. The Palisades Interstate Park Commission.
K. The United States Army Corps of Engineers.
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 228-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-14
1:269
§ 228-15. Signing and filing.
Upon submission of the final site plan with any modifications required
by the Planning Board in its final approval and upon satisfaction of any
conditions imposed by such approval, the Chairman of the Planning Board
shall sign the approved site plan and file it with the Village Clerk. One copy
shall also be filed with the Building Inspector, who may thereafter issue a
building permit, certificate of occupancy and certificate of use in reliance
thereon in accordance with Article VIII of the Zoning Law83 and § 228-16 of
these regulations.
§ 228-16. Issuance of certificate of occupancy and/or use; surety.
A. The Planning Board shall approve, approve with modifications or deny
the final site plan application within 62 days of the date of the hearing,
or, if no hearing is held, within 62 days of the date of receipt of an
application accepted as complete. Planning Board approval, approval
with modifications or disapproval shall be in written form and shall
include specific findings with respect to the standards as contained in
§ 228-22 of these regulations.
B. The decision of the Planning Board shall be filed in the office of the
Village Clerk within five business days after it is rendered, and a copy
thereof shall be mailed to the applicant.
A. The Planning Board shall require that on- or off-site improvements be
installed, including, but not limited to, on- or off-site drainage systems,
to ensure that all drainage, storm runoff and subsurface waters are
carried into approved watercourses and drainage systems. The
Planning Board shall further require that all off-site improvements and/
or drainage systems be installed on property granted to the Village by
fee, easement or otherwise, as determined by the Planning Board.
B. No certificate of occupancy or use shall be issued for the site until all
improvements shown on the site plan, including off-site requirements as
required by site plan approval, have been duly installed and all
easements and property interests have been granted or dedicated to
the Village. A performance bond or other surety shall be posted in an
amount that shall cover the cost of completing all on- and off-site
improvements. Said bond or surety shall be set and held by the Village
Board of Trustees, upon the advice of the Planning Board and the
Village of Suffern Department of Public Works, and in such form as
meets the approval of the Village Attorney. The Building Inspector shall
report to the Planning Board when the requirements, construction,
installation and all other items of the site plan have been completed, at
which time the Planning Board may authorize the release of the surety.
C. A temporary certificate of occupancy and/or use may be granted prior
to the completion of any required landscaping, concrete work or other
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 228-14 SUFFERN CODE § 228-16
1:270
§ 228-17. Field changes.
During construction, the Village Engineer may authorize or require, at his
own determination or, upon the request of the applicant, minor adjustments
to the approved site plan when such adjustments are necessary due to
unforeseen site conditions first discovered during actual construction. The
Village Engineer may refer said request to the Building Inspector or project
architect for his review. Minor adjustments shall be consistent with the
spirit and intent of the approved site plan. Approval of such adjustment,
with the reasons therefor, shall be in writing and a copy provided to the
Planning Board.
§ 228-18. Site plan amendments.
Where unforeseen conditions are encountered which require any material
change to an approved site development plan or where the developer
wishes to modify the approved plan for other reasons, an amended site plan
shall be filed with the Planning Board for review and approval in accordance
with the same procedures required for initial site plan applications.
§ 228-19. Site maintenance.
It shall be the duty of every property owner to maintain his property in
conformity with the approved site plan. Failure to do so shall constitute a
violation of these regulations.
improvements which may not be installed due to seasonal constraints,
upon the approval of the Planning Board, provided that a bond or surety
is posted in such amount as shall be set and held by the Village Board
of Trustees, upon the advice of the Building Inspector and the Village of
Suffern Department of Public Works, with the approval of the Planning
Board, and in such form as meets the approval of the Village Attorney.
The Planning Board may recommend release of the performance bond
or surety upon recommendation of the Building Inspector.
D. A temporary certificate of occupancy and/or use may be issued in
accordance with Article VIII of the Village of Suffern Zoning Law.84
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 228-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-19
1:271

ARTICLE IV
Site Plan Specifications
§ 228-20. Specifications.
The site plan shall be drawn by a licensed design professional on a series
of sheets of uniform size containing the information listed below on each
of the respective sheets. The maximum sheet size should be 30 inches by
42 inches. Sheet sizes of reasonable dimensions should be used, such as 24
inches by 36 inches, not 16 inches by 48 inches. The site plan shall be drawn
at a scale of one inch equals 10 feet, if practicable, but not smaller than one
inch equals 30 feet.
A. Planimetric Site Layout Sheet (Sheet No. 1). (Note: Topography is not
shown on this sheet. Refer to Attachment E85 for sheet layout.) The
Planimetric Site Layout Sheet shall show:
(1) Area map taken from and at the same scale as the Village of Suffern
Zoning Map [one inch equals 300 feet].
(2) Existing zoning district boundaries within 500 feet, to be shown on
the area map. If such a boundary goes through the site in question,
it shall also be shown on the site plan.
(3) The applicant's entire holdings. If the applicant is other than the
owner of record, then the owner of record's entire contiguous
holdings shall be shown.
(4) Standard site plan notes. (See § 228-20F.)
(5) Property boundaries and existing tax lot lines.
(6) Existing public streets abutting or crossing the site.
(7) Existing structures and uses located on the site.
(8) Approximate locations of wooded areas and existing structures
within 200 feet of site lot lines.
(9) Proposed location and use of any new building or structure,
including all above-ground mechanical, electrical and other utility
equipment.
(10) Proposed location of walkways, benches, recreation facilities,
garbage dumpster enclosures and facilities for recycling. (Refer to
Attachment F.86)
(11) Existing and proposed vehicular access to and from the site.
(12) Location and layout of driveways, parking areas and loading areas.
85.Editor's Note: Attachment E is located at the end of this chapter.
86.Editor's Note: Attachment F is located at the end of the chapter.
§ 228-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-20
1:273
(13) Proposed location, type and height of fencing.
(14) Proposed location of outdoor lighting facilities.
(15) Site plan of ultimate development, if the project is to be staged.
(16) Along all road frontages:
(a) The center line of the existing right-of-way.
(b) The edge of the existing pavement.
(c) The designated street line.
(d) The front setback line.
(e) The existing trees over four inches in diameter [measured four
feet above grade] and a description of their condition.
(17) Location of the curb cuts [or points of access and egress for the
properties immediately abutting and across the street from the
access point(s) to the site].
(18) Bulk table, identifying noncomplying items or those needing a
variance.
(19) The computation for the required number of parking spaces, as
provided for in the Table of General Use Requirements of the
Zoning Law.87
(20) Types of materials proposed to be used on the site, i.e., concrete
curb, asphalt, pavement, etc.
(21)On site plans involving signs, the location of freestanding signs in
relation to the designated street line.
(22) All pertinent zoning setback and yard dimension lines.
(23) Legends, North arrow, graphic scale and title block.
(24) A three-and-one-half-inch blank square, in the lower right-hand
corner, immediately above the title block for purposes of an
approval block.
B. Grading, Drainage and Utilities Plan Sheet (Sheet No. 2). The Grading,
Drainage and Utilities Plan Sheet shall show:
(1) All items listed for Sheet No. 1, with the exception of the items
indicated in Subsection A(1), (2), (4), (14), (18), (20) and (21) of this
section.
(2) Existing and proposed contours at a maximum two-foot vertical
interval extended to 100 feet beyond the boundaries of the site.
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 228-20 SUFFERN CODE § 228-20
1:274
(3) Location and types, sizes and slopes, where pertinent, of existing
and proposed waterlines, valves and hydrants, storm and sanitary
sewer lines, electric lines, telephone lines, gas and other utility
lines and utility poles. Typical cover should be indicated over all
proposed underground utility lines.
(4) Proposed stormwater drainage and underdrain systems.
(a) Existing and proposed stormwater drainage and underdrain
systems including:
[1] The location, size and slopes of all pipes and swales,
including invert and top elevations at each manhole, inlet,
headwall or other appurtenant drainage structure.
[2] The base width, side slope, inverts and lining of each swale
(riprap, asphalt, concrete, grass, etc.).
[3] The inverts of underdrain systems at bends and outlets.
(b) Roof drains and footing drain runoff shall be directed to an
existing storm drainage system in the street, if possible, and
not directed to adjacent properties. Underground detention or
percolation systems may be required.
(c) In addition to the drainage items in Subsection B(4), the
Planning Board may require the applicant to submit the
following:
[1] A map at appropriate scale showing the limits of the
watershed in which the property is located; the
development site should be shaded in.
[2] Drainage computations for the runoff entering the site for
a fully developed watershed and for the site itself after
proposed development.
[3] A marked up grading plan showing tributary areas to each
drainage structure illustrated.
(5) Location of spot grades at top and bottom of retaining walls.
(6) The following standard erosion control notes (Refer to Attachments
G and H88 for standard erosion control details to be included at the
discretion of the Planning Board):
(a) Temporary sedimentation entrapment areas shall be provided
at key locations to intercept and clarify silt-laden runoff from
the site. These may be excavated or may be created utilizing
earthen berms, riprap or crushed stone dams, hay bales or
other channelization and shall be constructed to ensure that all
88.Editor's Note: Attachments G and H are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 228-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-20
1:275
silt-laden waters are directed into the entrapment areas, which
shall not be permitted to fill in, but shall be cleaned
periodically during the course of construction. The collected
silt shall be deposited in areas safe from further erosion.
(b) All disturbed areas, except roadways, which will remain open
or unfinished for more than 10 days shall be temporarily
seeded with 1/2 pound of rye grass or mulched with 100
pounds of straw or hay per 1,000 square feet. Roadways shall
be stabilized as rapidly as practicable by the installation of the
base course. A temporary seeding and/or mulching should be
applied to disturbed areas that are left bare for 15 days unless
construction will begin within 30 days.
(c) Silt that leaves the site shall be collected and removed as
directed by appropriate municipal authorities.
(d) At the completion of the project, all temporary siltation devices
shall be removed and the affected areas regraded, planted or
treated in accordance with the approved plans.
(e) Areas disturbed by on-site grading.
[1] All areas disturbed by on-site grading, that will not be
constructed upon, shall be stabilized with permanent
vegetative cover, using the following seeding schedule, or
equivalent:
Type of Grass Pounds per Acre
Pounds per
1,000 square
feet
Kentucky blue
grass
20 0.45
Creeping red
fescue
20 0.45
Perennial rye
grass
5 0.10
[2] All seeded areas shall have an application of the following:
[a] Lime: the amount needed to obtain a pH of 5.5.
[b] Fertilizer: 15 pounds per 1,000 square feet of 10-20-10
fertilizer or approved equal.
[3] If not landscaped otherwise, all new constructed steep
permanent slopes less than one (vertical) to two and 2.5
(horizontal) shall be seeded with the following:
§ 228-20 SUFFERN CODE § 228-20
1:276
Type of Grass Pounds per Acre
Pounds per
1,000 square
feet
Creeping red
fescue
10 0.45
Crown vetch 15 0.35
Birdsfoot trefoil 8 0.20
Tall fescue or
smooth
bromegrass
15 0.35
With perennial
rye grass
5 0.10
[4] All slopes one (vertical) to 2.5 (horizontal) shall be
mulched and stabilized with cloth fabric and pinned to the
ground.
C. Landscaping and Lighting Plan Sheet (Sheet No. 3). The Landscaping
and Lighting Plan Sheet shall show:
(1) All items listed for Sheet No. 1, with the exception of the items
indicated in Subsection A(1), (2), (4), (18), (20), (21) and (23) of this
section.
(2) Location, direction, type and height of outdoor lighting facilities,
including isolux curves.
(3) Location and extent of existing wooded areas, rock outcrops and
single large trees [four-inch caliper or more, measured four feet
above the ground].
(4) Proposed location, design and type of screening and landscaping
trees. A planting list should be provided on the drawing, keyed to
the plan, showing botanical and common names, species,
quantities, height and caliper of planting materials. The
landscaping plan and schedule shall be prepared and certified by a
licensed landscape architect.
(5) The following standard landscape notes (Refer to Attachments I, J,
K, L, M and N89 for standard landscaping details to be included at
the discretion of the Planning Board):
(a) All plant beds and trees shall be mulched with a four-inch
depth of sugar cane or licorice root mulch or shredded bark.
(b) All trees shall be staked with two cedar stakes, with rubber
hose around the tree [six feet zero inches above grade] and
twisted ten-gauge galvanized wire.
89.Editor's Note: Attachments I, J, K, L, M and N are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 228-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-20
1:277
(c) Plant pits shall be 24 inches wider and six inches deeper than
the root ball. All existing soil shall be removed and backfilled
with a mixture of one part peat-humus to four parts topsoil.
One three-year Eeesey grow fertilizer packet (or equal) shall
be added per one inch of tree caliper or per 12 inches of height
of the shrub.
(d) All plants and workmanship shall be guaranteed for two
growing seasons.
(e) All planting shall be placed under the direction of a licensed
landscape architect who shall be notified 48 hours prior to
planting.
(f) All plant material shall be nursery grown and shall conform to
the American Association of Nurserymen's Standards.
D. Profile and Detail Plan Sheets(s) (Sheet No. 4, etc., as many as
required). The Profile and Detail Plan Sheets shall show:
(1) Profiles of roads, driveways, storm drainage pipes and channels
and sanitary sewer pipes.
(2) Elevation view of any freestanding signs, showing dimensions and
sign area; and on building fascia, the height of signs above grade,
their overall height, dimensions and area.
(3) Garbage dumpster detail, if required (Refer to Attachment H.90)
(4) Construction details illustrating all site improvements and those
required in other sections of these regulations, in accordance with
Village construction standards and specifications.
E. Additional sheets. For phased projects or large-scale projects, separate
sheets may be required to provide adequate clarity.
F. Standard site plan notes: The following standard notes should be placed
on the Planimetric Site Layout Sheet (Sheet No. 1) in a legible,
convenient manner:
(1) This is Lot _____ in Section _____ as shown on the Town of Ramapo
Tax Map.
(2) Area of tract:
(3) Zone:
(4) Proposed use:
(5) Record owner:
(6) Applicant:
90.Editor's Note: Attachment H is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 228-20 SUFFERN CODE § 228-20
1:278
(7) School district:
(8) Water supply by:
(9) Datum: National Geodetic Vertical Datum, 1929 revision.
(10) All utilities shall be underground. Electric service shall be in a
conduit of not less than two inches in diameter.
(11) (When appropriate): The Zoning Board of Appeals, on _____
(provide date) as Case Number _____ in the application of _____,
granted variances for _____.
(12)No sign(s) other than those shown on this drawing are permitted
without prior approval of the Planning Board. (Tenants are to be
advised of this condition.)
(13) Plans are based on field engineering data and certified hereto by:
Licensed Professional Engineer or Land Surveyor
_______________
Date
(14) The undersigned licensed landscape architect, who prepared and
certified the landscape plan approved by the Planning Board, has
supervised construction and installation of the landscape materials.
Before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the undersigned
hereby agrees to file with the Building Inspector and the Planning
Board as-built plans and an affidavit stating that the deponent has
examined the approved plans, that the landscaping has been
installed in accordance with approved plans and that the
landscaping complies with these regulations except insofar as
variations therefrom have been legally authorized. Such variations
shall be specified in the affidavit.
Licensed Landscape Architect
_______________
Date
(15) The undersigned owner and/or applicant, as a condition of approval
of this site plan, hereby agrees to complete the site plan as drawn
and all improvements shown thereon as a condition of the issuance
of a building permit and agrees to designate an appropriate
licensed professional engineer or surveyor who shall have the
responsibility for certifying the completion of said improvements in
accordance with the approved site plan. Said professional shall
submit an affidavit accepting such designation prior to the signing
§ 228-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-20
1:279
§ 228-21. Site plan revisions.
All site plans that are submitted to the Planning Board which have been
revised shall have the revision number noted in a triangle along with a brief
summary of the elements revised and the dates of revision. Additionally, this
revision number (in triangle) is to be used to indicate on the plan those
places where the changes have been made. Any plan submitted without
this system shall be returned to the applicant and shall be subject to a
resubmission fee.
of the site plan. No certificate of occupancy or use shall be issued
except as provided in the Village of Suffern Zoning Law.
Applicant Date
Owner Date
§ 228-20 SUFFERN CODE § 228-21
1:280
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 228-22. General standards.
The Planning Board shall not approve a site plan unless it shall find that
such plan conforms to the requirements of these regulations, as well as
to the Village of Suffern Zoning Law91 and other applicable laws and
regulations. In reviewing the site plan, the Planning Board shall also take
into consideration the public health, safety and general welfare and shall
set appropriate conditions and safeguards which are in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of these regulations, particularly in regard to
achieving the following standards:
A. Traffic access. The number, location and design of all proposed
driveways, in terms of their width, grade, alignment, visibility, sight
distance and relationship to the existing street system and neighboring
properties and land uses, shall be such that maximum safety will be
achieved and function properly provided for.
B. On-site circulation and parking. Adequate and convenient off-street
parking and loading spaces shall be provided to prevent parking in
public streets of vehicles belonging to any persons connected with or
visiting the proposed use, and the interior circulation system shall be
adequate to provide safe access to all required off-street parking,
including access for the handicapped.
C. Pedestrian circulation. An adequate and safe pedestrian circulation
system shall be provided to permit safe access to uses from the street
and from all parking areas on the site.
D. Landscaping and buffering. All parking, loading and service areas shall
be screened in a reasonable manner, at all seasons of the year, from the
view of adjacent residential lots and streets. The Planning Board shall
require as a condition of site plan approval that a significant vegetative
screen be required between the building and property line for all uses
in the PO-40, PO-15, PLI and M Zoning Districts and, where advisable,
in the MR-15, MR-50, CB and GB Zoning Districts. [Amended
10-20-1997 by L.L. No. 7-1997]
E. Lighting. Outdoor lighting shall be provided on the site to assure the
safe movement of vehicles and persons and for security. Such lighting
shall not create an undesirable impact on neighboring properties and
streets.
F. Drainage. The proposed stormwater drainage system shall be adequate
to prevent any increase in the rate of surface runoff or otherwise
contribute to downstream flooding during a storm of any magnitude up
to and including a one-hundred-year frequency storm.
91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 228-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-22
1:281
§ 228-23. Off-street parking, loading and access.
G. Water and sewage. The proposed systems for water supply and sewage
collection and disposal on the site shall be adequate, and Village
facilities shall be sufficient to handle the increase in service.
H. Solid waste. Adequate provisions shall be made for the storage,
collection and disposal of solid waste, and such facilities shall not be
permitted to adversely affect neighboring properties or public facilities.
I. Building design. The height, location and size of the proposed buildings
shall be in conformity with the requirements of the Zoning Law, and all
such buildings and other structures shall harmoniously relate to each
other, the site and neighboring properties and shall be in accordance
with Village plans and programs.
J. Signage. All proposed signs, including on-site directional signs and
building signs, shall meet the requirements of these regulations, shall
be adequate to provide reasonable information to the public and shall
be in harmony with the design of the site and buildings and with
neighboring properties.
K. Recreation.
(1) Land for park, playground or other recreational purposes is
required when the Planning Board has made a finding that a proper
case exists for requiring that a park or parks be suitably located for
playgrounds or other recreational purposes in the Village of
Suffern. Such findings shall include an evaluation of the present
and anticipated future needs for park and recreational facilities in
the Village based on projected population growth to which the
particular site plan will contribute.
(2) If a park cannot be properly located on the site plan, the Planning
Board may require a sum of money in lieu thereof to be established
by the Village Board of Trustees. In making such a determination,
the Planning Board shall assess the size and suitability of lands
shown which could be possible locations for parks or recreational
facilities, as well as practical factors, including whether there is a
need for recreational facilities in the immediate neighborhood. Any
moneys required by the Planning Board in lieu of land for park,
playgrounds or other recreational purposes shall be deposited in a
trust fund to be used by the Village of Suffern exclusively for parks
or other recreational purposes, including the acquisition of
property.
L. Other public needs. Other public needs and requirements, including the
protection of the environment shall be properly and adequately
provided for.
§ 228-22 SUFFERN CODE § 228-23
1:282
A. Zoning Law requirements. The number and location of off-street
parking and loading spaces to be provided on the site shall conform to
the requirements of the Village of Suffern Zoning Law.92
B. Table of minimum parking dimensions. The parking configuration shall
be as follows:
Table of Minimum Parking Dimensions
Dimension
Measurement
(feet)
Length of stall
Parallel 20
Perpendicular 181
Aisle width
One-way flow 12
Two-way flow 24
Width of stall
All parking stalls 9, except as provided in § 228-23D herein
NOTES:
1 The length of perpendicular parking stalls may be reduced by 2.5
feet where curb design permits vehicle overhang.
C. Parking area standards.
(1) Poured-in-place concrete curbing shall be provided to outline all
parking areas and to prevent any vehicle parking within the facility
from overhanging a property line or projecting over any sidewalk,
other walkway or public road.
(2) No vehicle shall be forced or encouraged by the nature of the
design of the parking area to back out of the parking facility onto a
public road.
(3) Suitable walks shall be provided within the facility for the safety of
pedestrians moving to or from their vehicles.
(4) All required parking facilities shall be graded, surfaced, drained
and maintained throughout the duration of their use to the extent
necessary to avoid nuisances of dust, erosion or excessive water
flow across public ways or adjacent lands. The maximum gradient
within parking areas shall not exceed 5%.
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 228-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-23
1:283
(5) Suitable markings shall be provided to indicate individual parking
spaces, maneuvering areas, entrances, exits, directions of traffic
flow and other similar requirements.
D. Special parking standards.
(1) Employee parking. In parking areas designated for employees, the
Planning Board may permit a reduction in the width of such spaces
to 8.5 feet.
(2) Parking facilities for the handicapped.
(a) Parking spaces shall be provided for the handicapped, and the
number, location and design of said spaces shall be in
conformity with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code, as may be amended from time to time.
(Refer to Attachment N.)93
(b) Generally, for nonresidential uses, handicapped parking spaces
shall be provided in parking lots and parking garages in
accordance with the following table:
Required Number of Parking Spaces
Total Parking Spaces
in Lot or Garage
Number of Accessible Parking
Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
Over 1,000 20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
(c) For a shopping center or facility having at least five separate
retail stores and at least 20 public off-street parking spaces, a
minimum of 5% of such parking spaces or 10 spaces,
whichever is less, shall be for use by the physically
handicapped.
(d) Where parking areas or garages are provided for multiple
dwellings as defined by the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, which includes apartments,
93.Editor's Note: Attachment N is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 228-23 SUFFERN CODE § 228-23
1:284
hotels, motels and senior citizen housing, at least one
adaptable parking space for each usable unit (constructed and
equipped so as to be usable by the physically handicapped),
but not less than 5% of the total number of parking spaces
provided, shall be suitable for use by the physically
handicapped. For adult residential care, at least 5% of the
total number of parking spaces shall be suitable. Where
determination by percent results in a number containing a
decimal of 0.5 or more, use the next higher number.
(3) Compact car parking. The Planning Board may require an applicant
to provide compact car parking spaces subject to the following
requirements:
(a) Compact car parking spaces shall be not less than seven and
7.75 feet wide and 15 feet long.
(b) Compact car parking spaces shall be permitted only for longterm
parking use, such as for commuters or employees.
(c) No more than 1/3 of the total off-street parking spaces required
by the Zoning Law94 shall be designated for compact cars.
(d) Compact car parking spaces shall be appropriately signed.
(4) Motorcycle/bicycle parking. The Planning Board may require an
applicant to provide motorcycle/bicycle parking, depending upon
the specific use proposed by an applicant and subject to the
following Eno Foundation for Transportation guidelines:
(a) One motorcycle and one bicycle parking space may be required
for parking facilities containing 50 automobile spaces. For
every additional 20 automobile parking spaces thereafter, a
minimum of one motorcycle and one bicycle parking space may
be required. The Planning Board shall consider the particular
use proposed by an applicant in establishing the maximum
number of parking spaces.
(b) Bicycle and motorcycle parking facilities are to be located in an
area of a parking lot convenient to destination entrances and in
highly visible areas to minimize theft and vandalism. Wherever
feasible, the parking should be visible to persons within the
building.
(c) Cycle parking facilities are to be placed on paved surfaces and
well lit.
(d) Cycle parking must not interfere with pedestrian traffic.
(e) Cycle parking should be protected from potential damage by
other vehicle traffic.
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 228-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-23
1:285
(f) A bicycle space shall be at least two feet six inches wide by six
feet zero inches long. Motorcycle and moped parking shall be
at least three feet four inches wide by seven feet zero inches.
(g) The Planning Board may require signs to identify cycle lots,
instructions for the operation of unfamiliar kinds of bicycle
racks and other requirements as the Board may deem
necessary.
E. Driveways. For reasons of traffic and pedestrian safety, both on- and offstreet,
as well as to provide for possible future road widening or other
improvements, all new driveways and sidewalk crossings entering onto
any street shall comply with all requirements of these regulations and
shall be subject to permit approval by the Suffern Department of Public
Works, Rockland County Highway Department or New York State
Department of Transportation for access onto Village, County or state
roads, respectively.
(1) Driveway width. Unobstructed access to and from a street shall be
provided for all parking spaces. Such access shall consist of at least
one twelve-foot-wide lane for parking areas with fewer than 30
parking spaces and at least two ten-foot-wide lanes for parking
areas with 30 parking spaces or more. No entrance or exit to any
off-street parking area shall exceed grades in excess of those
permitted in § 228-23E(2) below.
(2) Driveway gradients.
(a) The maximum gradient for new access driveways serving uses
other than single-family dwellings shall be 5%.
(b) Notwithstanding the maximum permitted gradient specified
above, a driveway serving a use other than a single-family
dwelling shall have a platform with a gradient not greater than
3% within 50 feet of the center line of the traveled way of the
street or within 25 feet of the right-of-way line of the street,
whichever distance is greater.
F. Delivery and loading facilities. Separate access should be provided for
delivery vehicles. Circulation systems for deliveries should be designed
to avoid interference with automobile and pedestrian movements or
with high turnover parking. Loading areas should be located preferably
to the rear of buildings, away from areas of pedestrian movement and
screened from view of parking areas, adjacent properties or adjacent
streets.
G. Parking area details to be shown on site plans.
(1) Parking spaces. All Detail Plan Streets (Sheet No. 4) of site plans
should contain a standard parking space and painting schedule.
(Refer to Attachment O.95)
§ 228-23 SUFFERN CODE § 228-23
1:286
§ 228-24. Landscaping and buffering.
(2) Parking end islands. All parking areas end islands should be
designed and constructed in accordance with the detail illustrated
in Attachment P,96 and said detail, where applicable, should be
shown on all Detail Plan Sheets (Sheet No. 4).
(3) Parking for handicapped persons. All site plans shall conform
where applicable. Parking spaces designated for the handicapped
shall be posted with a standard sign (Refer to Attachment Q.97) as
illustrated on the Detail Plan Sheet (Sheet No. 4).
(4) Fire lanes and zones. All fire lanes or zones (Refer to Attachment
R.98) shall be shown on the Planimetric Site Layout Sheet (Sheet
No. 1) and should be clearly labeled, dimensioned and marked with
a sign. (Refer to Attachment S.99) The applicant's professional
licensed engineer or land surveyor shall meet with the Fire
Inspector of the Village of Suffern and/or the Fire Department to
determine their requirements, which shall be shown on this
drawing insofar as they are external to the building.
H. Deferment of full improvement of off-street parking. Where the
Planning Board determines that the immediate use of any property may
not require the full initial improvement of all off-street parking and
loading facilities, the Planning Board may waive the initial
improvement of not more than 1/3 of the required number of spaces,
provided that the total number of spaces is shown on the approved plan.
The area shall be reserved for future use and shall be graded for
parking in accordance with the approved plan. All such reserved land
shall be landscaped in accordance with the approved landscaping plan
until the reserved spaces may be required to be improved. Reserved
spaces shall be improved within six months of the date of a written
notice from the Planning Board that such spaces have been determined
to be necessary. Appropriate written guaranties to the above shall be
provided by the owner and approved by the Village Attorney. The
deferment of parking spaces shall not apply to properties within the CB
District.
I. Fee in lieu of parking spaces. In the CB District, for any change or
increase in the intensity of use or any increase in the gross floor area
requiring the provision of additional off-street parking spaces the
applicant may request permission to make a cash payment in lieu of
some or all parking as set forth in § 266-38 of the Village of Suffern
Zoning Law.100
95.Editor's Note: Attachment O is located at the end of this chapter.
96.Editor's Note: Attachment P is located at the end of this chapter.
97.Editor's Note: Attachment Q is located at the end of this chapter.
98.Editor's Note: Attachment R is located at the end of this chapter.
99.Editor's Note: Attachment S is located at the end of this chapter.
100. Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 228-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-24
1:287
A. General standards. All properties subject to site plan review shall be
landscaped with appropriate trees, shrubs and other plant materials
and ground cover, as approved by the Planning Board, to assure the
establishment of a safe, convenient, functional and attractive site plan
requiring a minimum of maintenance. The following are general
standards for landscaping:
(1) Plant materials shall be nursery grown and selected according to
hardiness and ability to withstand highway salt conditions.
(2) Spaces to receive plant materials shall have a minimum inside
width of six feet, except that where vehicle overhang is permitted, a
ten-foot inside width shall be required.
(3) Loose materials, such as wood mulch and stone aggregate, shall be
spread within a landscaped space at a level not to exceed one and
1/2 inches below top-of-curb.
(4) Areas that will receive continued pedestrian movement shall be
paved.
(5) Landscape plans shall be designed by a licensed landscape
architect who shall certify as to plant hardiness and shall provide
as-built plans to the Building Inspector and Planning Board of the
completed project. The applicant's landscape architect who
prepared and certified the landscape plan approved by the
Planning Board shall supervise construction and installation of the
landscape materials. Before the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, there shall be filed with the Building Inspector and the
Planning Board an affidavit of the registered landscape architect
stating that the deponent has examined the approved plans, that
the landscaping has been installed in accordance with approved
plans and that the landscaping complies with these regulations
except insofar as variations therefrom have been legally
authorized. Such variations and the reasons therefor shall be
specified in the affidavit.
(6) The minimum landscape requirements for any use requiring site
plan approval are a general guide only and may be modified by the
Planning Board where, due to special characteristics of the project
site, the proposed use, surrounding area or buildings and
structures, such changes are necessary to ensure compatibility and
conformance with other standards or criteria of these regulations.
B. Traffic movement. In areas where landscape materials are used to
define paths of traffic movement, the following guidelines shall be used:
(1) Plant materials shall consist of upright juniper or yew, barberry,
firethorn, evergreen euonymus or equivalent approved by the
Planning Board.
§ 228-24 SUFFERN CODE § 228-24
1:288
(2) Plants shall be selected to achieve not more than three feet mature
height. Planting height shall be 18 to 24 inches.
(3) Plants shall be spaced to create a compact hedge border at time of
planting.
(4) As an alternate, street trees may be used. Trees shall be approved
by the landscape architect, have a caliper of 3 1/2 to four inches
and be spaced 20 feet on center. Street trees shall consist of sugar
maple, norway maple, red oak, little leaf linden, green ash, london
plane or equivalent approved by the Planning Board.
(5) Planting beds shall be covered with the following material:
(a) Licorice mulch or approved equivalent at four inches minimum
depth.
(b) Stone aggregate at three inches minimum depth, minimum
one-inch stone.
(c) Where pedestrian cross traffic is evident, a paving material
shall be used, such as paving blocks set in sand with tight
joints or Epoxy-Rok or equivalent.
C. Parking areas. In areas where landscape materials are used to
complement parking areas, the following guidelines shall be used:
(1) Forty-foot planting islands at the end of or within parking bays shall
contain the following materials:
(a) Honey locust, with a caliper of 3 1/2 to four inches, planted 20
feet on center.
(b) Other columnar varieties may be substituted upon Planning
Board approval.
(c) Trees with low-growing branches, gum or moisture, seeds or
pods shall be avoided.
(d) Branching of trees shall begin at a height no less than six feet
and no greater than 12 feet.
(2) Areas under shade trees shall be planted with horizontal juniper or
other ornamental evergreens of comparable growth habit. Plant
material shall have an eighteen-to-twenty-four-inch spread and
shall be spaced 18 inches on center.
(3) Planting beds shall be covered as in § 228-24B(5) of these
regulations.
D. Entrance definition. Where landscape materials are used to define the
point of entrance to a commercial facility, the following guidelines shall
be used:
§ 228-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-24
1:289
(1) Plant materials shall consist of a carefully designed variety of
evergreen shrubs selected from the following:
(a) Upright yew.
(b) Azalea.
(c) Japanese andromeda.
(d) Euonymus.
(e) Rhododendron.
(f) Laurel.
(g) Boxwood.
(h) Other evergreen varieties as approved by the Planning Board.
(2) Design may be a natural or formal setting; however, plant height
shall not interfere with required sight distance.
(3) Planting beds shall be covered as in § 228-24B(5) of these
regulations.
E. Pedestrian areas. Where landscape materials are used to complement
areas intended for pedestrian activity, the following guidelines shall be
used:
(1) Pedestrian areas shall be paved with concrete or paving block.
Areas to be paved shall be tamped or underlain with gravel.
(2) In order to minimize large areas of paving, landscape features,
such as two-to-three-foot earth mounds and planters, shall be used.
(3) Plant materials shall consist of a variety of evergreen and
deciduous shrubs and trees selected from the following:
(a) Evergreen:
[1] Spreading yew.
[2] Boxwood.
[3] Laurel.
[4] Euonymus.
[5] Azales.
[6] Juniper.
[7] Japanese andromeda.
[8] White pine.
[9] Mugo pine.
§ 228-24 SUFFERN CODE § 228-24
1:290
[10] Rhododendron.
[11] Other varieties approved by the Planning Board.
(b) Deciduous:
[1] Japanese red maple.
[2] Crab apple.
[3] Cherry.
[4] Dogwood.
[5] Azalea.
[6] Forsythia.
[7] Lilac.
[8] Other varieties approved by the Planning Board.
(4) Planting beds shall be covered with a licorice mulch or approved
equivalent at four inches minimum depth.
F. Buffer screening. The approval of any use in a business or industrial
district or any nonresidential use in any residence district shall include
provisions for a buffer screening area at least 10 feet in width along any
lot line abutting or, if determined necessary by the Planning Board,
directly across the street from any lot in a residence district. This
requirement may be waived by the Planning Board in situations where
it determines that large distances, topographic features or existing
vegetation satisfy the same purpose. Where landscape materials are
used for buffer screening purposes, the following guidelines shall be
used:
(1) Where sufficient space is available, a dense screen of evergreen
plant materials shall be used.
(2) Material may include:
(a) White pine.
(b) Spruce.
(c) Hemlock.
(d) Arborvitae.
(3) Plant materials shall be eight feet to 10 feet in height when planted
and shall be spaced to form an opaque screen either in a single row
or in multiple rows with alternate spacing.
(4) Where limited space is available, stockade or other approved fence
may be used in conjunction with climbing or similar plantings
trained to grow in a flat plane along a surface.
§ 228-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-24
1:291
§ 228-25. Outdoor lighting.
G. Natural areas. Where landscape materials are used primarily to
beautify otherwise vacant spaces, the following guidelines shall be
used:
(1) Planting varieties shall be the same as § 228-24E(3) and 228-24E(4)
of these regulations.
(2) Where practical, earth forms should be used such as two-to-threefoot
landscaped mounds.
(3) Planting bed cover: same as § 228-24E(4) or, as an alternate, sod
may be substituted.
H. State highway rights-of-way. Where landscape materials are used to
complement areas within a state highway right-of-way, the following
guidelines shall be used:
(1) The area shall be covered with sod or, as an alternative, stone
aggregate at a minimum three-inch depth may be substituted.
(2) Evergreen and/or deciduous materials shall be placed according to
size approved by appropriate highway jurisdiction.
A. General standards. Adequate lighting shall be provided on each site to
ensure safe movement of persons and vehicles and for security
purposes. Lighting fixtures and standards shall be of a type approved by
the Planning Board. All lighting shall be designed and arranged so as to
preclude or minimize glare and reflection on adjacent properties and
streets. The Planning Board may impose reasonable hours of operation
should lighting fixtures negatively impact adjacent properties. No
floodlights in excess of 100 watts shall be installed without specific
written permission from the Planning Board.
B. Design standards. The following design standards shall be followed on
all site plans:
(1) The style of the light and light standards shall be consistent with
the architectural style of the principal building.
(2) The maximum height of freestanding lights shall be no higher than
the height of the principal building but shall not exceed 18 feet. The
maximum height may be increased to 25 feet in large parking areas
where the Planning Board finds that such lighting is appropriate
and where such increased height will not be a disturbance to
neighbors.
(3) The source of illumination shall be so shielded that it is not visible
beyond the boundaries of the lot on which it is located.
(4) All lights shall be shielded to restrict the maximum approximate
angle of the cone of illumination to 150°.
§ 228-24 SUFFERN CODE § 228-25
1:292
§ 228-26. Signs.
(5) Where lights may be visible from adjacent residences or public
streets, the lights shall be appropriately shielded to minimize visual
discomfort and impairment of driver and pedestrian vision due to
glare.
(6) Spotlight-type fixtures attached to buildings shall not be permitted.
(7) Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected as to prevent
damage by vehicles.
(8) Lighting shall be located along streets, parking areas, at
intersections and where various types of circulation systems
merge, intersect or split, as required by the Planning Board.
(9) Pathways, sidewalks and trails shall be lighted with suitable low or
pedestrian-type standards.
(10) Exterior stairways, sloping or rising paths, building entrances and
exits shall be suitably illuminated for safety purposes.
(11) The lighting intensities listed below shall be used as a general
design guide. The Planning Board may vary these criteria where
the Board finds such a variation is appropriate and where such
variations will not be a disturbance to neighbors.
(a) Shopper parking: an average of 1.0 footcandle.
(b) Long-term parking: an average of 0.75 footcandle.
(c) Intersections: 2.0 footcandle.
(d) Maximum at property lines: 0.6 footcandle.
(e) In residential areas: average of 0.6 footcandle.
(12) Lighting for signs shall comply with the requirements of § 228-26 of
these regulations.
A. Purposes.
(1) The effective use of signs as a means of communication in the
Village shall be encouraged.
(2) The Village's aesthetic environment shall be maintained and
enhanced.
(3) The Village's ability to attract sources of economic development
and growth shall be stimulated through attractive streetscapes.
(4) Pedestrian and traffic safety shall be maintained and improved.
(5) Possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private
property shall be minimized.
§ 228-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-26
1:293
(6) A multiplicity of signs cluttering the overall appearance of the
Village shall be discouraged.
(7) The fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations shall
be accomplished.
B. Sign plan approval required. No sign shall be erected or installed upon
or within any structure or upon any land nor shall any existing sign be
changed until sign plan approval has been obtained from the Planning
Board and a sign permit has been issued by the Building Inspector.
Issuance of sign plan approval shall be conditioned upon conformance
with all applicable provisions of this section. Where an application for
sign plan approval is not part of a site plan application, the application
shall be accompanied by 10 copies of a drawing of professional quality
illustrating: sign dimensions, design, lettering, graphics, color and
material; the location of the sign on the building facade, window or
property and the dimensions of applicable setbacks; and the location of
any existing signs related to the business or property. A photo of the
sign's proposed location shall be submitted, and said photo shall also
depict any establishments adjoining the property, if applicable. The
Planning Board shall render a decision on the sign application within 30
days of receipt of a complete sign application. The decision of the
Planning Board shall be final. The Zoning Board of Appeals is not
permitted to vary the requirements of this section, nor any decision of
the Planning Board related to signs.
C. Exempted signs. No permit is required for the following classes of
signs:
(1) Signs required by duly constituted governmental bodies and their
agencies, where such signs are established in the interest of the
safety, convenience or welfare of the general public. The number
and location of such signs shall be as directed by the governmental
agency having jurisdiction.
(2) Traffic control signs required for traffic control purposes shown on
an approved site plan or posted pursuant to the order of traffic
control agencies and conforming to the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices of the New York State Department of
Transportation.
(3) Flags of the national, state, County or Town government; banners
and emblems or name and meeting place signs of civic,
philanthropic, educational or religious organizations or
institutions, not exceeding four square feet.
(4) Signs and decals pertaining to the tenant's registration with or
membership in a professional organization/affiliation or civic
association.
(5) Temporary signs in any zoning district pertaining to and displayed
during campaigns, drives or events of civic, political, philanthropic,
§ 228-26 SUFFERN CODE § 228-26
1:294
educational or religious institutions, provided that such signs are
erected not more than four weeks prior to the event and are
removed not later than two weeks after the event. [Amended
1-8-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
(6) Memorial plaques, cornerstones, historical tablets and the like.
(7) Signs required to be maintained or posted by law or governmental
order, rule or regulation, unless specifically prohibited, limited or
restricted.
(8) Small, nonilluminated signs, not exceeding two square feet in area,
displayed strictly for the direction, safety or convenience of the
public, including signs which identify rest rooms and other similar
facilities or conveniences, parking area and building entrances or
exits, freight entrances or for purposes of indicating the location of
off-street parking areas.
(9) Signs for customary incidental home occupation, professional
office or studio as permitted in the Village of Suffern Zoning Law,101
not exceeding two feet in length, nor six inches in height, indicating
the name, d/b/a (doing business as) or profession of such
professional person, as the only display, and such sign may be
internally illuminated, limited to hours of operation of the office or
home occupation.
(10) One temporary, nonilluminated "for sale" or "for rent" sign for each
lot in a residence district, provided that such sign is less than six
square feet in area and is removed promptly when the premises are
sold or rented. Any broker, agent or other person representing a
seller, including the seller himself, maintaining a sign for the
purpose of advertising, including any sign which says "sold,"
"gone," "another sale by _____," or words of similar purport
indicating that the property is no longer available, shall be removed
60 days after a sales contract between the seller and buyer has
been entered into.
(11) Temporary, nonilluminated "for sale" or "for rent" signs in
nonresidential districts, provided that such signs are not more than
30 square feet in area and are promptly removed when the
premises are sold or rented. One such sign is permitted for each
street frontage of each lot, except that each 500 feet of frontage
shall be considered as separate frontage.
(12) Temporary construction signs, not exceeding 12 square feet in
area, either affixed to the wall of the building to which they pertain
or to a post identifying the project under construction,
participating designers, contractors or developers, etc. A
construction sign shall not be erected until site or subdivision plan
approval has been granted by the Planning Board. Said sign shall
101. Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 228-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-26
1:295
be permitted only during the construction period of the project and
shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction
or improvement. Said sign shall conform in all respects to the
provisions of these regulations.
(13) Signs calling attention to a change in the status of a business,
which signs are customarily painted on a window or constructed of
paper, cloth or other light material and attached to, or located
within six feet of the interior side of the window. Said sign shall not
be displayed for more than 90 days. Banners and streamers
advertising the opening of a new business may be permitted up to
30 days after the date on which the business commences operation
and is open to the public, provided that the applicant has first
provided a cash deposit posted with the Village Clerk for purposes
of covering the cost of removing the banners, streamers and
temporary sign in the event the applicant fails to do same within
the designated time period. The cash deposit shall be refunded
upon the applicant's compliance with these provisions within the
time period specified above.
(14) Signs not visible outside of a building.
(15) Signs displayed in a window indicating the availability of a public
telephone or notary public and/or the possession of any licenses
normally required to conduct a given business.
(16) Holiday decorations displayed in season.
(17) Temporary signs for tag or garage sales, provided that such signs
contain the name of the seller and date of the sale, are displayed
only seven days prior to the sale and are removed the day after the
sale. Such signs are not to be placed upon utility poles in
accordance with Chapter 168, Littering, of the Code of the Village
of Suffern.
(18) "No trespassing" signs.
D. Permitted signs.
(1) The total sign area permitted for all nonresidential uses and all
special permit uses shall be determined as follows:
(a) Except for window signs, the total area of all signs shall not
exceed 1 1/2 square feet for each horizontal linear foot of the
front facade of the establishment. The area of each sign shall
be computed as follows:
[1] For individual signs, the area of a sign shall be computed
by delineating the smallest square, circle, rectangle,
triangle or combination thereof that will encompass the
extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or
other display, together with any material or color forming
§ 228-26 SUFFERN CODE § 228-26
1:296
an integral part of the background of the display or used
to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure
against which it is placed, but not including any
supporting framework, bracing or decorative fence or wall
when such fence or wall otherwise meets the Zoning
Law102 and is clearly incidental to the display itself. In the
case of a facade or freestanding sign, the entire face shall
be measured in computing the sign area.
[2] For multifaced signs, the sign area shall be computed by
adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any
one point. When two identical sign faces are placed back
to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any one
point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part
of the same sign structure, the sign area shall be computed
by the measurement of one of the faces.
(b) If an establishment fronts on a public parking lot, an additional
sign area equal to 50% of the sign area that would be
permitted for a facade sign shall be allowed, provided that the
additional sign area appears on that side of the building visible
from the parking lot. The sign shall be a facade sign meeting all
other dimensional requirements for said type of sign; provided,
however, that no sign shall exceed a maximum dimension of 10
feet in length and two feet in height.
(c) All signs shall comply with the accompanying Schedule of Sign
Requirements.103
(2) Except as may be specifically referred to herein, "establishment"
may refer to a tenant in a multitenant building or to an entire
building if it is owned by or leasable to one tenant.
E. Prohibited sign types. The use, erection or installation of the following
sign types is prohibited:
(1) Billboards.
(2) Roof signs.
(3) Signs attached to buildings that extend above the roofline.
(4) Flashing or intermittently illuminated signs. A sign which exhibits
changing light or color effects, even though the intensity of light
may be relatively constant, shall be deemed a flashing sign.
(5) Signs where the source of illumination is visible, including neontype
electric signs, except as may be permitted for window signs as
outlined in the Schedule of Sign Requirements.104
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
103. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Sign Requirements is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 228-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-26
1:297
(6) Searchlights to attract attention to a sign or permitted use.
(7) Strings of incandescent lights.
(8) Moving or rotating signs.
(9) Pennants, streamers, banners or other eye-catching devices.
(10) Awnings.
(11) Portable signs, with or without wheels, easel type, A-frame or other
or any sign not permanently affixed to a building or the ground.
(12) Inflatable signs and tethered balloons.
F. General regulations. The following regulations apply to all types of
signs in all districts:
(1) Illumination. Signs in nonresidential districts may be illuminated,
provided that the source of illumination shall be shielded so that it
is not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot on which it is located.
(2) Relationship to a permitted use. All signs must pertain to a use
conducted on the same property on which they are located, except
signs of service groups and religious institutions.
G. Design standards. The Planning Board, in promulgating site plan
regulations, shall provide for a limitation on the size of the signs, type
and characteristics of illumination, number and location, taking into
consideration the uses on the site and the reasonable requirement for
communicating information to the vehicular or pedestrian traffic. The
Planning Board shall consider the following in granting sign approval:
(1) Signs must be clearly accessory to the use or uses on the lot on
which they are located, and such signs and lighting must be shown
to be essential to the principal use upon the lot.
(2) Signs should be a subordinate part of the streetscape.
(3) The size and content of the sign shall be the minimum essential for
legibility and for the provision of information to patrons or invitees
seeking the particular use described on such sign.
(4) The sign content shall not hawk or peddle and must clearly provide
only information necessary to identify the use upon the lot.
(5) Garish colors and materials should be avoided. Signs which have
dark background colors and light letters are preferred in order to
minimize the apparent size of letters within the streetscape.
104. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Sign Requirements is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 228-26 SUFFERN CODE § 228-26
1:298
(6) The sign shall not be such as to be confused with any traffic signal
or other safety device nor be composed of elements depicting in
exaggerated size or grotesque style the use upon the lot.
(7) All signs, together with their supporting braces, guys, anchors,
etc., shall be kept in repair and in proper state of preservation. The
display surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or
maintained at all times.
(8) Awnings and canopies existing prior to the adoption of this chapter
shall be cleaned and repaired four times each year. Upon the
establishment's failure to do so, the Village, upon due notice, may
contract to have the same done. The cost incurred by the Village
shall be reimbursed by the owner.
H. Removal of existing nonconforming signs.
(1) Every sign which was nonconforming prior to the adoption of this
chapter shall be discontinued and removed or changed to conform
to these regulations within a time period of one year from the date
of the adoption of this chapter.
(2) Every sign which is made nonconforming by these regulations and
was conforming prior to the adoption of this chapter shall be
discontinued and removed or changed to conform to these
regulations within a time period of five years from the date of the
adoption of this chapter. If, on applications made at least six
months before the expiration of the period prescribed above for
termination of a nonconforming sign, the Board of Appeals shall
find that the period prescribed is unreasonable or inadequate for
the amortization of the value of the sign thereof, then the Board of
Appeals may grant such an extension of the period prescribed as it
shall deem to be reasonable and adequate for such amortization,
provided that no such period of extension shall exceed 100% of the
period prescribed and such extension can be granted only once for
any sign.
(3) Awnings/canopies legally existing prior to the adoption of this
chapter may remain in accordance with the provisions of
§ 228-26H(1) and (2). A change of business necessitating a change
in the awning text or awning fabric containing said text is
permitted, provided that the structural supports existing at the
time of adoption of this chapter are not changed and sign approval
is granted by the Planning Board. Any change of awning shall be
subject to the amortization provisions established in
§ 228-26H(1)and(2).
I. Enforcement. The erection of a sign not conforming to an approved sign
plan shall be deemed a violation of these regulations. No sign plan shall
hereafter be approved or sign permit issued, except pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter and the Zoning Law.105 No permit shall be
§ 228-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-26
1:299
issued for any sign which does not conform to an approved sign plan or
site development plan.
(1) The Building Inspector or the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify
a property owner by written notice of a sign which has been
erected in contravention of an approved sign plan and any
conditions which have been attached thereto. Said notice shall be
sent by certified mail to the owner of the sign.
(2) The sign owner shall take down or obtain sign plan approval
immediately in accordance with the procedures contained in these
regulations. If the owner of the nonconforming sign has not met the
requirements of the notice, the Building Inspector, the Code
Enforcement Officer or any authorized agent of the Village shall be
authorized to issue a violation against said owner.
J. Removal of certain signs. Any sign, including structural supports or
frame, now or hereafter existing, which no longer identifies a use on the
subject premises or which is not being maintained shall be taken down
and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of
the building or structure upon which such sign is found within 10 days
after written notification from the Building Inspector. Upon failure to
comply with such notice within the time specified in such order, the
Building Inspector shall issue a violation to said owner.
K. Unsafe signs. Should a sign be or become insecure or in danger of
falling or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the Building Inspector, the
owner thereof or person maintaining the same shall, upon receipt of
written notice from the Building Inspector and, in any case, within five
days thereafter, secure the same in a manner to be approved by the
Building Inspector. If such order is not complied with, the Building
Inspector is hereby authorized to cause removal of the unsafe sign, and
any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building,
structure or premises on which such sign is located. When any sign is in
such dangerous condition as to be immediately dangerous to the safety
of the public, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized to take such
action as in his opinion shall be necessary to protect the public or
property. The cost of the removal shall be borne by the owner of the
property on which such sign was erected and shall become a lien upon
such property until paid.
L. Conformance to Village plan. Signs shall conform to any Village Design
Plan for signs, which plan may be adopted by the Planning Board as an
overall guide to signs in a specific area or district, including a facade
design study.
M. Adjustment of sign regulation. The Planning Board may adjust the
requirements for a particular sign, including prohibited signs, where it
finds that they may be impractical due to existing conditions, such as
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 228-26 SUFFERN CODE § 228-26
1:300
the size or location of existing structures, existing vegetation,
topographic conditions and any benefits gained, such as the reduction
of a nonconformity, provided that any such modification will not have
the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the Zoning Law,106 the
Village Development Plan or the Official Map of the Village. In allowing
any modification, the Planning Board shall attach such conditions as
are, in its judgment, necessary to secure the objectives of the standards
or requirements so modified.
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 228-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-26
1:301

ARTICLE VI
Site Planning Design Criteria
§ 228-27. Purpose; findings.
§ 228-28. Applicability.
A. It is the purpose of this Article to promote the health, safety, comfort
and general welfare of the community and to eliminate blight and
promote the character and appearances and to conserve and improve
the property values of the Village, the attractiveness of whose
residential and business areas is the mainstay of the community, by
providing procedures for an architectural review of those business,
commercial, industrial and residential structures henceforth erected,
reconstructed, altered or remodeled in the Village of Suffern, and
thereby:
(1) To encourage good qualities of exterior building design and good
appearances to the sites and surroundings.
(2) To permit originality and resourcefulness in building design and
good appearances which are appropriate to the sites and
surroundings.
(3) To prevent such design and appearances as are offensive to the
visual sensibilities even when the design conforms to existing
design of surrounding structures.
B. The Village Board hereby finds that structures which are visually
offensive or inappropriate by reason of poor qualities or exterior design,
monotonous similarity or striking visual discord in relation to their sites
and surroundings mar the appearances of their areas, impair their use,
enjoyment and desirability and reduce the values of properties, are
detrimental to the characters of neighborhoods, prevent the most
appropriate development and utilization of land and therefore
adversely affect the functioning, economic stability, prosperity, health,
safety and general welfare of the entire community.
A. This article shall not apply to single-family or two-family detached
residential structures or additions or alterations thereto.
B. The requirements of this article shall apply to a building permit for the
construction of a new building or other structure or an alteration or
addition to any building or other structure affecting the exterior of said
building or structure where the cost of such a new building or structure
or alteration or addition to a building or structure is estimated to be
$5,000 or more by the Building Inspector. The requirements shall also
apply to solar energy collectors and microwave dishes, regardless of
cost. The Building Inspector may, in his discretion, refer to the Planning
Board any other application for a building permit.
§ 228-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-29
1:303
§ 228-29. Standards.
A. Relationship of buildings to the site.
(1) The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with
the streetscape and to provide for adequate planting, safe
pedestrian movement and parking areas.
(2) Site planning in which setbacks and yards are in excess of zoning
restrictions is encouraged to provide an interesting relationship
between buildings.
(3) Parking areas shall be treated with decorative elements, building
wall extensions, plantings, berms or other innovative means so as
to screen parking areas from view of public ways.
(4) Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning
district, the height and scale of each building shall be compatible
with its site and existing or anticipated adjoining buildings.
(5) Newly installed utility services and service revisions necessitated
by exterior alterations shall be underground.
(6) All structures in the PO-15 and PO-40, MR-50 and PLI Zoning
Districts shall be oriented in a manner which minimizes visibility of
the structure from the street or highway in order to avoid long
continuous frontages visible from the street or highway. [Added
10-20-1997 by L.L. No. 7-1997]
B. Relationship of buildings and site to adjoining area.
(1) Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles shall be made
compatible by such means as screens, screen breaks and materials.
(2) Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties shall be
provided.
(3) Harmony in texture, lines and masses is required. Monotony shall
be avoided.
C. Landscape and site treatment. Landscape elements included in these
criteria consist of all forms of plantings and vegetation, ground forms,
rock groupings, water patterns and all visible construction except
buildings and utilitarian structures.
(1) Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to the
beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved and
developed. Modifications to topography will be permitted where
they contribute to good appearance.
(2) Grades of walks, parking spaces, terraces and other paved areas
shall provide an inviting and stable appearance for walking and, if
seating is provided, for sitting.
§ 228-29 SUFFERN CODE § 228-29
1:304
(3) Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural
features, strengthen vistas and provide shade. Spectacular effects
shall be reserved for special locations only.
(4) Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant
varieties and other materials and by correlation with adjacent
developments.
(5) Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture
and color and for its ultimate growth. Plants that are indigenous to
the area and others that will be hardy, harmonious to the design
and of good appearance shall be used.
(6) In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrian
or motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree
guards or other devices.
(7) Parking areas and traffic ways shall be enhanced with landscaped
spaces containing trees or tree groupings.
(8) Where building sites limit planting, the placement of trees in
parkways or paved areas is encouraged.
(9) Screening of service yards, dumpster locations and other places
that tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls,
fencing, planting or combinations of these. Screening shall be
equally effective in winter and summer.
(10) In areas where general planting will not prosper, other materials,
such as fences, walls and pavings of wood, brick, stone, gravel and
cobbles, shall be used. Carefully selected plants shall be combined
with such materials where possible.
(11) Exterior lighting, when used, shall enhance the building design and
the adjoining landscape. Lighting standards and building fixtures
shall be of a design and size compatible with the building and
adjacent areas. Lighting shall be restrained in design and excessive
brightness avoided.
D. Building design.
(1) Architectural style is not restricted. Evaluation of the appearance
of a project shall be based on the quality of the design and
materials and relationship to surroundings.
(2) Buildings shall have good scale and be in harmonious conformance
with permanent neighboring development.
(a) Materials shall have a good architectural character and shall
be selected for harmony of the building with its components
and with adjoining buildings.
§ 228-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-29
1:305
(b) Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of
buildings and the design in which they are used. Buildings
shall have the same materials, or those that are architecturally
harmonious, used for all building walls and other exterior
building components wholly or partly visible from public
facilities and ways.
(c) Materials shall be of durable quality.
(d) In any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view,
the structural materials shall be compatible with themselves
and harmonious with their surroundings.
(3) Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets,
shall have good proportions and relationships to one another.
(4) Colors shall be harmonious and shall use only compatible accents.
(5) Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground or
buildings shall be screened from public view with materials
harmonious to the building or they shall be located as not to be
visible from any public ways.
(6) Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept.
Fixtures, standards and all exposed accessories shall be
harmonious with building design.
(7) Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage yards and
exterior work areas shall be screened from view of public ways,
using materials harmonious to the building.
(8) Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be
avoided. Variation of detail, form and siting shall be used to provide
visual interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting or
individual buildings may be used to prevent a monotonous
appearance.
E. Miscellaneous structures and street hardware.
(1) Miscellaneous structures and street hardware shall be designed to
be part of the architectural concept of design and landscape.
Materials shall be compatible with buildings, scale shall be in
harmony with buildings and surroundings and proportions shall be
attractive.
(2) Lighting in connection with miscellaneous structures and street
hardware shall meet the criteria applicable to site, landscape and
buildings.
F. Maintenance; planning and design factors.
(1) Continued good appearance depends upon the extent and quality of
maintenance. The choice of materials and their use, together with
§ 228-29 SUFFERN CODE § 228-29
1:306
§ 228-30. Planning Board limitations.
the types of finishes and other protective measures, must be
conducive to easy maintenance and upkeep.
(2) Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and
wear as well as for their beauty. Proper measures and devices shall
be incorporated for protection against the elements, neglect,
damage and abuse.
(3) Provision for washing and cleaning of buildings and structures and
control of dirt and refuse shall be included in the design.
Configurations that tend to catch and accumulate debris, leaves,
trash, dirt and rubbish shall be avoided.
A. The Planning Board shall restrict its considerations to a reasonable and
professional review of the proposal and plans, leaving full responsibility
for the design and development to the applicant. Such Board shall not
design or assist in the design of any buildings or structures submitted
for approval.
B. The Planning Board shall not unduly restrict new or innovative building
types, materials or methods.
C. In its endeavor to improve the quality of design, the Planning Board
shall consider cost as one factor, along with design, in its efforts to
achieve the objectives of this Article.
§ 228-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-30
1:307

ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 228-31. Adjustment of regulations.
§ 228-32. Amendments.
§ 228-33. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or other part
of these regulations is for any reason held invalid, the remaining portion of
these regulations shall not be affected.
§ 228-34. Enactment.
In order that properties may be developed in accordance with the authority,
jurisdiction and policy of the Village, these regulations are hereby adopted.
A. Where the Planning Board finds that, because of the special
circumstances of a particular case, hardship may result from strict,
compliance with these regulations, it may adjust the regulations so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured,
provided that any such adjustment will not have the effect of nullifying
the intent and purpose of these regulations, the Village Zoning Law,107
the Village Development Plan or the Official Map of the Village. In
granting any adjustment, the Planning Board shall attach such
conditions as are, in its judgment, necessary to secure substantially the
objectives of the standards or requirements so adjusted.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals is not permitted to vary the requirements
of the site plan regulations.
A. Procedure. The Planning Board may adopt amendments to these
regulations after a public hearing and subject to the approval of the
Village Board. Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing
shall be given by publication in the official Village newspaper at least 10
calendar days prior to the date on which it is to be held. A copy of the
amendment to be considered shall be placed on file in the officer of the
Village Clerk, where it shall be available for public inspection during
normal working hours for a period of at least 10 calendar days before
such hearing.
B. Applicability. Amendments shall take effect on the date of Village Board
approval and shall apply to any site plan which has not received
approval prior to such date.
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
§ 228-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-34
1:309
Chapter 231
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
235, Art. III.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 239.
Fees — See Ch. A275.
§ 231-1. Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter shall be defined, deemed and construed to
have the following meanings:
LAND — Any parcel of land or portion thereof, the boundary lines of which
can be ascertained by reference to the maps and records, or either, in
the office of the Tax Assessor of the Town of Ramapo or the office of the
Rockland County Clerk.
MOVE — To dig, to excavate, to remove, to grade, regrade, level or
otherwise alter or change the location or contour; to transport; or to supply.
This term shall not be construed to include plowing, spading, cultivating,
harrowing or discing of soil or any other operation usually and ordinarily
associated with the tilling of soil for agricultural or horticultural purposes.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation or
any group of two or more of them or anyone acting in behalf of said person.
SOIL — Any earth, topsoil, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt,
without regard to the presence or absence of organic matter therein.
§ 231-2. Permit required.108
No person, firm or corporation shall move or cause, allow, permit or suffer
to be moved any soil from, in or upon any land in the Village of Suffern
unless and until a soil permit shall first have been issued by the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Suffern.
§ 231-3. Responsibility of landowner.
No owner of any land in the Village of Suffern shall cause, allow, permit or
suffer any soil in or upon such land to be moved from said premises by any
person, firm or corporation until such person, firm or corporation has first
obtained a soil permit to do so.
§ 231-4. Exception.
No soil permit shall be required in connection with the construction,
alteration, addition to or repairing of any building erected or hereafter
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 228-34 SUFFERN CODE § 231-4
1:310
erected on any land or the excavation, filling, landscaping or grading
incidental to the use of such building on said land, including the installation,
repair or replacement of a sanitary system used in connection therewith,
provided that the finished grade on such land after completion of said work
shall not be lowered to a point more than six inches higher than the crown
of the road abutting the property upon which such building shall be located.
Further, any holes left as the result of excavation shall not be filled with
stones, boulders, debris or stumps unless they are covered with at least
three feet of soil.
§ 231-5. Application information.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to excavate on any lands within the
corporate limits of the Village of Suffern for the purpose of removing soil
shall, before commencing work on such excavation, file with the Building
Inspector a written application on a form furnished by the Village for a
permit therefor, which application shall contain the following data:
§ 231-6. Review of application by Board of Trustees.
Said application and information attached thereto shall be reviewed by the
Board of Trustees and may be refused or denied in the discretion of said
Board; provided, however, that if, at the time of making said application,
the applicant shall request a hearing in connection with the same, a date
shall be set upon sufficient notice to afford the applicant an opportunity for
such hearing. If, after examination of the application and data and hearing,
if requested, the Board of Trustees shall approve of said application, the
Village Clerk shall issue a permit subject to the terms of this chapter and
any special conditions found necessary in this specific case. Said permit
shall be good to the end of the calendar year and must be renewed each
year.
§ 231-7. Review of application by Building Inspector and Planning
Board.
Said application shall first be reviewed by the Building Inspector and then
referred to the Board of Trustees with recommendation. Before final action
is taken by the Board of Trustees in accordance with this chapter, the Board
of Trustees shall refer the matter to the Planning Board of the Village of
Suffern and shall consider the recommendation, if any, and advice of the
Board.
A. Present contour lines and contour grades of the lots and lands.
B. Proposed contour lines and proposed contour grades resulting from
such intended removal of soil, in relation to the adjoining property.
C. Grades of all abutting streets, lots and lands.
D. Such other pertinent data the Board of Trustees may require.
§ 231-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-8
1:311
§ 231-8. Considerations.
In considering and reviewing the application and in issuing or denying the
license, the Board of Trustees shall be guided by the general purpose of
municipal planning and shall take into consideration the following factors:
§ 231-9. Performance bond.
Before any permit shall be issued, the applicant shall file with the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Suffern a performance bond with satisfactory
surety, the amount to be determined by the Building Inspector and the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern, which bond shall be conditioned
upon full and faithful performance by the principal within the time specified
in the application of all the proposed work as set forth in the application
and which may be found necessary by the Board of Trustees. In addition,
the bond shall be conditioned upon the repair, at the expense of the owner
or applicant, of any street or streets damaged by the transportation of
soil in connection with the application if, in the judgment of the Board,
such repairs are deemed to be necessary. The term "expense," as used in
this section, shall include the cost and supervision incurred by the Village
Building Inspector in connection with such repairs.
§ 231-10. Retention of topsoil.
The owner of the premises or the person in charge of the removal of soil,
when permission has been duly granted, shall not take away the top layer
of arable soil for a depth of six inches, but such top layer of arable soil to a
depth of six inches shall be set aside for retention on the premises and shall
be respread over the premises when the rest of the soil has been removed,
pursuant to levels and contour lines approved by the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Suffern.
§ 231-11. Manner of removal.
In the removal of soil, when permission has been duly granted to the owner
or person, it shall be done in such manner that, upon completion, there
A. Soil erosion by water and wind.
B. Surface water drainage.
C. Soil fertility.
D. Lateral support of abutting streets, lots and lands.
E. Public health and safety.
F. Land values and uses.
G. Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the Village.
H. Water table.
§ 231-8 SUFFERN CODE § 231-11
1:312
shall be no sharp declivities, pits or depressions and in such a manner
that, upon completion, the area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of
debris and graded and seeded to conform to the contour lines and grades as
approved by the Building Inspector and the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Suffern. No operation governed by this chapter shall be permitted on
Sunday or before 6:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m., Eastern standard time.
§ 231-12. Inspection.
The Building Inspector, Village Engineer, Mayor and/or any member of the
Board of Trustees or Planning Board shall have at all times the right to
inspect any property where a license has been issued under the provisions
of this chapter. In order to facilitate this right of inspection, the owners of
said property shall cause sufficient grade and boundary stakes to be put in
place while work is going on or about to commence. The Building Inspector,
Board of Trustees and Planning Board shall have the right to inspect said
property at any time for the purpose of laying out roads, drainage or for any
other purpose deemed in the best interest of the Village of Suffern.
§ 231-13. Fees.109
Together with the application, there shall be deposited with the Building
Inspector a permit fee as set by resolution of the Board of Trustees in the
Standard Schedule Fees of the Village of Suffern.110 However, the Board
of Trustees may waive or modify this requirement for the entire payment
initially but shall require not less than 10% of the total permit fee to be
paid with the application. The balance of the fee shall be paid in monthly
installments equal to the number of yards removed in each month multiplied
by the amount stipulated in this section. The monthly installments shall be
paid on or before the 10th day of the month following the month in which
the soil or rock has been removed. Failure to make payment on this date
shall result in suspension of the permit until all arrears shall have been paid.
§ 231-14. Penalties for offenses.111
Any person who shall violate this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions, for each
offense.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 231-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-14
1:313
Chapter 233
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 141.
Quarrying and blasting — See Ch. 209.
Site plan regulations — See Ch. 228.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 239.
Zoning — See Ch. 266.
Zoning and planning application fees — See
Ch. 267.
§ 231-14 SUFFERN CODE § 231-14
1:314
ARTICLE I
Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control
[Adopted 6-6-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005112]
§ 233-1. Findings of fact.
It is hereby determined that:
A. Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition.
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
waterborne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and
other desirable species.
C. Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat.
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff thereby
increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation.
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream base flow.
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the municipality.
G. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities.
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety.
I. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
112. Editor's Note: This local law was originally adopted as a new Ch. 241, but was included as
Art. I of Ch. 233 to maintain the organizational structure of the Code.
§ 233-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-2
1:315
§ 233-2. Purpose; objectives.
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management
requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health,
safety, and welfare of the public residing within the Village of Suffern and
to address the findings of fact in § 233-1 hereof. This article seeks to meet
those purposes by achieving the following objectives:
§ 233-3. Statutory authority.
In accordance with Article 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State
of New York, the Board of Trustees of Suffern has the authority to enact
local laws and amend local laws for the purpose of promoting the health,
safety or general welfare of the Village of Suffern and for the protection
and enhancement of its physical environment. The Board of Trustees of
Suffern may include in any such local law provisions for the appointment of
any municipal officer, employees, or independent contractor to effectuate,
administer and enforce such local law.
§ 233-4. Applicability.
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the NYS
Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) State Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges from Municipal Separate Stormwater Sewer Systems
(MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02 or as amended or revised;
B. Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the NYSDEC SPDES General Permit for Construction
Activities GP-02-01 or as amended or revised;
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
D. Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development activities which would otherwise degrade local water
quality;
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable: and
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management
practices and to ensure that these management practices are properly
maintained and eliminate threats to public safety.
A. This article shall be applicable to all land development activities as
defined in this article, § 233-6.
§ 233-2 SUFFERN CODE § 233-4
1:316
§ 233-5. Exemptions.
The following activities may be exempt from review under this article
unless the Board of Trustees on recommendation from the Stormwater
Management Officer rescinds the exemption.
B. The Stormwater Management Officer shall accept and review (or
delegate review of) all stormwater pollution prevention plans and
forward such plans to the applicable municipal board. The Stormwater
Management Officer shall review the plans, and may, where authorized
to do so, engage the services of a registered professional engineer to
review the plans, specifications and related documents with the cost
paid from an escrow account established pursuant to § 267-3 of the
Village Code, or, at the Stormwater Management Officer's discretion,
accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans
conform to the requirements of this article.
C. All land development activities subject to review and approval by the
applicable board of the Village of Suffern under subdivision, site plan,
and/or special permit regulations shall be reviewed subject to the
standards contained in this article.
D. All land development activities not subject to review as stated in
Subsection C shall be required to submit a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) (when required under the NYSDEC General
SPEDES Permit) of the Stormwater Management Officer who shall
accept the SWPPP if it complies with the requirements of this article.
A. Agricultural activity as defined in this article.
B. Silvicultural activity except that landing areas and log haul roads are
subject to this article.
C. Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and are
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of a facility.
D. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Stormwater Management Officer.
E. Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved
and a building permit issued by the Village of Suffern on or before the
effective date of this article.
F. Land development activities for which a building permit has been
approved on or before the effective date of this article.
G. Cemetery graves.
H. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds
of posts or poles.
§ 233-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-5
1:317
§ 233-6. Definitions.
The terms used in this article or in documents prepared or reviewed under
this article shall have the meanings as set forth in this section.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land development activity.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls
and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover (or
removes impervious surfaces exposing soils that are not immediately
recovered with impervious surfaces).
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual, most recent version including applicable updates, which serves
as the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and
practices.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
I. Emergency activity necessary to protect life, property or natural
resources.
J. Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetables and other plants primarily for use by that person
and his or her family.
K. Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing
structure.
§ 233-5 SUFFERN CODE § 233-6
1:318
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snow melt and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A state pollutant discharge
elimination system permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries, which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction activity including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or activities
disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger
common plan of development or sale, even though multiple separate and
distinct land development activities may take place at different times on
different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Cold-water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, and
habitats for threatened, endangered or special concern species.
§ 233-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-6
1:319
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land, latest issue.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal
separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality
standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards, latest issue.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — The Director of the
Department of Public Works or officer designated by him to accept and
review (or delegate review) stormwater pollution prevention plans, forward
the plans to the applicable municipal board and inspect stormwater
management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPS) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
§ 233-6 SUFFERN CODE § 233-6
1:320
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons, which also meet the criteria
of this definition, are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water, which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 233-7. Stormwater pollution prevention plans (SWPPP).
A. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement. No application for
approval of a land development activity shall be reviewed until the
appropriate board has received a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) prepared in accordance with the specifications in this article.
B. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
(1) All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information
and erosion and sediment controls:
(a) Background information about the scope of the project,
including location, type and size of project;
(b) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, at a scale no
less than one inch equals 100 feet, including a general location
map. At a minimum, the site map should show the total site
area; all improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that will
not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent offsite
surface water(s); wetlands and drainage patterns that
could be affected by the construction activity; existing and final
slopes; locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or
equipment storage areas; and location(s) of the stormwater
discharges(s);
(c) Description of the soil(s) present at the site;
(d) Construction phasing plans describing the intended sequence
of construction activities, including clearing and grubbing,
excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation
and any other activity at the site that results in soil
disturbance. Consistent with the New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Erosion
Control Manual) not more than five acres shall be disturbed at
any one time unless pursuant to an approved SWPPP;
§ 233-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-7
1:321
(e) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be
used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction
debris from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
(f) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on-site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials, including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response;
(g) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures
to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment
control for each stage of the project from initial land clearing
and grubbing to project close-out;
(h) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control
practice;
(i) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting
and sizing of any temporary sediment basins;
(j) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent
control measures;
(k) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in
place;
(l) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice;
(m) Name(s) of the receiving water(s);
(n) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site;
(o) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows
from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and
the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to
the degree attainable; and
(p) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the
site.
(2) Land development activities as defined in § 233-6 of this article and
meeting Condition A, B or C below shall also include water quantity
and water quality controls (postconstruction stormwater runoff
controls) as set forth in Subsection B(3) below as applicable:
§ 233-7 SUFFERN CODE § 233-7
1:322
(a) Condition A: stormwater runoff from land development
activities discharging a pollutant of concern to either an
impaired water identified on the Department's 303(d) list of
impaired waters or a total maximum daily load (TMDL)
designated watershed for which pollutants in stormwater have
been identified as a source of the impairment (2005 includes
only Greenwood Lake).
(b) Condition B: stormwater runoff from land development
activities disturbing five or more acres.
(c) Condition C: stormwater runoff from land development activity
disturbing between one and five acres of land during the
course of the project, exclusive of the construction of singlefamily
residences and construction activities at agricultural
properties.
(3) SWPPP requirements for Conditions A, B and C:
(a) All information in Subsection B(1) of this article.
(b) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(c) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific
location(s) and size(s) of each postconstruction stormwater
management practice.
(d) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural
components of the stormwater management system for the
applicable design storms.
(e) Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions.
(f) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
each postconstruction stormwater management practice.
(g) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice.
(h) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection
and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall
remain in effect with transfer of title to the property.
(i) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all
subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater
management measures in accordance with § 233-9 of this
article.
§ 233-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-7
1:323
§ 233-8. Performance and design criteria.
All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance
and design criteria:
C. Plan certification. The SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape
architect, certified professional or professional engineer and must be
signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that the
design of all stormwater management practices meet the requirements
in this article.
D. Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other
applicable environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the
land development activity prior to approval of the final stormwater
design plan.
E. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor who will be involved in soil
disturbance and/or stormwater management practice installation
identified in the SWPPP shall sign and date a copy of the following
certification statement before undertaking any land development
activity: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand and agree
to comply with the terms and conditions of the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for
any person to cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature; address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made.
(3) The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for
the land development activity.
F. A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land
development activity during construction from the date of initiation of
construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this article, the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are
designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
article:
(1) The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most
current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the
"Design Manual").
§ 233-7 SUFFERN CODE § 233-8
1:324
§ 233-9. Maintenance and repair of stormwater facilities.
(2) New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control, (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2004, most current version or its successor, hereafter
referred to as the "Erosion Control Manual").
B. Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause
an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to
natural conditions in surface waters of the State of New York.
A. Maintenance during construction.
(1) The applicant or developer of the land development activity shall at
all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of
treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are
installed or used by the applicant or developer to achieve
compliance with the conditions of this article. Sediment shall be
removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever their
design capacity has been reduced by 50%.
(2) The applicant or developer or his or her representative shall be on
site at all times when construction or grading activity takes place
and shall inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices. Inspection reports shall be completed
every seven days and within 24 hours of any storm event producing
0.5 inch of precipitation or more. The reports shall be delivered to
the Stormwater Management Officer weekly and also copied to the
site logbook.
B. Maintenance easement(s). Prior to the issuance of any approval that
has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the
applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement
agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served
by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for
access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
Village of Suffern to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper
working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this article. The grantor in the office of the County Clerk
shall record the easement after approval by the counsel for the Village
of Suffern.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
article shall operate and maintain the stormwater management
practices to achieve the goals of this article. Proper operation and
maintenance also includes as a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
§ 233-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-9
1:325
§ 233-10. Severability; when effective.
§ 233-11. Requirements for subdivisions.
In addition to other requirements for approval of a subdivision, the
following requirements shall apply:
appurtenances), which are installed or used, by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this article.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause
or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance
with § 233-8B.
D. Maintenance agreements. The Village of Suffern shall review and
approve a formal maintenance agreement for stormwater management
facilities binding on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the
office of the County Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to
final plan approval. The maintenance agreement shall be consistent
with the terms and conditions of Schedule B113 of this article entitled
"Sample Stormwater Control Facility Maintenance Agreement." The
Village of Suffern, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole
discretion, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater
management facility, provided such facility meets all the requirements
of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and
sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular
maintenance. The Village of Suffern may, at its discretion, establish
drainage districts to pay for all future maintenance costs.
A. Severability. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection,
paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not
affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection,
paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article.
B. Effective date. This article shall be effective upon filing with the office
of the Secretary of State.
A. For preliminary subdivision plat: A stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPPP) consistent with the requirements of §§ 233-1 through
233-10 of this article shall be required for preliminary subdivision plat
approval. The SWPPP shall meet the performance and design criteria
and standards in §§ 233-6 through 233-10 of this article. The approved
preliminary subdivision plat shall be consistent with the provisions of
this article.
113. Editor's Note: Schedule B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 233-9 SUFFERN CODE § 233-11
1:326
§ 233-12. Site plan review.
In addition to other requirements for approval of a site plan, the following
requirements shall apply:
§ 233-13. Erosion and Sediment Control Law.
The Erosion and Sediment Control Law of the Village of Suffern is hereby
adopted in general conformance with the New York State Model Erosion
and Sediment Control Ordinance, March 2003 as described by the
provisions of this article.
§ 233-14. Administration and enforcement.
B. For final subdivision plat approval; Stormwater pollution prevention
plan: A stormwater pollution prevention plan consistent with the
requirements of §§ 233-1 through 233-10 of this article and with the
terms of preliminary plan approval shall be required for final
subdivision plat approval. The SWPPP shall meet the performance and
design criteria and standards in §§ 233-6 through 233-10 of this article.
The approved final subdivision plat shall be consistent with the
provisions of this article.
A. For site plan approval: A stormwater pollution prevention plan
consistent with the requirements of §§ 233-1 through 233-10 of this
article shall be required for site plan approval. The SWPPP shall meet
the performance and design criteria and standards in §§ 233-6 through
233-10 of this article. The approved site plan shall be consistent with
the provisions of this article.
A. Construction inspection.
(1) Erosion and sediment control inspection.
(a) The Village of Suffern Stormwater Management Officer may
require such inspections as necessary to determine compliance
with this article and may either approve that portion of the
work completed or notify the applicant wherein the work fails
to comply with the requirements of this article and the
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as approved. To
obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the Village of
Suffern enforcement official or his designee at least 48 hours
before any of the following as required by the Stormwater
Management Officer (for each phase of construction, if
applicable):
[1] Start of construction.
[2] Installation of sediment and erosion control measures.
[3] Completion of site clearing.
§ 233-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-14
1:327
[4] Completion of rough grading.
[5] Completion of final grading.
[6] Close of the construction season.
[7] Completion of final landscaping.
[8] Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(b) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and take
required corrective actions. No further work shall be
conducted except for site stabilization until any violations are
corrected and all work previously completed has received
approval by the Stormwater Management Officer.
(2) Stormwater management practice inspections and as-built plans.
The Village of Suffern Stormwater Management Officer, or his
designee, will conduct inspections of stormwater management
practices (SMPs). All applicants are required to submit as-built
plans for any stormwater management practices located on-site
after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final
design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and
must be certified by a professional engineer.
(3) Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion.
Inspection programs shall be established on a reasonable basis,
including but not limited to, routine inspections; random
inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of
possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas
identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other
contaminants or pollutants; inspections based on possible impacts
to highly sensitive or valuable community water resources;
inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with
higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with
discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical
discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment
quality standards or the SPDES stormwater permit; and joint
inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or
safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to,
reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges,
surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage
control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control
facilities and other stormwater management practices.
(4) Submission of reports. The Village of Suffern Stormwater
Management Officer may require monitoring and reporting from
entities subject to this article as are necessary to determine
compliance with this article.
§ 233-14 SUFFERN CODE § 233-14
1:328
(5) Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new stormwater
management facility is installed on private property or when any
new connection is made between private property and the public
stormwater system, the landowner shall grant to the Village of
Suffern the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a
reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection as specified in
Subsection A(3).
B. Performance guarantee.
(1) Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Village of Suffern in
its approval of the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the
Village of Suffern will require the applicant or developer to provide,
prior to construction, a performance bond, in an amount acceptable
to the Stormwater Management Officer in a form acceptable to the
Village Attorney which guarantees satisfactory completion of the
project and names the Village of Suffern as the beneficiary. The
performance guarantee shall remain in force until the surety is
released from liability by the Village of Suffern, provided that such
period shall not be less than one year from the date of final
acceptance or such other certification that the facility(ies) have
been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications and that a one-year inspection has been conducted
and the facilities have been found to be acceptable to the Village of
Suffern.
(2) Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control facilities are to be operated and
maintained by the developer or by a corporation that owns or
manages a commercial or industrial facility, the developer, prior to
construction, may be required to provide the Village of Suffern with
an irrevocable letter of credit from an approved financial institution
or surety to ensure proper operation and maintenance of all
stormwater management and erosion control facilities, both during
and after construction, and until the facilities are removed from
operation. If the developer or landowner fails to properly operate
and maintain stormwater management and erosion and sediment
control facilities, the Village of Suffern may draw upon the account
to cover the costs of proper operation and maintenance, including
engineering and inspection costs.
(3) Recordkeeping. The Village of Suffern may require entities subject
to this article to maintain records demonstrating compliance with
this article.
C. Enforcement and penalties.
(1) Notice of violation. When the Village of Suffern determines that a
land development activity is not being carried out in accordance
§ 233-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-14
1:329
with the requirements of this article, it may issue a written notice
of violation to the landowner. The notice of violation shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the landowner, developer or
applicant.
(b) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring.
(c) A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
(d) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
land development activity into compliance with this article and
a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action.
(e) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed.
(f) A statement that the determination of violation may be
appealed to the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal
within 15 days of service of notice of violation.
(2) Stop-work orders. The Village of Suffern may issue a stop-work
order for violations of this article. Persons receiving a stop-work
order shall be required to halt all land development activities,
except those activities that address the violations leading to the
stop-work order. The stop-work order shall be in effect until the
Village of Suffern confirms that the land development activity is in
compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed.
Failure to address a stop-work order in a timely manner may result
in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the
enforcement measures authorized in this article.
(3) Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is
conducted contrary to this article, may be restrained by injunction
or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
(4) Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this
article shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not
exceeding $5,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six
months, or both for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a
second offense, both of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than
$700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or
both. However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon
courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall
be deemed misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions
of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each
week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation.
§ 233-14 SUFFERN CODE § 233-14
1:330
§ 233-15. Fees for services.
The Village of Suffern may require any person undertaking land
development activities regulated by this article to pay reasonable costs at
prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP maintenance
performed by the Village of Suffern or performed by a third party for the
Village of Suffern.
(5) Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this
article, the Stormwater Management Officer may prevent the
occupancy of said building or land.
(6) Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land
to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not
undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the Village of
Suffern may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which
shall become a lien upon the property until paid.
§ 233-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-15
1:331

ARTICLE II
Illicit Discharge and Connection to Storm Drainage
[Adopted 6-6-2005 by L.L. No. 5-2005114]
§ 233-16. Purpose; objectives.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Village of Suffern through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum
extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to:
§ 233-17. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — Employees or designees of the
director of the municipal agency designated to enforce this article.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits. Currently these include construction projects resulting in land
disturbance of five acres or more. Beginning in March 2003, NPDES
Stormwater Phase II permits will be required for construction projects
resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include
A. Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.
B. Prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate
storm sewer system.
C. Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
article.
114. Editor's Note: This local law was originally adopted as a new Ch. 240, but was included as
Art. II of Ch. 233 to maintain the organizational structure of the Code.
§ 233-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-17
1:333
but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and
demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 233-22 of this article.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Either of the following:
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by EPA [or by
a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)] that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide
basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may
cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including
but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain
or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by
an authorized enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
B.
§ 233-17 SUFFERN CODE § 233-17
1:334
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER CONTROL OFFICER — The Director of the Village of
Suffern Department of Public Works.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
§ 233-18. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
§ 233-19. Responsibility for administration.
The Stormwater Control Officer shall administer, implement, and enforce
the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon
the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the
Stormwater Control Officer to persons or entities acting in the beneficial
interest of or in the employ of the Village of Suffern.
§ 233-20. Severability.
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
article.
§ 233-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-21
1:335
§ 233-21. Standards to be minimum standards.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 233-22. Discharge prohibitions; connection prohibitions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses
any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of
applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The
commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the
storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article: water line flushing or other potable
water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted
stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or
footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering
systems), crawl space pumps, air-conditioning condensation,
springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian
habitat of wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated,
typically less than one PPM chlorine), fire-fighting activities, and
any other water source not containing pollutants.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time
of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge
order issued to the discharger and administered under the
authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable
laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
grantee for any discharge to the storm drain system.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
§ 233-21 SUFFERN CODE § 233-22
1:336
§ 233-23. Suspension of MS4 access.
§ 233-24. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Stormwater Control Officer prior to the allowing of
discharges to the MS4.
§ 233-25. Monitoring of discharges.
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
Stormwater Control Officer may, without prior notice, suspend MS4
discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop
an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or
welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the
United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have his or her
MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a
violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may
petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and
hearing.
C. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior
approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The Stormwater Control Officer shall be permitted to enter and
inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as
may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a
discharger has security measures in force which require proper
§ 233-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-25
1:337
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the Stormwater Control Officer ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept
under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater,
and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state
and federal law.
(3) The Stormwater Control Officer shall have the right to set up on
any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion
of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/
or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
(4) The Stormwater Control Officer has the right to require the
discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the
Stormwater Control Officer and shall not be replaced. The costs of
clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Stormwater Control Officer
access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater
discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of
a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated
with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the
authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted
facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this article.
(7) If the Stormwater Control Officer has been refused access to any
part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/
she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may
be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency
may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 233-25 SUFFERN CODE § 233-26
1:338
§ 233-26. Requirement to use of best management practices.
The Stormwater Control Officer will adopt requirements identifying best
management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may
cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm
drain system, or waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial
or industrial establishment shall provide, at his or her own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials
or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses
through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any
person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the
source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's
expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer
system, Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity,
to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of
this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES
permit.
§ 233-27. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse,
so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 233-28. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain
system, or water of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event
of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately
notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency
dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials,
said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or
by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in
person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and
mailed to the Stormwater Control Officer within three business days of
the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from
a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such
§ 233-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-28
1:339
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge
and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be
retained for at least three years.
§ 233-29. Notice of violation.
§ 233-30. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the Stormwater Control Officer. The notice of appeal must be personally
served on the Village Clerk within 14 days from the date of the notice
of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Board of Trustees or its
designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the
notice of appeal.
§ 233-31. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 14
days of the decision of the Board of Trustees upholding the decision of
the Stormwater Control Officer, then representatives of the authorized
enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are
A. Whenever the Stormwater Control Officer finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the
Stormwater Control Officer may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without
limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property; and
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
§ 233-28 SUFFERN CODE § 233-31
1:340
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation
and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner,
agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for
the purposes set forth above.
§ 233-32. Cost of abatement.
Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the
assessment by filing a detailed protest with the Village Clerk within 14 days.
If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the
decision or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the
charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall
constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment and shall
be levied on the next Village real property tax bill. Any person violating any
of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the Village by reason
of such violation. Interest at the rate of 18% per annum shall be assessed on
the balance beginning on the 31st day following discovery of the violation.
§ 233-33. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the Board of Trustees may
institute an action for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the
person from activities which would create further violations or compelling
the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 233-34. Alternative compensatory action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized
by this article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a
violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling,
attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
§ 233-35. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 233-36. Criminal prosecution.
Any person who has violated or continues to violate this article shall be
liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be
subject to a criminal penalty of up to $500 per violation per day and/or
§ 233-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-36
1:341
imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 30 days. The Stormwater
Control Officer may recover all attorney's fees, court costs and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling
and monitoring expenses.
§ 233-37. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the
discretion of the Stormwater Control Officer to seek cumulative remedies.
§ 233-36 SUFFERN CODE § 233-37
1:342
Chapter 235
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush and weeds — See Ch. 93.
Parades — See Ch. 181.
Shopping carts — See Ch. 224.
Soil removal — See Ch. 231.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 239.
Fees — See Ch. A275.
§ 233-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-37
1:343

ARTICLE I
Street Amusements
[Adopted 2-8-1971 as Ch. 3 of the 1971 Code]
§ 235-1. Prohibited activities.
The following amusements or acts are hereby declared illegal:
§ 235-2. Penalties for offenses. Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No.
3-1990]
The following penalties are imposed for any violation of this article not
heretofore specifically provided for: Any person, firm or corporation
violating any provision of this article not heretofore expressly provided for
shall be liable to the penalties as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
A. Coasting on any public street.
B. Playing ball or throwing stones, snowballs, sticks or other hard things
on the public streets.
C. Riding a bicycle on a public sidewalk or riding a bicycle on a public
thoroughfare between one hour after sunset and one hour before
sunrise without a good headlight whose rays can be seen for 200 feet.
§ 235-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-2
1:345

ARTICLE II
Obstructions and Encroachments
[Adopted 2-8-1971 by Art. I of Ch. 43 of the 1971 Code]
§ 235-3. Awnings restricted.
No awning shall be maintained over public property, any part of which is
less than 6 1/2 feet from the walk or surface beneath and the projection of
which is less than five feet from the curbline. The Board of Trustees shall
remove any awning maintained in violation of this article after five days'
written notice has been given of such violation to the owner or maintainer
thereof.
§ 235-4. Excavations.
Excavations immediately adjacent to any public street or grounds shall be
promptly completed and the permanent wall fixture expeditiously installed.
The owner of such property shall see that proper light, fences and every
other reasonable precaution are used to prevent accident or damage
because of such work.
§ 235-5. Obstructions prohibited; exceptions; temporary
freestanding business signs. [Amended 5-4-2009 by L.L. No. 6-2009]
A. Obstructions prohibited. Except as otherwise provided herein, no
person shall place or deposit on any public street or sidewalk or on any
area generally used as a sidewalk or any part or portion thereof any
structure, material, stand, sign or other substance of any kind for the
sale or display of merchandise or advertisement of any kind or nature.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to interfere with any
reasonable use of such streets or sidewalks for the loading or unloading
of merchandise containers or refuse or for the placing of garbage or
refuse at the curb on appointed days for the collection thereof.
B. Temporary freestanding business signs.
(1) Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall
have the meanings indicated:
A-FRAME FREESTANDING BUSINESS SIGN — A movable sign
constructed with two sides attached at the top so as to allow the
sign to stand in an upright position.
(2) Permit required. It shall be unlawful to display, erect, relocate, or
alter any sign without first filing with the Building Department an
application for an A-frame sign and obtaining a sign permit. Fees
for an A-frame freestanding business sign permit shall be
established in the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Village of
Suffern.115 A permit shall be issued within five business days if an
115. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 235-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-5
1:347
A-frame freestanding business sign complies with the regulations
set forth herein and is proposed to be situated at a location
adjudged by the Building Department to be safe and not to
interfere with pedestrian traffic. Prior to issuance of a permit, the
Building Department shall cause the location of the proposed Aframe
freestanding business sign to be inspected for compliance
with these regulations. Site plan approval is not required for an
A-frame freestanding business sign for which a permit has been
issued. Permits shall be valid for a period expiring at the end of
each calendar year and must be renewed annually.
(3) A-frame sign regulations.
(a) No more than one A-frame freestanding business sign may be
permitted for each retail or restaurant business premises upon
issuance of a permit from the Building Department on a portion
of the sidewalk immediately adjacent to a retail business or
restaurant in accordance with these regulations. An A-frame
freestanding business sign shall not exceed the dimensions of
32 inches wide and 36 inches tall, and it shall have no more
than two faces. An A-frame freestanding business sign may
advertise only the business lawfully practiced within the
premises. All signs shall be professionally manufactured or
crafted and maintained in good repair. An A-frame
freestanding business sign may not be illuminated or contain
any electrical component. All components of an A-frame
freestanding business sign shall be nonmoving and stationary,
and nothing may be attached thereto. An A-frame freestanding
business sign may not be chained, attached or affixed to any
object. [Amended 10-1-2012 by L.L. No. 13-2012]
(b) All A-frame freestanding business signs may be displayed only
during hours a business is open and shall be removed at the
daily close of business and must, in any case, be removed prior
to 8:00 p.m. All A-frame freestanding business signs must be
removed in the case of snowfall or excessive winds.
(c) An A-frame freestanding business sign may not be placed in
front of a business establishment unless a minimum pedestrian
clearance of four feet of unobstructed space exists. A
permitted A-frame freestanding business sign shall be placed
out of the way of pedestrian traffic and in a manner that does
not interfere with pedestrian street crossings, persons exiting
parked vehicles or deliveries. No temporary freestanding
business sign shall be placed so as to interfere with vehicular
traffic by obstructing sight lines for streets, pedestrian rightsof-
way and driveways. An A-frame freestanding business sign
shall not otherwise be placed in a location that the Building
Department believes to be hazardous or inappropriate to the
accomplishment of the foregoing.
§ 235-5 SUFFERN CODE § 235-5
1:348
§ 235-6. Snow removal. [Amended 10-23-1978 by L.L. No. 9-1978;
3-12-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
(d) Any Code Enforcement Officer or Building Inspector who finds
a temporary freestanding business sign so placed that the sign
as located causes an obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular
traffic or restricts the vision of drivers of vehicles on abutting
streets or on the subject property may cause the sign to be
removed.
(e) All temporary freestanding business signs shall be kept in good
repair and in a proper state of preservation. Every temporary
freestanding business sign and the premises immediately
surrounding the sign shall be maintained by the owner or
person in charge thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive
condition and free and clear of all obnoxious substances,
rubbish and garbage.
(4) Enforcement. This section may be enforced by the Building
Department and Code Enforcement Officer. In addition to other
penalties prescribed by this chapter, the Building Department may
revoke the permit of any owner, tenant or occupant of premises
who violates the provisions of this law. Anyone aggrieved by any
such revocation may appeal the same to the Board of Trustees
within five business days after issuance of such revocation in
writing by filing a letter with the Village Clerk setting forth in detail
the basis for such appeal. The Board of Trustees shall consider such
appeal at its next regularly scheduled Village Board meeting.
A. All owners of property are hereby required to remove all snow and ice
within 10 daylight hours after cessation of a snowstorm from sidewalks
adjoining their property and from all fire hydrants on their property or
adjoining their property, and must continue to keep same clear of snow
and ice at all times thereafter as necessary. Said sidewalks must be
cleared for the entire length of sidewalk adjoining the property and a
minimum of 30 inches in width. Fire hydrants must be cleared by a
minimum of 36 inches in all directions, and a clear path must be
provided to the street for said fire hydrants. Owners of single-family
dwellings who are physically disabled are exempt from the
requirements of removing snow and ice from fire hydrants if they notify
the Village Clerk prior to November 1 of each year. The owners of all
apartments and of all professional and commercial buildings and all
condominium associations shall, in addition, remove all snow and ice
from all parking areas and access roads thereto under their control and
from all fire lanes within 10 daylight hours after the cessation of a
snowstorm. Access to all dwellings and buildings shall be provided for
emergency vehicles within five daylight hours after cessation of a
snowstorm. [Amended 7-11-2011 by L.L. No. 9-2011]
B. It is prohibited to deposit snow or ice on any sidewalk, street, right-ofway
or storm drain or to obstruct any drainage course. It is further
§ 235-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-6
1:349
prohibited to pile or plow snow to a height of three feet or more within
10 feet from any corner or intersection of any road or highway. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to employees of the Village
of Suffern in the performance of their duty.
C. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent to comply
with the provisions of Subsection B of this section, the Superintendent
of Public Works is hereby authorized and empowered to contract for the
removal of the ice and snow or to order its removal by the Village of
Suffern. The actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of 6%
per annum from the date of completion of the work, shall be charged to
the owner of such property; and if said amount remains unpaid, it will
be placed on the next regular tax bill of the Village of Suffern. Where
the full amount due the Village is not paid by such owner within 10 days
after the removal of such ice or snow, then, and in that case, the
Superintendent of Public Works shall file a sworn statement with the
Village Clerk showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the
date the work was done and the location of the property on which said
work was done. The recordation of such sworn statement shall
constitute a lien and privilege on the property and shall remain in full
force and effect for the same amount due in principal and interest, plus
costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been made.
Said costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law
for the collection of taxes. Sworn statements recorded in accordance
with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal
formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done
properly and satisfactorily and shall be full notice to every person
concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a
charge against the property designated or described in the statement
and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law.
D. Permit required. [Added 3-5-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014; amended
11-8-2017 by L.L. No. 7-2017]
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall, on a for-hire basis, plow snow,
ice, sleet or similar matter or cause or allow the same to be plowed
or placed by the use of any vehicle, including but not limited to a
car, truck, pickup truck, van, all-terrain vehicle, front-end loader or
motor-operated snow blower within the Village of Suffern unless a
permit therefor, as hereinafter prescribed, issued by Department of
Public Works, is in full force and effect and such permit is
prominently displayed by affixing it to the vehicle so as to be readily
visible from the exterior thereof or as otherwise prescribed by the
Department of Public Works. The requirement to obtain a permit
shall not apply to a person who resides at the property that is being
plowed by that person.
(2) Application for such permit shall be made to the Department of
Public Works by the owner of the vehicle or a business or person
which employs the use of such vehicle(s) for the purposes of snow
removal within the Village of Suffern on a for-hire basis, in writing,
§ 235-6 SUFFERN CODE § 235-6
1:350
§ 235-7. Repair and maintenance of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
[Added 5-28-1986 by L.L. No. 5-1986; amended 7-20-1998 by L.L.
No. 10-1998; 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 8-2008]
upon forms to be furnished by the Department of Public Works. The
forms shall contain the business or individual's name and address,
the operator's name and address, the vehicle identification number
for all vehicles used in the snow removal business, the New York
State license number attached to such vehicles, and information
regarding any other snow removal equipment set forth in
Subsection D(1) above, proof of insurance, and such additional
information as the Department of Public Works shall require and
shall be accompanied by the permit fee set forth in the Schedule of
Fees. The Department of Public Works may require such documents
and information as may be reasonably necessary to verify the facts
stated in such application.
(3) Such permit shall be for the period of October 1 to September 30 of
each year and may be revoked by the Board of Trustees upon notice
to the permittee and an opportunity to be heard and may also be
suspended by the Mayor upon good cause, including violation of
this section, until a determination on revocation of the permit is
made.
(4) This section may be enforced by the Village of Suffern Police
Department, and/or the Building Inspector, or Code Enforcement
Officers and their deputies, and they are authorized to issue
appearance tickets pursuant to Article 150 of the Criminal
Procedure Law of the State of New York for the violation of any
section.
A. Every owner, occupant or person in charge of every building or vacant
lot shall at all times keep all sidewalks and curbs adjoining said lands in
good and safe repair and free from all garbage, refuse, debris, material,
encumbrances and obstructions. In addition, every owner, occupant or
person in charge of every building or vacant property shall not sweep or
cause to be deposited any garbage, refuse, debris or material into the
street or gutter and shall at all times keep all gutters adjoining said
lands free from all garbage, refuse, debris and material. Whenever the
sidewalks or curbs adjoining said lands are in need of repair or are
obstructed or encumbered, they shall be repaired by the owner,
occupant or person in charge of said adjoining lands solely at the cost
and expense of said owner, occupant or person in charge of said lands.
In the event there is no sidewalk on or adjoining a property, the area for
which the foregoing individual/entity is responsible, shall be measured
from the end of the property.
B. Such owner, occupant or person in charge of said building or vacant lot
and each of them shall be liable for any injury or damage by reason of
such omission, failure or negligence to make, maintain or repair such
§ 235-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-7
1:351
§ 235-8. Bridging of gutters prohibited.
No bridging or obstructing of street gutters shall be allowed.
§ 235-9. Permits required for certain encroachments and
projections. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
None of the following encroachments, projections or encumbrances in,
over or upon any public street or grounds shall be installed or maintained
without a permit from the Board of Trustees, and their existence shall be
regulated as follows:
§ 235-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No.
3-1990]
The following penalties are imposed for any violation of this article not
heretofore specifically provided for: Any person, firm or corporation
violating any provision of this article not heretofore expressly provided for
shall be liable to the penalties as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 235-10.1. Sidewalk and curb improvements. [Added 9-13-2006 by
L.L. No. 10-2006]
sidewalks or curbs. All such repair shall be in accordance with the
Village of Suffern specifications.
A. Excavated or building material. The holder of the permit shall, with
proper lights, expeditious work and every other reasonable effort, limit
the obstruction and the chances of accident.
B. Moving a building. A reasonable bond protecting the Village against
possible damages shall precede granting of such permit. The size of the
bond will be determined by vote of the Board of Trustees. The holder of
the permit shall make every reasonable effort to expedite the work and
minimize the obstruction.
C. Banners and flags across the street. All parts of the same shall be
placed at least 18 feet above the surface of the street.
A. At such time that the Village has elected to repave a street or road in
the Village, which repaving necessitates the construction or
reconstruction of curbs or sidewalks located in the right-of-way, the
Board of Trustees may, in its discretion, determine that the owners of
real property adjoining such sidewalks and/or curbs shall be
responsible for all or a proportion of the cost for such construction or
reconstruction and shall determine the percent or proportion for which
each property owner shall be responsible. In determining whether the
Village will assume all or any portion of the cost of the same, the Village
may consider: whether the sidewalks or curbing to be constructed or
reconstructed are standard materials for construction or are an
§ 235-7 SUFFERN CODE § 235-10.1
1:352
upgrade as compared to the Village standard; the entity that originally
installed the same; the method and adequacy of the original
installation/construction; the cause or necessity for construction or
reconstruction; the frontage and physical relationship of each affected
property; and any other relevant factor.
B. The Board of Trustees may pass a resolution allocating the cost of any
such construction or reconstruction between the Village and adjoining
property owners and the percentage responsibility of each prior to the
commencement of any such construction and setting forth the
approximate anticipated charge to each property owner. The resolution
shall also determine whether the sun due by each property owner shall
be paid in one or more installments and the frequency of periodic
payments if any. A copy of a notice summarizing the same shall be
mailed to each record property owner prior to the commencement of
construction at the address indicated on the tax roll.
C. Within 30 days after completion of construction, the Village Clerk shall
send a statement to each adjoining property owner of the amount due,
and a calculation showing the method of computation and a statement
that the amount is due within 30 days thereafter. Said statement shall
also provide that amounts remaining unpaid after such date shall incur
interest calculated monthly at 9% per annum. If said sum remains
unpaid at the time the next succeeding Village real property tax bill is
rendered, such amount shall be relevied on said tax bill and shall be
collected in the same manner as real property taxes.
D. The provisions of this section shall not change, alter, or modify the
obligations and liability of adjoining property owners set forth in
§ 235-7 of the Village Code.
§ 235-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-10.1
1:353

ARTICLE III
Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 1-27-1975 by L.L. No. 1-1975]
§ 235-11. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Street Excavation Law
of the Village of Suffern."
§ 235-12. Definitions and word usage.
§ 235-13. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel,
undermine or in any manner break up any street, to make or cause to be
made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose
or to place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated
material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street,
unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit therefor
from the Superintendent of Public Works as herein provided.
§ 235-14. Application information.
No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application for the
issuance of an excavation permit is submitted to the Superintendent of
Public Works. The written application shall state the name and address
of the applicant, the nature, location and purpose of the excavation, the
date of commencement and date of completion of the excavation and other
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
APPLICANT — Any person making written application to the
Superintendent of Public Works for an excavation permit hereunder.
EXCAVATION WORK — The excavation and other work permitted under
an excavation permit and required to be performed under this article.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been granted and has in full force
and effect an excavation permit issued hereunder.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
STREET — Any street, highway, sidewalk, curb, alley, avenue or other
public way or public grounds in the Village.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Superintendent of
Public Works of the Village of Suffern.
§ 235-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-14
1:355
data as may reasonably be required by the Superintendent of Public Works.
The application shall be accompanied by plans showing the extent of the
proposed excavation work, the dimensions and elevations of both the
existing ground prior to said excavation and of the proposed excavated
surfaces, the location of the excavation work and such other information as
may be prescribed by the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 235-15. Fees and deposits. [Amended 8-20-1980 by L.L. No.
6-1980; 3-12-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
§ 235-16. Disposition of deposits.
§ 235-17. Placard; posting.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall provide each permittee at the
time a permit is issued hereunder a suitable placard plainly written or
printed in English letters at least one inch high with the following notice:
"Village of Suffern Permit No. __________ Expires __________," and in the first
A. Fees. No permit for a street opening shall be issued by the
Superintendent of Public Works until the applicant therefor shall have
first paid to the Village Clerk, in cash or by check payable to the Village
of Suffern, a deposit to be set by resolution of the Board of Trustees in
the Standard Schedule of Fees.116
B. Deposits. The amount of deposit for openings shall be as set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees in the Standard Schedule of Fees.117
A. The amount of deposit shall be retained by the Village for the duration
of the period of maintenance as defined hereinbelow.
B. Upon failure or default by the permittee of any of the terms,
agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit on the permittee's
part to be done or performed, said deposit may be used by the Village
for any expense incurred by the Village by reason of such failure or
default on the part of the permittee.
C. After expenses for such failure or default, as determined and certified
by the Superintendent of Public Works, have been paid and deducted
from the amount of the deposit, any balance left after such deductions
shall be refunded to the permittee at the end of the maintenance period.
D. The period of maintenance shall be considered as a period of two years
after the date of final completion, as determined by the Superintendent
of Public Works, of the work to be done pursuant to the terms of the
permit. The permittee shall be responsible for the entire work and shall
keep every portion of said work in perfect order and repair during the
entire period of maintenance.
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 235-14 SUFFERN CODE § 235-17
1:356
blank space there shall be inserted the number of said permit, and after the
word "expires" shall be stated the date when said permit expires. It shall
be the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the placard posted in a
conspicuous place at the site of the excavation work. It shall be unlawful for
any person to exhibit such placard at or about any excavation not covered
by such permit or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of
expiration of the permit.
§ 235-18. Public service corporations.
§ 235-19. Rerouting of traffic.
The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during the
performance of the excavation work traffic conditions as nearly normal
as practicable shall be maintained at all times so as to cause as little
inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to
the general public, provided that the Superintendent of Public Works may
permit the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by
him if, in his opinion, it is necessary. The permittee shall route and control
traffic including its own vehicles as directed by the Police Department. The
following steps shall be taken before any street may be closed or restricted
to traffic:
A. Unless otherwise agreed upon between a public service corporation
and the Village of Suffern, a public service corporation may, in lieu of
the deposit hereinabove specified for street opening, file and keep on
file with the Superintendent of Public Works a bond in the amount of
$5,000 said bond to be approved as to form, amount and sufficiency of
surety by the Village Attorney, and said bond to be retained as security
for the faithful performance by the applicant of all terms, agreements,
covenants and conditions of the permit on the applicant's part to be
done or performed.
B. A public service corporation may, in lieu of the insurance hereinbefore
specified for street opening, file and keep on file with the
Superintendent of Public Works an agreement, approved as to form by
the Village Attorney, to indemnify and save harmless the Village from
claims, suits, actions, proceedings, losses, injuries, damages and costs
of every name and description arising out of or resulting from an act or
omission on the part of such public service corporation under any
permit granted to it or from any negligence or fault of such public
service corporation, its contractors, agents, servants or employees in
connection with sidewalk, curb or driveway work or repairs or street
openings or any work related thereto and to also defend on behalf of the
Village any such suits, actions or proceedings which may be instituted
against the Village.
A. The permittee must receive the approval of the Superintendent of
Public Works and the Chief of the Police.
§ 235-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-19
1:357
§ 235-20. Clearance for fire equipment.
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants.
§ 235-21. Unguarded equipment.
It shall be unlawful for the permittee to suffer or permit to remain
unguarded at the place of excavation or opening any machinery, equipment
or other device having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to
attract children and hazardous to their safety or health.
§ 235-22. Backfilling.
Backfilling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to an excavation
permit issued hereunder shall be compacted to a degree equivalent to that
of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug. Compacting shall
be done by mechanical tappers or vibrators, by rolling in layers or by
water settling, as required by the soil in question and sound engineering
practices generally recognized in the construction industry. The decision
as to whether a trench shall be backfilled by water settling shall be based
upon such engineering practices and shall be made by the Superintendent
of Public Works.
§ 235-23. Restoration of surface; temporary pavement; claims for
defective work.
§ 235-24. Restoration of surface by Village; maintenance period.
B. The permittee must notify the Chief of the Fire Department of any
street so closed.
C. Upon completion of construction work, the permittee shall notify the
Superintendent of Public Works and Chief of Police before traffic is
moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may
be made.
A. The permittee shall restore the surface of all streets broken into or
damaged as a result of the excavation work to its original condition in
accordance with the specifications of the Superintendent of Public
Works. Temporary resurfacing shall be placed by the contractor
immediately after backfilling. The temporary pavement shall be kept in
good condition until the permanent surfacing is placed.
B. Acceptance of approval of any excavation work by the Superintendent
of Public Works shall not prevent the Village from asserting a claim
against the permittee for incomplete or defective work if discovered
within 24 months from the completion of the excavation work. The
Superintendent of Public Works' presence during the performance of
any excavation work shall not relieve the permittee of its
responsibilities hereunder.
§ 235-19 SUFFERN CODE § 235-24
1:358
§ 235-25. Emergencies.
In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility in
or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to
immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual,
the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit or utility,
without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit hereunder,
shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the
dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health and safety
of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility
shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next
succeeding day during which the Superintendent of Public Works' office is
open for business and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without
first obtaining an excavation permit hereunder.
§ 235-26. Insurance.
No permit for street opening shall be issued by the Superintendent until the
applicant therefor shall have first placed on file with said Superintendent,
without cost to the Village, satisfactory evidence of general liability
insurance in the amount of not less than $100,000 for any one person and
not less than $300,000 for any one accident and property damage insurance
in the amount of not less than $25,000 for any one accident and $50,000
in the aggregate and satisfactory evidence that said insurance has been
approved as to form, correctness and adequacy by the Village Attorney
to insure the Village and the applicant against any loss, injury or damage
arising out of the granting of the permit or from any negligence or fault of
said applicant, his agents, servants or employees in connection with said
A. If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to
its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by
such permit or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation
work covered by such permit, the Superintendent of Public Works, if he
deems it advisable, shall have the right to do all work and things
necessary to restore the street and to complete the excavation work.
The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof and 25% of such
cost in addition for general overhead and administrative expenses. The
Village shall have a cause of action for all fees, expenses and amounts
paid out and due it for such work and shall apply, in payment of the
amount due it, any funds of the permittee deposited as herein provided.
The Village shall also enforce its rights under the permittee's bond
provided pursuant to this article.
B. It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site
of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to the
excavation for two years after restoring it to its original condition. The
Superintendent of Public Works is authorized to require security, in the
form of a bond, letter of credit or cash deposit, in an amount and form
deeded appropriate by him and in a form acceptable to the Village
Attorney. [Amended 11-7-2011 by L.L. No. 16-2011]
§ 235-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-26
1:359
opening or with any work related thereto. Such insurance shall remain in
force throughout the effective period of the permit as well as any authorized
extensions thereof and shall carry an endorsement to the effect that the
insurance company will give at least 10 days' written notice to the Village
of any modification or cancellation of any such insurance.
§ 235-27. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any excavation work
under the direction of competent Village authorities by employees of the
Village or by any contractor of the Village performing work for and on behalf
of the Village necessitating openings or excavations.
§ 235-28. Liability of Village.
§ 235-29. Exemptions. [Added 5-27-1975 by L.L. No. 8-1975]
This article shall not be construed to apply to the installation or
replacement of utility service over, under or through public areas by the
adjoining property owner or to the construction and repair of sidewalks,
whether done voluntarily or by direction of the Village, provided that the
limit of the work area does not encroach upon or disturb paved, surfaced
or traveled rights-of-way. This exemption shall apply solely to the adjoining
property owner, and in the event that the work to be performed shall be
performed in whole or in part by a contractor or subcontractor for the
benefit of the adjoining property owner, that contractor shall be required
to post insurances in accordance with the provisions of § 235-26 of this
article to cover the period of time during which service is to be performed.
If the work is performed by the adjoining property owner, said property
owner shall execute a letter of indemnification holding the Village free and
harmless from any and all liabilities. It is the intention of this exemption to
permit the adjoining property owner to install or replace utility service in
the areas set forth without the requirements of fees and deposits. However,
if, in the discretion of the Superintendent of Public Works, the homeowner
makes application for the purpose of assisting a contractor in avoiding the
provisions of this article, said Superintendent of Public Works shall have the
A. This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the Village or any
official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any
person injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an
excavation permit is issued hereunder, nor shall the Village or any
official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such
liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder,
the issuance of any permit or the approval of any excavation work.
B. The permittee agrees in accepting a permit to save harmless the Village
of Suffern, its officers and servants from and against any injury, loss,
damage or legal action resulting from any negligence or fault of the
permittee, its agents or servants in connection with work covered by
the permit
§ 235-26 SUFFERN CODE § 235-29
1:360
authority to deny the exemption and impose the fees and deposits required
hereunder.
§ 235-30. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No.
3-1990]
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any person who
violates or causes or participates in any violation of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation and be
subject to the penalties provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
B. Whenever any person shall have been notified, in writing, by the
Superintendent of Public Works that he is violating any of the provisions
of this article or is served with a summons or warrant accusing him
thereof, each day that he shall continue such violation after such
notification or service shall constitute a separate offense, punishable by
a like fine or penalty.
§ 235-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-30
1:361
Chapter 239
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 96.
Contractor's security for homes — See Ch.
113.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 127.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 141.
Sewers — See Ch. 220.
Soil removal — See Ch. 231.
Water — See Ch. 261.
Zoning — See Ch. 266.
Chapter 244
TAXATION
§ 235-30 SUFFERN CODE § 235-30
1:362
ARTICLE I
Utilities Tax
[Adopted 2-8-1971 as Ch. 51 of the 1971 Code]
§ 244-1. Imposition of tax. [Amended 6-4-2018 by L.L. No. 8-2018]
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 131 of the Village Law of the State
of New York,118 a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after the
first day of June 1970 is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business
in the Village of Suffern which is subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service and which has a gross income for the 12
months ending May 31, 2018, in excess of $5,000, except motor carriers or
brokers subject to such supervision under Article 3-B of the Public Service
Law,119 and a tax equal to 1% of its gross operating income from and after
the first day of June 2018 is hereby imposed upon every other utility doing
business in the Village of Suffern which has a gross operating income for
the 12 months ending May 31, 2018, in excess of $5,000, which taxes shall
have application only within the territorial limits of the Village of Suffern
and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees imposed by any
other provision of law.
§ 244-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale,
conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect
to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in gross
income), made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by the
purchaser in the Village of Suffern, including cash, credits and property
of any kind or nature, whether or not such sale is made or such service
is rendered for profit, without any deduction on account of the cost of the
property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or other services or
other costs, interest or discount paid or any other expenses whatsoever;
also profits from the sale of securities; also profits from the sale of real
property growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property;
also profits from the sale of personal property, other than property of a kind
which would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on hand
at the close of the period for which a return is made; also receipts from
interest, dividends and royalties derived from sources within the Village of
Suffern other than such as are received from a corporation, a majority of
whose voting stock is owned by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction
therefrom for any expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the
receipt thereof; and also profits from any transaction, except sales for resale
and rentals, within the Village of Suffern whatsoever.
118. Editor's Note: See now § 5-530 of the Village Law.
119. Editor's Note: Article 3-B of the Public Service Law was repealed by L. 1970. c. 267, and is
now covered by Article 7 of the Transportation Law.
§ 244-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-2
1:363
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason
of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or
telegraphy or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use
of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator or telephone or telegraph service
in the Village of Suffern, including cash, credits and property of any kind or
nature, with any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property
sold, and cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs, interest or
discount paid or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignees of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity or any other entity and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court whatsoever or by any
other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions
of the state or municipality and public districts.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service, except persons engaged in the business
of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars or of operating
railroads other than street-surface, rapid-transit, subway and elevated
railroads, and also includes every person, whether or not such person
is subject to such supervision, who sells gas, electricity, steam, water,
refrigeration or telephony or telegraphy delivered through mains, pipes or
wires or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or
telegraph service by means of mains, pipes or wires, regardless of whether
such activities are the main business of such person or are only incidental
thereto or of whether use is made of the public streets.
§ 244-3. Recordkeeping.
Every utility subject to tax under this Article shall keep such records of
its business and in such form as the Village Treasurer may require, and
such records shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the
Village Treasurer may consent to their destruction within that period or may
require that they be kept longer.
§ 244-4. Filing of return.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file quarterly, on or before
September 25, December 25, March 25 and June 25, a return for the
three calendar months preceding such return date and, in the case of the
first such return, for all preceding calendar months during which the tax
imposed hereby was effective. Every return shall state the gross income
or gross operating income for the period covered thereby. The return shall
be filed with the Village Treasurer on a form to be furnished by him for
such purpose and shall contain such other data, information or matter as
he may require to be included therein. The Village Treasurer, in order to
ensure payment of the tax imposed, may require at any time a further or
supplemental return, which shall contain any data that may be specified
by him, and he may require any utility doing business in the Village of
§ 244-2 SUFFERN CODE § 244-4
1:364
Suffern to file an annual return, which shall contain any data specified by
him, regardless of whether the utility is subject to tax under this Article.
Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility
making the same or of the owner or of a copartner thereof or of a principal
officer of the corporation, if such business is conducted by a corporation, to
the effect that the statements contained therein are true.
§ 244-5. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return as required by this Article, each utility shall
pay to the Village Treasurer the tax imposed by this Article for the period
covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of
filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which
the return is required to be filed.
§ 244-6. Failure to submit acceptable return.
A. In case any return filed pursuant to this Article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Village Treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient
return is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice
from him or if no return is made for any period, the Village Treasurer
shall determine the amount of tax due from such information as he is
able to obtain and, if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of
external indices or otherwise. He shall give notice of such
determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination
shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the persons against
whom it is assessed shall, within 30 days after the giving of notice of
such determination, apply to the Village Treasurer for a hearing or
unless the Village Treasurer, of his own motion, shall reduce the same.
After such hearing, the Village Treasurer shall give notice of his
decision to the person liable for the tax. Such decision may be reviewed
by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of
the State of New York if application therefor is made within 90 days
after the giving of notice of such decision. An order to review such
decision shall not be granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be
reviewed, with interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first
deposited with the Village Treasurer and an undertaking filed with him,
in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme
Court shall approve, to the effect that, if such proceeding is dismissed
or the tax confirmed, the applicant will pay all costs and charges which
may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or, at the option of
the applicant, such undertaking may be in a sum sufficient to cover the
tax, interest, penalties, costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the
applicant shall not be required to pay such tax, interest and penalties as
a condition precedent to the granting of such order.
B. Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with intent to
evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made after the
expiration of more than three years from the date of the filing of a
§ 244-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:365
§ 244-7. Manner of giving notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this Article may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return filed by him under this Article or, if no return has been
filed, to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to
whom addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the
provisions of this Article by the giving of notice shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 244-8. Penalties for failure to file or pay tax.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof within the time required by this Article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for each
month of delay or fraction thereof, except the first month, after such return
was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the Village Treasurer,
for cause shown, may extend the time for filing any return and, if satisfied
that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of the penalty
fixed by the foregoing provisions of this section.
§ 244-9. Refunds.
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof
shall make application for a refund thereof and the Village Treasurer or
the; court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof
was erroneously or illegally collected, the Village Treasurer shall refund
the amount so determined. For like cause and within the same period, a
refund may be so made on the initiative of the Village Treasurer. However,
no refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination
of the Village Treasurer, as hereinbefore provided, unless the Village
Treasurer, after a hearing as hereinbefore provided or of his own motion,
shall have reduced the tax or penalty or it shall have been established
in a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of
the State of New York that such determination was erroneous or illegal.
All refunds shall be made out of moneys collected under this Article. An
application for a refund made as hereinbefore provided shall be deemed
an application for the revision of any tax or penalty complained of, and
the Village Treasurer may receive additional evidence with respect thereto.
After making his determination, the Village Treasurer shall give notice
thereof to the person interested, and he shall be entitled to any order to
review such determination under said Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law
and Rules, subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained relative to the
granting of such order.
return; provided, however, that where no return has been filed as
required by this Article, the tax may be assessed at any time.
§ 244-6 SUFFERN CODE § 244-10
1:366
§ 244-10. Tax to be part of operating costs.
The tax imposed by this Article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
cost of such utility.
§ 244-11. Action to enforce payment.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
Article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Village Treasurer,
bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any
judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Village Treasurer.
Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person
liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the
tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 244-12. Powers of Village Treasurer.
In the administration of this Article, the Village Treasurer shall have power
to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law,
as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance of
his duties and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records
relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony
and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his
official duty under this Article and to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 244-13. Secrecy provisions.
A. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the Village Treasurer or any
agent, Clerk or employee of the Village of Suffern to divulge or make
known the amount of gross income or gross operating income or any
particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this Article. The
officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required to
produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in any
action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the Village of
Suffern in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this Article or
on behalf of the State Tax Commission in an action or proceeding under
the provisions of the Tax Law of the State of New York or on behalf of
any party to any action or proceeding under the provisions of this
Article when the returns or facts shown thereby are directly involved in
such action or proceeding, in either of which events the court may
require the production of and may admit in evidence so much of said
returns or of the facts shown thereby as are pertinent to the action or
proceeding and no more. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit
the delivery to a person or his duly authorized representative of a copy
of any return filed by him nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so
classified as to prevent the identification of particular returns and the
§ 244-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-13
1:367
§ 244-14. Disposition of moneys.
All taxes and penalties received by the Village Treasurer under this Article
shall be paid into the treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and
deposited in the general fund of the Village.
items thereof nor the publication of delinquent lists showing the names
of persons who have failed to pay their taxes at the time and in the
manner provided for by this Article, together with any relevant
information which, in the opinion of the Village Treasurer, may assist in
the collection of such delinquent taxes nor the inspection by the Village
Attorney or other legal representatives of the Village of Suffern of the
return of any person who shall bring action to set aside or review the
tax based thereon nor against whom an action has been instituted in
accordance with the provisions of the Article.
B. Notwithstanding any provisions of this Article, the Village Treasurer
may exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any City or any other
Village in the State of New York information contained in returns filed
under this Article, provided that such City or other Village grants
similar privileges to the Village of Suffern, and provided that such
information is to be used for tax purposes only, and the Village
Treasurer shall, upon request, furnish the State Tax Commission with
any information contained in such returns.
§ 244-13 SUFFERN CODE § 244-14
1:368
ARTICLE II
Business Investment Exemption
[Adopted 1-22-1979 by L.L. No. 1-1979]
§ 244-15. Exemption granted.
A total exemption from real property taxation for 10 successive years after
the adoption hereof is hereby granted to eligible business facilities as
defined in § 115 of the Commerce Law of the State of New York,120 located
in the Village of Suffern, from real property taxes imposed by the Village of
Suffern.
§ 244-16. Amount of exemption; conditions.
An eligible business facility as defined by the New York State Job Incentive
Board, pursuant to §§ 115 and 120 of the Commerce Law of the State of
New York, shall be granted an eighty-five-percent exemption from taxes
imposed by the Village of Suffern for any increase in the value thereof which
is attributable to expenditures certified by the Job Incentive Board to have
been paid or incurred by the owner or operator for capital improvements
commenced on or after the effective date of this Article, consisting of the
construction, reconstruction, erection or improvement of depreciable real
property included in such facility, and such exemptions shall be continued
from year to year during the specified period if the certificate of eligibility
with respect to such business facility is not revoked or modified and is
renewed or extended as provided by § 120 of the Commerce Law.
§ 244-17. Application.
Such exemption shall be granted upon an application by the owner or
operator of such facility on a form prescribed by the New York State Job
Incentive Board, to which there shall be attached a copy of the certificate
of eligibility issued by the New York State Job Incentive Board. Such
application shall be filed with the Assessor on or before January 1 of each
year. Copies of such application shall be filed simultaneously with the New
York State Job Incentive Board and the State Board of Equalization and
Assessment
§ 244-18. Determination of assessed value.
The Assessor shall consider the application for such exemption and, if the
same is in order, shall determine the assessed value of such exemption
in accordance with the above-mentioned certificate of eligibility, issued
pursuant to § 120 of the Commerce Law of the State of New York, and enter
the appropriate value on the exempt portion of the assessment roll and the
appropriate value on the taxable roll. The eligible business facility shall then
120. Editor's Note: Section, 115 through 121 of the Commerce Law (Economic Development
Law) were repealed by L. 1983, c. 15.
§ 244-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-18
1:369
be exempt to the extent provided by this Article from taxes commencing
with the assessment roll prepared on the next-following taxable status date.
§ 244-19. Redetermination of assessed value when certificate of
eligibility is revoked or modified.
If an exemption has once been granted for a business facility under this
Article and the Assessor receives notice that a certificate of eligibility
of such facility has been revoked or modified, he shall redetermine the
assessed value of any such exemption in accordance with such revocation
or modification. If, upon such redetermination, it appears for a year for
which an exemption has been granted that such facility has been ineligible
or that the assessed value of such exemption as redetermined is less than
the assessed value of such exemption as shown on the assessment rolls
for such year, then a tax shall be levied at the rate of tax for such year
upon so much of the assessed valuation of such exemption, as shown on
such assessment rolls, as may be ineligible or excessive. Such tax shall be
levied as an omitted assessment in the manner provided in § 550 of the
Real Property Tax Law for each such year. Any such redetermination shall
be made no later than three years after the applicant for exemption last
received benefit of any exemption under said § 485 of the Real Property Tax
Law.121
121. Editor's Note: Section 485 of the Real Property Tax Law was repealed by L. 1988, c. 165.
§ 244-18 SUFFERN CODE § 244-19
1:370
ARTICLE III
Senior Citizens Tax Exemption
[Adopted 11-28-1983 by L.L. No. 8-1983]
§ 244-20. Amount of exemption. [Amended 11-19-1990 by L.L. No.
1990; 12-2-1991 by L.L. No. 5-1991; 11-16-1992 by L.L. No. 8-1992;
5-19-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997; 1-16-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001;
11-18-2002 by L.L. No. 8-2002; 2-20-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
Pursuant to § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law, the percentage of the
assessed valuation of real property which is exempt from taxation will be
determined on the basis of annual income in accordance with the graduated
schedule set forth below. "Annual income" refers to the income of the
owner or the combined income of all of the owners for the income tax year
immediately preceding the date that the application is filed. Where title of
the property is vested in either a husband or wife, annual income is the
combined income of the husband and wife. In computing net rental income
or net income from self-employment, no depreciation deduction shall be
allowed for the exhaustion or wear and tear of real or personal property
held for the production of income. Such income shall include social security
and retirement benefits, interest, dividends, total gains from the sale of or
exchange of a capital asset in the same tax year, net rental income, salary
or earnings, and net income from self-employment, but shall not include a
return of capital, gifts, or inheritances received during the twelve-month
period, veteran's disability payments and medical and prescription drug
expenses that are not reimbursed or paid by insurance.
Annual Income Effective
July 1, 2007
Percentage of Assessed Valuation
Exempt from Taxation
Less than $27,000 50%
$27,000 but less than
$28,000
45%
$28,000 but less than
$29,000
40%
$29,000 but less than
$30,000
35%
$30,000 but less than
$30,900
30%
$30,900 but less than
$31,800
25%
$31,800 but less than
$32,700
20%
$32,700 but less than
$33,600
15%
$33,600 but less than
$34,500
10%
§ 244-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-20
1:371
Annual Income Effective
July 1, 2007
Percentage of Assessed Valuation
Exempt from Taxation
$34,500 but less than
$35,400
5%
Annual Income Effective
July 1, 2008
Percentage of Assessed Valuation
Exempt from Taxation
Less than $28,000 50%
$28,000 but less than
$29,000
45%
$29,000 but less than
$30,000
40%
$30,000 but less than
$31,000
35%
$31,000 but less than
$31,900
30%
$31,900 but less than
$32,800
25%
$32,800 but less than
$33,700
20%
$33,700 but less than
$34,600
15%
$34,600 but less than
$35,500
10%
$35,500 but less than
$36,400
5%
Annual Income Effective
July 1, 2009
Percentage of Assessed Valuation
Exempt from Taxation
Less than $29,000 50%
$29,000 but less than
$30,000
45%
$30,000 but less than
$31,000
40%
$31,000 but less than
$32,000
35%
$32,000 but less than
$32,900
30%
$32,900 but less than
$33,800
25%
$33,800 but less than
$34,700
20%
§ 244-20 SUFFERN CODE § 244-20
1:372
Annual Income Effective
July 1, 2009
Percentage of Assessed Valuation
Exempt from Taxation
$34,700 but less than
$35,600
15%
$35,600 but less than
$36,500
10%
$36,500 but less than
$37,400
5%
§ 244-21. Death of spouse.
The real property tax exemption provided herein on real property owned by
husband and wife, one of whom is 65 years of age or over, once granted,
shall not be rescinded solely because of the death of the older spouse so
long as the surviving spouse is at least 62 years of age.
§ 244-22. Restriction on school tax exemption.
The exemption provided herein shall not be granted for school tax purposes
if a child resides at said real property and attends a public school of
elementary or secondary education.
§ 244-23. Conditions.
No exemption shall be granted:
A. If the income of the owner or combined income of the owners of the
property for the income tax year immediately preceding the date of
making application for exemption exceeds the sum of $28,900,
consistent with the schedule set forth in § 244-20 herein. "Income tax
year" shall mean the twelve-month period for which the owner or
owners filed a federal personal income tax return or, if no such return is
filed, the calendar year. Where title is vested in either the husband or
the wife, their combined income may not exceed such sum, except
where the husband or wife, or ex-husband or ex-wife, is absent from the
property as provided in Real Property Tax Law § 467(3)(d)(ii), then only
the income of the spouse or ex-spouse residing on the property shall be
considered and may not exceed such sum. Such income shall include
social security and retirement benefits, interest, dividends, total gain
from the sale or exchange of a capital asset which may be offset by a
loss from the sale or exchange of a capital asset in the same income tax
year, net rental income, salary or earnings and net income from selfemployment,
but shall not include a return of capital, gifts,
inheritances, payments made to individuals because of their status as
victims of Nazi persecution, as defined in P.L. 103-286, or moneys
earned through employment in the federal foster grandparent program,
and any such income shall be offset by all medical and prescription drug
expenses actually paid which were not reimbursed or paid for by
insurance, if the governing board of a municipality, after a public
§ 244-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-23
1:373
hearing, adopts a local law, ordinance or resolution providing therefor.
The provisions of this subsection notwithstanding, such income shall
not include veterans disability compensation, as defined in Title 38 of
the United States Code, provided that the governing board of such
municipality, after public hearing, adopts a local law, ordinance or
resolution providing therefor. In computing net rental income and net
income from self-employment, no depreciation deduction shall be
allowed for the exhaustion, wear and tear of real or personal property
held for the production of income. [Amended 12-2-1991 by L.L. No.
5-1991; 11-16-1992 by L.L. No. 8-1992; 1-16-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001]
B. Unless the title of the property shall have been vested in the owner or
one of the owners of the property for at least 24 consecutive months
prior to the date of making application for exemption; provided,
however, that in the event of the death of either a husband or wife in
whose name the title of the property shall have been vested at the time
of death which then becomes vested solely in the survivor by virtue of
devise by or descent from the deceased husband or wife, the time of
ownership of the property by the deceased husband or wife shall be
deemed also a time of ownership by the survivor, and such ownership
shall be deemed continuous for the purposes of computing such period
of 24 consecutive months. In the event of a transfer by either a husband
or wife to the other spouse of all or part of the title to the property, the
time of ownership of the property by the transferor spouse shall be
deemed also a time of ownership by the transferee spouse, and such
ownership shall be deemed continuous for the purposes of computing
such period of 24 consecutive months. Where property of the owner or
owners has been acquired to replace property formerly owned by such
owner or owners and taken by eminent domain or other involuntary
proceeding, except a tax sale, the period of ownership of the former
property shall be combined with the period of ownership of the
property for which application is made for exemption, and such periods
of ownership shall be deemed to be consecutive for purposes of this
section. Where a residence is sold and replaced with another within one
year and is in the same assessing unit or municipality, the period of
ownership of the former property shall be combined with the period of
ownership of the replacement residence and deemed consecutive for
exemption from taxation by each such assessing unit or municipality.
Where a residence is sold and replaced with another within one year
and both residences are within the state, the period of ownership of
both properties shall be deemed consecutive for the purposes of the
exemption from taxation by a municipality within the state granting
such exemption.
C. Unless the property is used exclusively for residential purposes.
D. Unless the real property is the legal residence of and is occupied in
whole or in part by the owner or by all of the owners of the property.
§ 244-23 SUFFERN CODE § 244-24
1:374
§ 244-24. Filing of application.
Application for such exemption must be made by the owner or all of the
owners of the property on forms to be furnished by the Assessor's office
and shall furnish the information and be executed in the manner required
or prescribed in such forms and shall be filed in such Assessor's office on or
before January 1 of each year.
§ 244-25. Notification that application must be filed.
On or before the first day of November, the Assessor shall mail to each
person who was granted exemption pursuant to this Article on the latest
completed assessment roll an application or a notice that such application
must be filed on or before the first day of January and be approved in order
for the exemption to be granted. The assessing authority shall, within three
days of the completion and filing of the tentative assessment roll, notify by
mail any applicant who has included with his application at least one selfaddressed,
prepaid envelope of the approval or denial of the application;
provided, however, that the assessing authority shall, upon the receipt and
filing of the application, send by mail notification of receipt to any applicant
who has included two of such envelopes with the application. Where a
applicant is entitled to a notice of denial pursuant to this section, such
notice shall be on a form prescribed by the State Board of Equalization and
Assessment and shall state the reason for such denial and shall further state
that the applicant may have such determination reviewed in the manner
provided by law. Failure to mail any such application form or notice or
failure of such person to receive any of the same shall not prevent the levy,
collection and enforcement of the payment of the taxes on property owned
by such person.
§ 244-26. Penalties for offenses.
Any person convicted of having made a willful false statement in an
application for such exemption shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$100 and shall be disqualified from any farther exemption for a period of
five years.
§ 244-27. Collection of tax erroneously exempted.
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this Article, the collection of
any amount of tax erroneously exempted due to an incorrect statement in an
application for exemption shall be enforceable in the same manner provided
for the collection of delinquent taxes pursuant to the provisions of Article
10 of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 244-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-27
1:375

ARTICLE IV
Exemptions for Improvements to Aid Handicapped Persons
[Adopted 8-27-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984]
§ 244-28. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to exempt from real property taxes property
owned by certain physically disabled persons as authorized by § 459 of the
New York State Real Property Tax Law.
§ 244-29. Exemption granted; conditions.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 459 of the New York State Real Property
Tax Law, an improvement to any real property used solely for residential
purposes as a one-, two- or three-family residence shall be exempt from
taxation to the extent of any increase in value attributable to such
improvement if such improvement is used for the purpose of facilitating and
accommodating the use and accessibility of such real property by:
§ 244-30. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MEMBER OF THE HOUSEHOLD — A blood relative of the family.
RESIDENT OWNERS OF SAID PROPERTY — As defined in § 244-29A of this
Article, a person or persons possessing legal ownership of the property for
at least one year prior to submitting an application for exemption.
§ 244-31. Applicability to certain improvements.
Such exemption shall apply to improvements constructed on or after June 1,
1984.
§ 244-32. Period of validity.
An exemption granted under this Article is valid for one year and must be
reapplied for on a year-to-year basis.
§ 244-33. Transfer of title.
An exemption granted under this Article is extinguished on transfer of title
on the premises in question.
A. A resident owner of the real property who is physically disabled and
who resides on the premises at least 10 months per year; or
B. A member of the resident owner's household who is physically disabled,
if such member resides in the real property.
§ 244-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-34
1:377
§ 244-34. Applicability to certain assessment rolls.
This Article shall apply to assessment rolls prepared on the basis of taxable
status dates occurring on or after June 1, 1985.
§ 244-34 SUFFERN CODE § 244-34
1:378
ARTICLE V
Exemption for Disabled Persons with Limited Income
[Adopted 3-16-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
§ 244-35. Legislative intent.
Pursuant to § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law, real property owned
by one or more persons with disabilities and whose income is limited by
reason of such disability may be partially exempt from Village of Suffern
real property taxes. Such partial exemption shall be subject to the income
limits established by § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 244-36. Eligibility.
§ 244-37. Exemption granted. [Amended 1-16-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001; 11-18-2002 by L.L. No. 9-2002]
Pursuant to § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law, the percentage of the
assessed valuation which is exempt from taxation will be determined on the
basis of income in accordance with the following graduated schedule:
Maximum Income
Exemption Eligibility
Percentage of Assessed Valuation
Exempt from Taxation
Not more than $21,500 50%
$21,500 or more but less than
$22,500
45%
A. The persons who meet the eligibility requirements as set forth in
§ 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law are entitled to the partial tax
exemption as set forth below.
B. Title to that portion of real property owned by a cooperative apartment
corporation in which a tenant-stockholder of such corporation resides,
and which is represented by his share or shares of stock in such
corporation as determined by its or their proportional relationship to
the total outstanding stock of the corporation, including that owned by
the corporation, shall be deemed to be vested in such tenantstockholder.
That proportion of the assessment of such real property
owned by a cooperative apartment corporation determined by the
relationship of such real property vested in such tenant-stockholder to
such entire parcel and the buildings thereon owned by such cooperative
apartment corporation in which such tenant-stockholder resides shall
be subject to exemption from taxation pursuant to this article and any
exemption so granted shall be credited by the appropriate taxing
authority against the assessed valuation of such real property; the
reduction in real property taxes realized thereby shall be credited by
the cooperative apartment corporation against the amount of such
taxes otherwise payable by or chargeable to such tenant-stockholder.
§ 244-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-37
1:379
Maximum Income
Exemption Eligibility
Percentage of Assessed Valuation
Exempt from Taxation
$22,500 or more but less than
$23,500
40%
$23,500 or more but less than
$24,500
35%
$24,500 or more but less than
$25,400
30%
$25,400 or more but less than
$26,300
25%
$26,300 or more but less than
$27,200
20%
$27,200 or more but less than
$28,100
15%
$28,100 or more but less than
$29,000
10%
$29,000 or more but less than
$29,900
5%
§ 244-37 SUFFERN CODE § 244-37
1:380
ARTICLE VI
Exemption for Members of Volunteer Fire Companies and
Ambulance Services
[Adopted 4-17-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
§ 244-38. Legislative intent.
The Real Property Tax Law has been amended by the addition of a new
§ 466-a which permits a Village to grant a partial tax exemption on real
property owned by an enrolled member of an incorporated volunteer fire
company, fire department or incorporated voluntary ambulance service or
such enrolled member and spouse. Said partial exemption can be 10% of
the assessed value of such property.
§ 244-39. Grant of exemption.
An exemption from taxation of 10% of assessed value of property owned
by an eligible person as set forth below is hereby granted with respect to
Village taxes. In no event shall the exemption exceed $3,000 multiplied by
the latest state equalization rate for the Town.
§ 244-40. Eligibility.
Such exemption shall be granted to an enrolled member of an incorporated
volunteer fire company, fire department or incorporated voluntary
ambulance service residing in such County, provided that:
A. The applicant resides in the Town or Village which is served by such
incorporated volunteer fire company or fire department or incorporated
voluntary ambulance service;
B. The property is the primary residence of the applicant;
C. The property is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided,
however, that in the event any portion of such property is not used
exclusively for the applicant's residence, but is used for other purposes,
such portion shall be subject to taxation and the remaining portion only
shall be entitled to the exemption provided by this section; and
D. The applicant has been certified by the authority having jurisdiction for
the incorporated volunteer fire company or fire department as an
enrolled member of such incorporated volunteer fire company or fire
department for at least five years or the applicant has been certified by
the authority having jurisdiction for the incorporated voluntary
ambulance service as an enrolled member of such incorporated
voluntary ambulance service for at least five years. The applicant must
submit proof of such certification together with the application for an
exemption.
§ 244-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-41
1:381
§ 244-41. Grant of Lifetime Exemption for twenty-year service.
Any enrolled member of an incorporated volunteer fire company, fire
department or incorporated voluntary ambulance service who accrues more
than 20 years of active service and is so certified by the authority having
jurisdiction for the incorporated volunteer fire company, fire department
or incorporated voluntary ambulance service shall be granted the 10%
exemption as authorized by this article for the remainder of his or her life,
as long as his or her primary residence is located within such a County.
§ 244-42. Application for exemption.
Application for such exemption shall be filed with the Assessor of the Town
of Ramapo on or before the taxable status date on a form as prescribed by
the State Board.
§ 244-43. No diminution of benefits.
No applicant who is a volunteer fire fighter or volunteer ambulance worker
who by reason of such status is receiving any benefit under the provisions
of Article 4 of the Real Property Tax Law on the effective date of this Article
VI shall suffer any diminution of such benefit because of the provisions of
this article.
§ 244-41 SUFFERN CODE § 244-43
1:382
ARTICLE VII
Veterans Alternative Exemption
[Adopted 2-20-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007; amended in its entirety
2-20-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
§ 244-44. Exemption amount.
The application of § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New
York is hereby amended in its application to the Village of Suffern to provide
as follows: The maximum exemption allowable pursuant to Real Property
Tax Law § 458-a(2)(a), (b), and (c) is hereby increased to $75,000, $50,000,
and $250,000, respectively.
§ 244-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-44
1:383

ARTICLE VIII
Real Property Exemptions for Cold War Veterans
[Adopted 2-20-2018 by L.L. No. 4-2018]
§ 244-45. Definitions.
As used in this section:
ACTIVE DUTY — Full-time duty in the United States Armed Forces, other
than active duty for training.
ARMED FORCES — The United States Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force,
and Coast Guard.
COLD WAR VETERAN — A person, male or female, who served on active
duty for a period of more than 365 days in the United States Armed Forces,
during the time period from September 2, 1945, to December 26, 1991, was
discharged or released therefrom under honorable conditions and has been
awarded the Cold War recognition certificate as authorized under Public
Law 105-85, the 1998 National Defense Authorization Act.
LATEST CLASS RATIO — The latest final class ratio established by the
Commissioner for use in a special assessing unit.
LATEST STATE EQUALIZATION RATE — The latest final state equalization
rate or special equalization rate established by the Commissioner pursuant
to this chapter. The Commissioner shall establish a special equalization rate
if it finds that there has been a material change in the level of assessment
since the establishment of the latest state equalization rate, but in no
event shall such special equalization rate exceed 100. In the event that
the state equalization rate exceeds 100, then the state equalization rate
shall be 100 for the purposes of this section. Where a special equalization
rate is established for purposes of this section, the Assessor is directed
and authorized to recompute the Cold War veterans exemption on the
assessment roll by applying such special equalization rate instead of state
equalization rate applied in the previous year and to make the appropriate
corrections on the assessment roll, notwithstanding the fact that such
Assessor may receive the special equalization rate after the completion,
verification and filing of such final assessment roll. In the event that the
Assessor does not have custody of the roll when such recomputation is
accomplished, the Assessor shall certify such recomputation to the local
officers having custody and control of such roll, and such local officers are
hereby directed and authorized to enter the computed Cold War Veterans
exemption certified by the Assessor on such roll.
QUALIFIED OWNER — A Cold War veteran, the spouse of a Cold War
veteran, or the unremarried surviving spouse of a deceased Cold War
veteran. Where property is owned by more than one qualified owner, the
exemption to which each is entitled may be combined. Where a veteran is
also the unremarried surviving spouse of a veteran, such person may also
receive any exemption to which the deceased spouse was entitled.
§ 244-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-45
1:385
QUALIFIED RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY — Property owned by a
qualified owner which is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided,
however, that in the event that any portion of such property is not used
exclusively for residential purposes, but is used for other purposes, such
portion shall be subject to the exemption provided by this section. Such
property shall be the primary residence of the Cold War veteran or the
unremarried surviving spouse of a Cold War veteran, unless the Cold War
veteran or unremarried surviving spouse is absent from the property due to
medical reasons or institutionalization for up to five years.
SERVICE-CONNECTED — With respect to disability or death, that such
disability was incurred or aggravated, or that the death resulted from a
disability incurred or aggravated, in line of duty on active military, naval or
air service.
§ 244-46. Grant of exemption.
A. Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of either: (i) 10% of the assessed value of such property;
provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed $8,000 or the
product of $8,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate of the
assessing unit, or, in the case of a special assessing unit, the latest class
ratio, whichever is less or; (ii) 15% of the assessed value of such
property; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed
$12,000 or the product of $12,000 multiplied by the latest state
equalization rate for the assessing unit, or, in the case of a special
assessing unit, the latest class ration, whichever is less.
B. In addition to the exemption provided by Subsection A of this section
where the Cold War veteran received a compensation rating from the
United States Veterans Affairs or from the United States Department of
Defense because of a service-connected disability, qualifying residential
real property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of the product
of the assessed value of such property, multiplied by 50% of the Cold
War veteran disability rating; provided, however, that such exemption
shall not exceed $40,000 or the product of $40,000 multiplied by the
latest state equalization rate for the assessing unit.
C. If a Cold War veteran received the exemption under §§ 458 or 458-a of
the Real Property Tax Law, the Cold War veteran shall not be eligible to
receive the exemption under this section.
D. The exemption provided by Subsection A of this section shall be granted
for a period of 10 years. The commencement of such ten-year period
shall be governed pursuant to this subsection. Where a qualified owner
owns qualifying residential real property on the effective date of this
article, such ten-year period shall be measured from the assessment
roll prepared pursuant to the first taxable status date occurring on or
after the effective date of this article. Where a qualified owner does not
own qualifying residential real property on the effective date of this
article, such ten-year period shall be measured from the assessment
§ 244-45 SUFFERN CODE § 244-46
1:386
roll prepared pursuant to the first taxable status date occurring at
least 60 days after the date of purchase of qualifying residential real
property; provided, however, that should the veteran apply for and be
granted an exemption on the assessment roll prepared pursuant to a
taxable status date occurring within 60 days after the date of purchase
of residential real property, such ten-year period shall be measured
from the first assessment roll in which the exemption occurs. If, before
the expiration of such ten-year period, such exempt property is old and
replaced with other residential real property, such exemption may be
granted pursuant to this subdivision for the unexpired portion of the
ten-year exemption period.
E. Application for exemption shall be made by the owner, or all of the
owners, of the property on a form prescribed by the State Board. The
owner or owners shall file the completed form in the Assessor's office
on or before the first appropriate taxable status date. The owner or
owners of the property shall be required to refile each year. Applicants
shall refile on or before the appropriate taxable status date. Any
applicant convicted of willfully making any false statement in the
application for such exemption shall be subject to the penalties
prescribed in the penal law.
§ 244-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-46
1:387
Chapter 248
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 175.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 251.
Fees — See Ch. A275.
§ 248-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the
following words shall have the meanings given them by this section:
CALL BOX STAND — A place where the Board of Trustees has authorized
the holder of a taxicab license to install a telephone or call box for the taking
of calls or the dispatching of taxicabs.
DRIVER'S LICENSE — Permission granted by the Board of Trustees to any
person to drive a licensed taxicab upon the streets of the Village of Suffern.
OPEN STAND — A public place alongside the curb or a street or elsewhere
which has been designated by the Board of Trustees as reserved exclusively
for the use of taxicabs.
OPERATOR AND/OR OWNER — A person owning, controlling the use of or
engaged in the business of operating one or more taxicabs for hire upon the
streets of the Village.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, unincorporated
association or any other legal entity.
RATE CARD — A rigid white sheet of paper not less than five inches by
seven inches encased in a clear transparent wrapper to be securely affixed
to the vehicle so as to be clearly visible to all passengers in the vehicle and
clearly readable, containing information as required pursuant to § 248-9 of
this chapter. No printing thereon shall be in other than black letters not less
than one inch high.
TAXICAB LICENSE — Permission granted by the Village to any person to
operate or keep for hire any taxicab in the Village for a period commencing
January 1 of that year unless sooner terminated, revoked or suspended.
TAXICAB STAND — Any place or location which may be designated by the
Village for the parking or standing of taxicabs.
VILLAGE — The Village of Suffern.
§ 248-2. Taxicab license required.
No person shall operate or permit to be operated a taxicab owned or
controlled by him as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the Village without
having first obtained a taxicab license from the Board of Trustees.
§ 244-46 SUFFERN CODE § 248-3
1:388
§ 248-3. Application for taxicab license.
An application for a taxicab license shall be filed with the Village Clerk
upon forms provided by the Village of Suffern, and said application shall be
verified under oath and shall furnish the following information:
A. The name, address, telephone number, date of birth and social security
number of the applicant.
B. The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of all
unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature or transaction
or acts giving rise to said judgments.
C. The experience of the applicant in the taxicab business.
D. The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant; a
description and the license plate numbers of said vehicles.
E. The location of the off-street address in the Village from which said
taxicabs will operate.
F. Upon the filing of a complete application for a taxicab license, the
Village Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief of Police who shall
conduct an investigation of the applicant, including verification of the
accuracy of the information contained in the license application. The
Chief of Police shall cause the required processing fee and the New
York State Division of Criminal Justice Services fingerprint card
containing the applicant's fingerprints to be forwarded to the New York
State Division of Criminal Justice Services for the purpose of
determining the arrest and conviction record of the applicant. Upon
completion of such investigation and receipt of a report from the New
York State Division of Criminal Justice Services, the Chief of Police shall
cause a report to be made to the Board of Trustees with respect to the
foregoing. The Chief of Police shall not divulge the specific information
regarding an applicant's criminal history as is received from the New
York State Division of Criminal Justice Services and shall merely inform
the Board of Trustees whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of a crime. Upon receipt of such report, the Board of Trustees shall fix a
time and place for a public hearing thereon and shall provide notice of
said public hearing by publishing a notice thereof in the official
newspaper of the Village at least five days in advance of such hearing
and by conspicuously posting such notice in five public places at least
five days prior to the date of the hearing. [Amended 1-24-1994 by
L.L. No. 1-1994; 9-19-1994 by L.L. No. 11-1994]
G. Prior arrests and convictions, including the nature of the offense,
jurisdiction, date committed and sentence, if any.
H. Convictions for moving violations within the last 36 months.
I. All accidents during the prior 36 months involving property damage or
personal injury, together with a full explanation of the same.
§ 248-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-3
1:389
§ 248-4. Taxicab license fee. [Amended 6-21-1999 by L.L. No.
3-1999]
No certificate shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder
thereof has paid an annual license fee as set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees in the Standard Schedule of Fees.122 Said license fees shall be for
the period March 1 to February 28 of each year and shall be in addition
to any other license fees or charges established by proper authority and
applicable to said holder of the vehicle or vehicles under his operation and
control.
§ 248-5. Public hearing.
Upon the filing of an application, the Board of Trustees shall fix a time and
place for a public hearing thereon and shall provide notice of said hearing
by publishing a notice thereof in the official newspaper of the Village at
least five days in advance of such hearing and by conspicuously posting
such notice in five public places at least five days prior to the date of the
hearing.
§ 248-6. Issuance of license.
If the Board of Trustees, following a public hearing, finds that the applicant
for a taxicab license is of good moral character, has not been convicted of a
crime, is capable of providing taxicab service in a safe and efficient manner,
is able to comply with the insurance requirements of this chapter and is
willing and able to comply with all the other requirements and provisions of
this chapter, then the Board of Trustees shall approve the application and
direct the Village Clerk to issue a taxicab license setting forth the name and
address of the applicant, the number, description, license plate numbers
and identity numbers for each vehicle and the date of issuance. If the Board
of Trustees cannot make such findings, it shall deny the application.
§ 248-7. Liability insurance required. [Amended 5-18-1998 by L.L.
No. 8-1998]
The Clerk shall not issue a taxicab license upon approval by the Board of
Trustees until the applicant provides a certificate of insurance, identifying
the Village of Suffern as the certificate holder, demonstrating that every
vehicle which will be operated in the Village is insured in the amount of
$100,000 for bodily injury to any person, $300,000 for injuries to more
than one person which are sustained in the same accident and $50,000 for
property damage resulting from one accident, by an insurance company
J. Days and hours when the applicant intends to operate each licensed
vehicle.
K. Any additional information which the Board of Trustees may require.
122. Editor's Note: A copy of the current Standard Schedule of Fees is on file in the Village
offices.
§ 248-3 SUFFERN CODE § 248-7
1:390
licensed to do business in the State of New York. The licensee shall also
provide a certificate demonstrating that a policy of workers' compensation
is in full force and effect. The applicant must keep said policies of insurance
in effect at all times, and the licensee shall provide a current certificate of
insurance to the Village Clerk prior to the end of the policy period specified
in the certificate of insurance. Said certificate of insurance shall provide for
20 days' notice of cancellation to the Village.
§ 248-8. Identification. [Amended 5-18-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998]
§ 248-9. Display of driver's license; rate card.
A. Upon the issuance of a taxicab license, the Village Clerk shall
thereupon assign and designate a number for such licensed taxicab,
which shall be permanently displayed on the exterior front doors, the
upper quarter panel and the center of the front deck of said taxicab, in
numbers at least six inches in height and one inch in width, in a color
that contrasts with the background color of the taxicab, so that the
same is legible at a distance of 50 yards, during the daylight hours. Said
number shall also be permanently displayed in the interior of the
taxicab in numbers at least two inches in height so that the same is
visible to passengers in the front and rear of the taxicab.
B. In addition to the foregoing, all taxicabs shall be clearly identified or
marked as follows on the exterior:
(1) A light on the roof with the legend "Taxi," which shall be lit at night.
(2) The name of the licensed company, owner or operator and
telephone number in three-inch lettering permanently placed on
the exterior front doors.
A. Each taxicab shall display, at all times, a rate card which shall contain
the name and address of the owner of the taxicab and the taxicab
number assigned to said taxicab. The rate card shall also contain a
schedule of fare charges as determined by the Board of Trustees. In
addition, there shall also be displayed, at all times, the driver's license
of the driver of the taxicab issued by the Village of Suffern, containing a
photograph of the driver with the driver's name, date of birth,
description of driver, motorist identification number and Village driver's
license number, as assigned.
B. Both of the above cards shall be placed on the dashboard inside said
taxicab and shall be illuminated after sundown so that they are clearly
readable from the rear seat by a passenger.
C. A notice shall be placed in each taxicab attached to the rear of the front
seat, which shall read as follows: "For Complaints — If a passenger has
any complaint regarding the operation of the vehicle or the conduct of
the driver, call the Village of Suffern, (914) 357-2600, between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., and thereafter the Suffern Police
§ 248-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-9
1:391
§ 248-10. Register of licensed taxicabs.
The Village Clerk shall keep a register or card index of the name of each
person owning or operating a taxicab licensed under this chapter, together
with a license identification number and a description, make and color
marking of such vehicle. Such record shall be open to the inspection of the
public at all reasonable times. A copy of said license and register shall be
filed with the police department.
§ 248-11. Duration of taxicab license. [Amended 6-21-1999 by L.L.
No. 3-1999]
A taxicab license issued as of March 1 shall expire on the last day of
February next succeeding, unless sooner suspended or revoked.
§ 248-12. Transfer of license prohibited.
No taxicab license may be sold, mortgaged, encumbered or otherwise
transferred except with the prior approval of the Board of Trustees of the
Village of Suffern.
§ 248-13. Suspension or revocation of taxicab license.
§ 248-14. Temporary taxicab license.
Department, (914) 357-2300, giving the name of the owner, the number
of the taxicab and the substance of the complaint, together with the
complainant's name, address and telephone number.
D. A schedule of rates, as set forth in § 248-31 of this chapter, shall be
clearly marked on each side of the taxi in letters at least three inches
high, but not more than six inches in height.
A. A taxicab license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked or suspended by the Board of Trustees if the holder thereof
has:
(1) Violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Discontinued operations for more than 60 days.
(3) Violated any ordinances of the Village of Suffern or the laws of the
United States or the State of New York, the violations of which
reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public
transportation.
(4) Charged excessive fares.
B. Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given notice of the
proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard.
§ 248-9 SUFFERN CODE § 248-14
1:392
§ 248-15. through § 248-19. (Reserved)
§ 248-20. Taxicab driver's license required.
No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the Village
of Suffern, and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to
be so driven, and no taxicab licensed by the Village of Suffern shall be so
driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of said taxicab shall have first
obtained and shall have then in force a taxicab driver's license issued under
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 248-21. Application for driver's license.
A. Upon the death of the holder of any taxicab license under this chapter,
the same shall be automatically annulled and canceled, except that the
Board of Trustees may issue a temporary license without adhering to
the formal requirements in the following cases:
(1) To the executor or administrator of the estate of a licensee.
(2) To a surviving next of kin of such deceased licensee, where no
administrator of his estate has been appointed and no executor has
qualified under his duly probated will.
(3) To the surviving member or members of a firm or association
which, at the time of death of a member, was such a licensee.
(4) To a designated person, firm or corporation where the licensee has
been called into the service and is a member of the Armed Forces of
the United States of America.
B. Such temporary license may be issued for a term not exceeding 90 days
from the date of death of such deceased licensee, and the Board of
Trustees may, in its discretion, renew such license for an additional
term or terms of 90 days each, not exceeding in the aggregate one year.
A. An application for a taxicab driver's license shall be filed with the
Village Clerk on forms provided by the Village of Suffern, and such
application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following
information:
(1) The names and addresses of four residents of the Village of Suffern
who have known the applicant for a period of five years and who
will vouch for the sobriety, honesty and general good character of
the applicant.
(2) The experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers.
(3) The educational background of the applicant.
(4) A concise history of his employment.
§ 248-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-21
1:393
§ 248-22. Examination; chauffeur's license required.
Before any application can be finally passed upon by the Board of Trustees,
the applicant shall be required to pass a satisfactory examination as to
his knowledge of the Village and to prove that he has a permanent motor
vehicle chauffeur's license issued by the State of New York.
§ 248-23. Investigation; report; police record. [Amended 1-24-1994
by L.L. No. 1-1994; 9-19-1994 by L.L. No. 11-1994; 1-23-1995 by L.L.
No. 1-1995]
Upon the filing of a complete application for a taxi driver's license, the
Village Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief of Police who shall
conduct an investigation of the applicant, including verification of the
accuracy of the information contained in the license application. The Chief
of Police shall cause the required processing fee and the New York State
Division of Criminal Justice Services fingerprint card containing the
applicant's fingerprints to be forwarded to the New York State Division of
Criminal Justice Services for the purpose of determining the arrest and
conviction record of the applicant. Upon completion of such investigation
and receipt of a report from the New York State Division of Criminal Justice
Services, the Chief of Police shall cause a report to be made to the Board
of Trustees with respect to the foregoing. The Chief of Police shall not
divulge the specific information regarding an applicant's criminal history as
is received from the New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services
and shall merely inform the Board of Trustees whether or not the applicant
has been convicted of a crime.
(5) The arrest record of the applicant.
(6) New York State Department of Criminal Justice Services fingerprint
card containing thereon the fingerprints of the applicant and the
appropriate processing fee required by the Department of Criminal
Justice Services. [Amended 1-24-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
(7) A full-face picture, passport size.
B. Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate from a physician
licensed to practice in the State of New York certifying that, in his
opinion, the applicant is not inflicted with any disease or infirmity which
might make him an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. At the time the
application is filed, the applicant shall pay to the Village Clerk a sum as
set by resolution of the Board of Trustees in the Standard Schedule of
Fees of the Village of Suffern.123
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 248-21 SUFFERN CODE § 248-24
1:394
§ 248-24. Approval of application. [Amended 9-19-1994 by L.L. No.
11-1994; 1-23-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
If the Board of Trustees, following a public hearing, finds that the applicant
for a taxicab driver's license is of good moral character, has not been
convicted of a crime, is capable of providing taxi service in a safe and
efficient manner and has satisfactorily provided the reports and
certifications required to be attached to the application and has complied
with all other requirements of this chapter, the Board of Trustees shall
approve the application.
§ 248-25. Issuance of license; duration; annual fee.
§ 248-26. Display of driver's license.
Every driver licensed under this chapter shall post his driver's license in
such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while such driver is
operating a taxicab, and there shall be affixed to such license in a space
provided therefor a full-face picture of such licensee, said picture to be
passport size.
§ 248-27. Suspension or revocation of driver's license.
The Chief of Police is hereby given the authority to suspend any driver's
license issued under this chapter for a driver's failing or refusing to comply
with the provisions of this chapter, such suspension to last for a period of
not more than 90 days. The Chief of Police is also given authority to revoke
any driver's license for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
However, a license may not be revoked unless the driver has received
written notice and has had an opportunity to present evidence in his behalf.
§ 248-28. Compliance with laws required.
Every driver licensed under this chapter shall comply with all Village,
state and federal laws. Failure to do so will justify the Board of Trustees
suspending or revoking a license.
§ 248-29. Inspections; standards, rules and regulations.
A. Upon approval of an application for a taxicab driver's license, the
Village Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant which shall bear the
name, address, color, age, signature and photograph of the applicant.
B. Such license shall be in effect for the remainder of the calendar year;
thereafter, it shall be issued upon the payment of a fee as set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees in the Standard Schedule of Fees of
the Village of Suffern,124 unless the license for the preceding year has
been revoked.
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 248-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-29
1:395
§ 248-30. Identifying sign or insignia.
Each taxicab shall bear a sign or insignia readily identifying it as a public
taxicab, and said sign or insignia so carried upon each taxicab shall be first
submitted and approved as to size and method of attachment by the Board
of Trustees.
§ 248-31. Rates of fare. [Amended 5-18-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998;
11-17-2003 by L.L. No. 9-2003; 8-7-2006 by L.L. No. 8-2006]
Every taxicab operated under this chapter shall have a rate card setting
forth the authorized rates of fare displayed in such a place as to be in view
of all passengers. No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge more than
$6 for travel to and from a location in the Village of Suffern. There shall
be an additional charge of $2 for additional passengers. There shall be no
additional charges for handling packages or baggage.
§ 248-32. Receipts.
The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to
such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically
printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt, on which shall be the
name of the owner, license number or motor number, amount of meter
reading or charges and the date of transaction.
A. Vehicles must be licensed prior to the use and operation of any vehicle
under the provisions of this chapter. Vehicles must be inspected by an
inspection facility licensed by the State of New York for compliance
with the standards promulgated by the State of New York for taxicabs
and the rules and regulations which may be promulgated by the Chief of
Police. The Board of Trustees hereby delegates to the Chief of Police the
authority to promulgate rules and regulations and standards for the
inspection of taxicabs to provide for safe transportation, safety
equipment and regulatory devices. The Chief of Police is also delegated
authority to promulgate an inspection form which must be completed
by such licensed inspection facility prior to the licensing of a vehicle
and upon semiannual inspection required pursuant to § 248-29C.
[Amended 1-24-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
B. When the Board of Trustees finds that a vehicle has met the standards,
rules and regulations established by the Board of Trustees, it shall
direct the Village Clerk to issue a license to that effect, which shall also
state the authorized seating capacity of said vehicle.
C. Every vehicle operating pursuant to a license issued under the
provisions of this chapter shall be inspected for mechanical safety,
operating efficiency and cleanliness by an inspection facility licensed by
the State of New York at least twice a year to ensure continued
maintenance, safety and cleanliness of such vehicles. [Amended
1-24-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
§ 248-29 SUFFERN CODE § 248-33
1:396
§ 248-33. Refusal of passenger to pay legal fare.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any
of the vehicles mentioned in this chapter after having hired the same, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any vehicle herein defined with
intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such
service.
§ 248-34. Solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers.
A. Solicitation of passengers by driver. No driver shall solicit passengers
of a taxicab except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such
taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curbside thereof.
The driver of any taxicab shall remain in the driver's compartment or
immediately adjacent to his vehicle at all times when such vehicle is
upon the public streets, except that, when necessary, a driver may be
absent from his taxicab for no more than 15 consecutive minutes, and
provided further that nothing herein contained shall be held to prohibit
any driver from alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of
assisting passengers into or out of such vehicle.
B. Prohibited solicitation. No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or
annoying tone of voice or by sign or in any manner annoy any person or
obstruct the movement of any persons or follow any person for the
purpose of soliciting patronage. Drivers shall not congregate in groups
away from their cabs on public sidewalks or streets to solicit patronage.
C. Receipt and discharge of passengers on sidewalk only. Drivers of
taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but
shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible or, in the
absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and
there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets,
where passengers may be discharged at either the right- or left-hand
sidewalk or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk.
D. Additional passengers. No driver shall permit any other person to
occupy or ride in said taxicab unless the person or persons first
employing the taxicab shall consent to the acceptance of the additional
passenger or passengers.
E. Restriction on number of passengers. No driver shall permit more
persons to be carried in a taxicab as passengers than the rated seating
capacity of his taxicab as stated in the license for said vehicle issued by
the Police Department. A child in arms shall not be counted as a
passenger.
F. Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited. No driver shall refuse
or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons upon request, unless
previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this
chapter to do so.
§ 248-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-34
1:397
§ 248-35. Open stands.
§ 248-36. Call box stands.
G. Solicitation for hotels. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
driver of a taxicab to solicit business for any hotel or to attempt to
deliver patrons from one hotel to another, neither shall such driver
engage in selling intoxicating liquor or solicit business for any houses of
ill-repute or use his vehicle for any purpose other than the transporting
of passengers.
H. Uniform to be worn. All drivers shall at all times while soliciting
patronage and while operating their vehicles be neat and clean and
shall wear a cap and blouse. There shall be affixed to both cap and
blouse the name of the taxicab company by whom the driver is
employed.
A. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern is hereby authorized and
empowered to establish open stands in such place or places upon the
streets of the Village of Suffern as it deems necessary for the use of
taxicabs situated in the Village. Said Board of Trustees shall not create
an open stand without taking into consideration the need for such
stands by the companies and the convenience to the general public. The
Board of Trustees shall prescribe the number of cabs that shall occupy
such open stands. The Board of Trustees shall not create an open stand
in front of any place of business where the abutting property owners
object to the same or where such stand would tend to create a traffic
hazard.
B. Open stands shall be used by the different drivers on a first-come-firstserved
basis. The driver shall pull onto the open stand from the rear and
shall advance forward as the cabs ahead pull off. Drivers shall be
required to stay within a reasonable distance of their cabs, but in no
event beyond a distance of 50 feet, and within full view of the cab. They
shall not solicit passengers or engage in loud or boisterous talk while at
an open stand. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing
a passenger from boarding the cab of his choice that is parked at open
stands.
A. The Board of Trustees is hereby authorized and empowered to establish
call box stands upon the streets of the Village of Suffern in such places
as in its discretion it deems proper. A holder desiring to establish a call
box stand shall make written application to the Board of Trustees. The
applicant must attach to the application the written approval of the
abutting property owners of said space, consenting to the creation of
such stand. Upon filing of the application, the Police Department shall
make an investigation of the traffic conditions at each place and shall
thereafter file its written recommendation to the Board of Trustees. The
Board of Trustees shall then either grant or refuse the application.
When a call box stand has been established as herein provided, it shall
§ 248-34 SUFFERN CODE § 248-36
1:398
§ 248-37. Other vehicles in taxi stands prohibited.
Private or other vehicles for hire shall not at any time occupy the space
upon the streets that has been established as either open stands or call box
stands.
§ 248-38. Responsibilities of taxicab business owners.
All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the Village of Suffern
operating under the provisions of this chapter shall render an overall
service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. Holders of certificates of
public conveyance and necessity shall maintain a central place of business
or telephone for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching cabs. They
shall answer all calls received by them for service inside the corporate limits
of the Village of Suffern as soon as they can do so; and if said services
cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall then notify the
prospective passengers how long it will be before said call can be answered
and give the reason therefor. Any holder who shall refuse to accept a
call anywhere in the corporate limits of the Village of Suffern at any time
when such holder has available cabs or who shall fail or refuse to give
overall service shall be deemed a violator of this chapter, and the certificate
granted to such holder shall be revoked at the discretion of the Board of
Trustees.
§ 248-39. Records and reports.
be used solely by the holder to whom the same was granted and his
agents and servants, and no other holder shall be permitted to use the
same; provided, however, that no holder shall obtain permits for more
than one such closed stand within the downtown business area.
B. A holder operating a call box stand as provided for in this chapter shall
be allowed to have on duty at such stand a starter or other employee for
the purpose of assisting in the loading or unloading of passengers from
cabs, for receiving calls and dispatching cabs and for soliciting
passengers at such stand. The words "at such stand" shall mean that
part of the sidewalk immediately adjacent to and of equal length with
such call box stand. It shall be unlawful for any such starter or other
employee to go beyond the area herein designated for the purpose of
soliciting passengers or assisting them in boarding such cabs.
A. Every holder shall keep accurate records of receipts from operations,
operating and other expenses, capital expenditures and such other
operations information as may be required by the Board of Trustees.
Every holder shall maintain such information and other data required
by this chapter at a place readily accessible for examination by the
Board of Trustees.
B. Every holder shall submit reports of receipts, expenses and statistics of
operation to the Board of Trustees for each calendar year. Said reports
shall reach the Village Clerk on or before the 28th day of February on
§ 248-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-39
1:399
§ 248-40. Advertising on taxicabs.
Subject to the rules and regulations of the Board of Trustees, it shall be
lawful for any person owning or operating a taxicab or motor vehicle for
hire to permit advertising matter to be affixed to or installed in or on such
taxicabs or motor vehicles for hire.
§ 248-41. Enforcement.
The Police Department of the Village of Suffern is hereby given the authority
and is instructed to watch and observe the conduct of holders and drivers
operating under this chapter. Upon discovering a violation of the provisions
of this chapter, the Police Department shall report the same to the Board of
Trustees, which will order or take appropriate action.
§ 248-42. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished
as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General Provisions.
Chapter 250
TREE ADVISORY BOARD
§ 250-1. Purpose.
The intention of the Board of Trustees in adopting this chapter is to
establish the Suffern Tree Advisory Board, which shall be responsible for
advising and educating on issues pertaining to trees and wooded plants in
the year following the calendar year for which such reports are filed.
Every person who comes within the scope of this subsection may be
required to submit to examination under oath by the Board of Trustees
or as its designee in relation to matters covered by said subsection.
C. All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of
taxicabs which result in death or injury to any person or in damage to
any vehicle or to any property in an amount exceeding $50 shall be
reported within 24 hours from the time of occurrence to the Police
Department in a form of report to be furnished by such Department.
D. Service contract reports. It shall be mandatory for all holders to file
with the Village Clerk copies of all contracts, agreements,
arrangements, memoranda or other writings relating to the furnishing
of taxicab service to any hotel, theater, hall, public resort, railway
station or other place of public gathering, whether such arrangement is
made with the holder or any corporate firm or association with which
the holder may be interested or connected. Failure to file such copies
within seven days shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of a
certificate of any offending holder or the cancellation of any cab-stand
privileges.
§ 248-39 SUFFERN CODE § 250-1
1:400
the Village of Suffern and to maintain the status of the Village as "Tree City
USA."
§ 250-2. Establishment of Board.
There is established for the Village of Suffern a citizens' advisory board to
be known as the "Suffern Tree Advisory Board."
§ 250-3. Membership and compensation. [Amended 2-5-2018 by L.L.
No. 2-2018]
The Suffern Tree Advisory Board shall consist of a minimum of five
members, but no more than eight members, who live or work in the Suffern
area and whom the Mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the
Board of Trustees. The members shall serve without compensation for
services performed. One member of the Tree Advisory Board shall be the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works.
§ 250-4. Appointments; terms of office.
The term of the members of the Tree Advisory Board shall be up to one year.
In the event a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his or her
successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. The first
Board shall serve as follows: one member shall be the head of the Village's
Department of Public Works, two members shall serve for two years each,
and two members shall serve for three years each.
§ 250-5. Meetings.
A. The Board shall have at least one regular meeting three times per year.
The Board shall determine meeting dates and times. Special meetings
may be held as often as the Board deems necessary or as directed by
the Mayor or Village Board.
B. For purposes of conducting the Board's business, exercising its powers
and for all other purposes, a quorum of the Board shall consist of three
or more members. Any action taken by a majority of those present,
when those present constitute a quorum at any regular or special
meeting of the Board, shall be deemed and taken as the action and
decision of the Board.
C. The Board shall elect such officers as it deems necessary to conduct
business. The Board shall adopt such rules of procedure as it deems
necessary.
D. The Board shall keep written minutes of all meetings held and all
business transacted. All records of the Board shall be open to public
inspection, except those that may be exempt from public disclosure
under Village/state law.
§ 250-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6
1:401
§ 250-6. Duties of Board.
The Tree Advisory Board shall acquire authorization from the Board of
Trustees prior to undertaking any project. The duties of the Tree Advisory
Board shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
§ 250-7. Tree City USA.
By adopting this chapter, the Board of Trustees agrees to maintain the
status of the Tree City USA Program by meeting the four standard
requirements:
A. Promoting the responsible planting of trees on public and private
property.
B. Promoting public education about trees.
C. Promoting proper tree maintenance.
D. Advocating trees within the Village of Suffern.
E. Providing for aesthetics within the Village of Suffern through the
formulation and implementation of tree programs.
F. Developing programs and projects while working with other community
groups to enhance Village beautification.
G. Developing innovative and joint funding for tree projects from a variety
of sources.
H. Providing the Mayor and Board of Trustees with a twice-yearly report
regarding Tree Advisory Board activities.
I. Developing, maintaining and providing a Tree Standard Manual for
proper tree planting, maintenance and care of trees and wooded plants,
by development of landscaping and/or tree local laws within the Village,
as well as reviewing project plans for compliance with said local laws as
requested by Village staff.
A. Establish a tree board or department;
B. Establish a tree care local law;
C. Provide a community forestry program with an annual budget of a least
$2 per capita;
D. Support Arbor Day by observance and a proclamation.
§ 250-6 SUFFERN CODE § 250-7
1:402
Chapter 251
TREE REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 41.
Brush and weeds — See Ch. 93.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 105.
Parks — See Ch. 193.
Soil removal — See Ch. 231.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 239.
§ 251-1. Permit required. [Amended 3-5-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
No person, firm, corporation or individual connected with or employed
by such firm or corporation shall remove, cut down or destroy any tree
with a trunk exceeding 12 inches in diameter at a height of four inches
measured from the ground on any private property, unless such person, firm
or corporation has obtained a permit to do so from the Superintendent of
the Department of Public Works pursuant to § 251-2 hereof.
§ 251-2. Permit procedures.
A. Application for permits must be made in writing to the Superintendent
of the Department of Public Works upon forms prescribed by that
official. Denial of permits by the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works may be appealed to the Board of Trustees. The Board of
Trustees is authorized and empowered to obtain the assistance, when
necessary, of persons especially qualified by reason of training or
experience in tree planting, preservation and landscaping.
B. Permits for the removal, cutting or destruction of trees may be granted
under the following circumstances:
(1) If the presence of the tree would cause hardship or would endanger
the public or the person or the property of the owner or of an
adjoining owner.
(2) If the tree is diseased or threatens the health of other trees.
(3) If the trees substantially interfere with a permitted use of the
property and there is no practical alternative other than removal
and the removal of the trees shall be performed in a selective
manner.
C. Revocation of permit. If the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works determines that removal, cutting or destruction of trees for
which a permit has been granted is not proceeding according to the
permit, the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works may
revoke the permit.
§ 250-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-2
1:403
§ 251-3. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
Chapter 254
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 57.
Parades — See Ch. 181.
Commercial parking areas — See Ch. 189.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 248.
D. Any tree removal application involving property for which development
is proposed shall be referred to the Village of Suffern Planning Board
for its review and recommendation. The Planning Board shall render its
recommendation to the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works within 60 days from receipt of such referral. The Superintendent
of the Department of Public Works shall not act contrary to said
recommendation without specifying his reasons therefor and, if the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works recommends action
contrary to the recommendation of the Planning Board, such permit
shall not be issued until approved by the Board of Trustees, which may
take whatever action on such application as it deems to be appropriate
in furtherance of the public health, safety and welfare of the Village.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant
to the Penal Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not
exceeding $5,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each tree removed, cut down or
destroyed in violation of this chapter shall amount to a separate
violation.
B. In addition to any other penalty, the violator will be required to replace,
in kind, each and every tree removed, cut down or destroyed in
violation of this chapter. If a tree was so large and mature that it cannot
be replaced, the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works
may require the planting of multiple trees instead. No certificate of
occupancy shall issue for any new construction on the property on
which occurred any violation of this chapter unless and until the
provisions of this subsection have been complied with.
C. The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, Code
Enforcement Officer and Building Inspector, are authorized to enforce
the provisions of this chapter by the issuance of appearance tickets.
§ 251-2 SUFFERN CODE § 251-3
1:404
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 254-1. Definitions.
§ 254-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Police Commissioner of the Village of Suffern shall install and maintain
traffic control devices when and as required under the provisions of this
chapter, to make effective the provisions of this chapter, and may install and
maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary
to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York, subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 254-3. Schedules; adoption of regulations.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article
1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for the purposes
of this chapter:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Lincoln's Birthday, Washington's
Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day,
Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named
herein or on traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard
which is in current use in this state.
A. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations
adopted under the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby
established a system of schedules, appearing as Article VIII of this
chapter, in which shall be entered all regulations after adoption. Such
schedules shall be deemed a part of the section to which they refer. All
regulations shall be adopted with reference to the appropriate schedule
as indicated in the various sections of this chapter.
B. Regulations shall be adopted by the Board of Trustees in accordance
with provisions of the Village Law and the Vehicle and Traffic Law, or by
an officer or agency authorized by the Board of Trustees to adopt
regulations pursuant to § 1603 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 254-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-3
1:405

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 254-4. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule I (§ 254-51), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 254-5. Speed limits.
The maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed on or along any streets
or highways within the Village is hereby established at 30 miles per hour,
except that the speed limit for vehicles proceeding on or along those streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule II (§ 254-52) shall be as indicated
in said schedule.
§ 254-6. School speed limits.
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of that indicated in
Schedule III (§ 254-53), in the areas described in said Schedule III, during
school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
§ 254-7. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV (§ 254-54), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 254-8. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule V (§ 254-55), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 254-9. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule VI (§ 254-56), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 254-10. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule VII (§ 254-57),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 254-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-11
1:407
§ 254-11. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VIII (§ 254-58), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections.
Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 254-12. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 254-59), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 254-13. Truck route system.
§ 254-13.1. Dimensions and weights of vehicles. [Added 11-17-1997
by L.L. No. 10-1997]
A. A truck route system upon which all trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer
combinations having a total gross weight in excess of five tons are
permitted to travel and operate shall be as set forth in Schedule X
(§ 254-60).
B. All trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations having a total gross
weight in excess of five tons are hereby excluded from all streets except
those streets listed in Schedule X, except that this exclusion shall not be
construed to prevent the delivery or pickup of merchandise or other
property along the street from which such vehicles and combinations
are excluded.
A. Except as expressly permitted by the United States or the New York
State Department of Transportation, and except where the requirement
for local delivery will permit no alternate legal route, no person shall
operate or move or cause or knowingly permit to be operated or moved
on any public street in the Village of Suffern any vehicle or combination
of vehicles of a size or weight exceeding the limitations provided for in
this section.
B. Width.
(1) The width of a vehicle, inclusive of load, shall be not more than 96
inches, plus safety devices, on any Village street in the Village of
Suffern.
(2) The provisions of Subsection B(1) of this section shall not apply to
vehicles and implements or combinations thereof not over 13 feet
in width, used solely for farm purposes, during the period from
sunrise to sunset, provided that at least two red flags not smaller
than 24 inches square be displayed on the left front and rear of
each vehicle or implement or combination thereof in such manner
as to be clearly visible from the front and rear for a distance of at
least 500 feet. However, no such vehicles, implements or
combinations thereof shall be operated on any highway after 10:00
§ 254-11 SUFFERN CODE § 254-13.1
1:408
a.m. on any Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, except for trips of
two miles or less.
(3) The provisions of Subsection B(1) of this section shall not apply to
omnibuses or buses used solely for the transportation of children to
and from school, but the width of such omnibuses shall not exceed
98 inches.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B(1) of this section,
racks for carrying hay, straw or unthreshed grain may have a width
of 10 feet at the top of the rack. In no case shall the width at the
base of the rack exceed 102 inches at any portion thereof while on
any Town highway.
C. The height of a vehicle from the underside of tire to the top of the
vehicle, inclusive of load, shall be not more than 13 1/2 feet. Any
damage to highways, bridges or highway structures resulting from the
use of a vehicle exceeding 13 feet in height where such excess height is
the proximate cause of the accident shall be compensated for by the
owner and operator of such vehicle.
D. Length.
(1) The length of a single vehicle, inclusive of load and bumpers, shall
not be more than 40 feet unless otherwise provided in this
subsection.
(2) The length of a semitrailer or trailer shall not exceed 45 feet except
as provided in this subsection; provided, however, that the length of
any trailer or semitrailer being operated in combination with
another trailer or semitrailer shall not exceed 28 1/2 feet.
(3) The length of buses having a carrying capacity of more than seven
passengers shall not exceed 45 feet, except that the length of
articulated buses shall not exceed 62 feet.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to fire vehicles.
(5) Any semitrailer with a length not to exceed 48 feet may be operated
on any Town highway, provided that the total length of a
combination of vehicles, including such a semitrailer, does not
exceed 60 feet.
E. Additional restriction on length; exceptions.
(1) The total length of a combination of vehicles, inclusive of load and
bumpers, shall not be more than 60 feet.
(2) The provisions of Subsection E(1) of this section shall not apply to:
(a) Vehicles of a corporation which are subject to the jurisdiction
of the Interstate Commerce Commission, the Public Service
Commission or other regulatory body and which are used in
§ 254-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-13.1
1:409
the construction, reconstruction, repair or maintenance of its
property or facilities, provided that any such vehicle complies
with the safety requirements of the laws and regulations of the
United States and of New York State pertaining to over-length
vehicles.
(b) Vehicles hauling poles, girders, columns or other similar
objects of excess length, provided that any such vehicle
complies with the safety requirements of the laws and
regulations of the United States and of New York State
pertaining to such over-length vehicles.
(c) Fire vehicles.
(d) Any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is disabled and
unable to proceed under its own power and is being towed for
a distance not in excess of 10 miles for the purpose of repairs
or removal from the highway.
(e) State and/or municipally owned vehicles engaged in
snowplowing, ice clearing or other emergency-type operations.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection E(1) of this section, a
bumper overhang of not more than a total of three feet on the front
and four feet on the rear of the vehicle shall be permitted.
F. In determining the number of wheels and axles on any vehicle or
combination of vehicles within the meaning of this section, only two
wheels shall be counted for each axle, and axles which are less than 46
inches apart from center to center shall be counted as one axle.
However, in the case of multiple tires or multiple wheels, the sum of the
widths of all the tires on a wheel or combination of wheels shall be
taken in determining tire width.
G. Subject to the provisions of the section of this chapter governing
maximum vehicle gross weights, the weight per inch width of tire on
any one wheel of a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles equipped
with pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall be not more than 800 pounds.
H. Subject to the provisions of the section of this chapter governing
maximum vehicle gross weights, the weight on any one wheel of a
single vehicle or a combination of vehicles equipped with pneumatic
tires, when loaded, shall be not more than 11,200 pounds.
I. Subject to the provisions of the section of this chapter governing
maximum vehicle gross weights, the weight on any one axle of a single
vehicle equipped with pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall be not more
than 22,400 pounds.
J. Subject to the provisions of the section of this chapter governing
maximum vehicle gross weights, the weight on any two consecutive
axles of a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles equipped with
§ 254-13.1 SUFFERN CODE § 254-13.1
1:410
pneumatic tires, when loaded, and when such axles are spaced less
than eight feet from center to center, shall be not more than 36,000
pounds, except where axles are spaced eight feet or greater, but less
than 10 feet, the weight on those two axles shall not exceed that
permitted by Subsection K(2) of this section and, in addition, shall not
exceed 40,000 pounds. Axles shall be counted as provided in Subsection
F of this section.
K. Subject to the provisions of the section of this chapter governing
maximum vehicle gross weights, a single vehicle, or a combination of
vehicles having three axles or more and equipped with pneumatic tires,
when loaded, may have a total weight on all axles not to exceed 33,000
pounds, plus 900 pounds for each foot and major fraction of a foot of the
distance from the center of the foremost axles to the center of the
rearmost axles. Axles are to be counted as provided in Subsection F of
this section. In no case, however, shall the total weight exceed 79,000
pounds. [Amended 8-7-2006 by L.L. No. 7-2006]
L. No vehicle shall be operated on the public streets of the Village of
Suffern other than on pneumatic tires.
M. For the purpose of this section, the width of pneumatic tires shall be
ascertained by measuring the greatest width of the tire casing when the
tire is inflated.
N. No person shall operate or move a vehicle or a combination of vehicles
over, on or through any bridge or structure on any highway if the
weight of such vehicle or combination of vehicles, and load, is greater
than the posted capacity of the structure or exceeds the height of the
posted clearance as shown by an official sign.
O. If a vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in violation of this
section, an appearance ticket or summons may be issued to the
registrant of the vehicle or, if a combination of vehicles, to the
registrant of the hauling vehicle, rather than the operator. In the event
that the vehicle is operated by a person other than the registrant, any
appearance ticket or summons issued to the registrant shall be served
upon the operator, who shall be deemed the agent of the registrant only
for the purpose of receiving such appearance ticket or summons. In
addition, a notice containing all pertinent information relating to the
charge which is contained on the summons or appearance ticket shall
be mailed by or on behalf of the person who issued the appearance
ticket or summons to the registrant at the address given on the
registration certificate for the vehicle or, if no registration certificate is
produced at the time the appearance ticket or summons is issued, to the
address of the registrant on file with the Department of Motor Vehicles
of said state within five days after the date of issuance of the
appearance ticket or summons, but at least five days before the return
date specified on the appearance ticket or summons. Proof of mailing to
the registrant under this section shall be filed with the court in which
the appearance ticket or summons is returnable on or before the return
§ 254-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-13.1
1:411
date. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to owneroperators
of any motor vehicle or to any motor vehicle or trailer which
is registered in the name of a person whose principal business is the
lease or rental of motor vehicles or trailers unless the lease or rental
of motor vehicles or trailers is being operated by an employee of the
registrant or for a community of interest other than the lease or rental
agreement between the parties to the lease or rental agreement.
P. In any case wherein the charge laid before the court alleges a violation
of this section, any plea of guilty thereafter entered in satisfaction of
such charge must include at least a plea of guilty to a violation of one of
the subsections of this section. No other disposition by plea of guilty to
any other charge in satisfaction of such shall be authorized, provided,
however, that if the prosecuting attorney, upon reviewing the available
evidence, determines that the charge of a violation of this section is not
warranted, he may consent, and the court may allow, a disposition by
plea of guilty to that or another charge in satisfaction of such charge;
provided, however, that the court must impose at least the minimum
fine as authorized in this section for the offense.
Q. Violations; penalties for offenses.
(1) A violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than $200 nor more than $500, or by imprisonment
for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment,
for the first offense; by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than
$1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, for the second or subsequent offense,
in both cases plus the fine provided in Subsection Q(2) of this
section.
(2) A violation of the provisions of this section by any vehicle or
combination of vehicles whose weight exceeds the weight
limitation as set forth in any of these sections, or the weight
limitations specified by a permit issued by the United States or
New York State Department of Transportation, shall be punishable
by fines levied on the registered owner of the vehicle or vehicles,
whether at the time of the violation the vehicle was in the charge of
the registered owner or his agent or lessee in accordance with the
following schedule [in addition to the fines as prescribed in
Subsection Q(1) of this section]:
Excess Total
Weight1 Greater
Than
(pounds)
Excess Total
Weight Less
Than or Equal to
(pounds) Amount of Fine
0 1,900 $50
1,900 2,900 $75
2,900 3,900 $100
§ 254-13.1 SUFFERN CODE § 254-13.1
1:412
Excess Total
Weight1 Greater
Than
(pounds)
Excess Total
Weight Less
Than or Equal to
(pounds) Amount of Fine
3,900 4,900 $200
4,900 5,900 $300
5,900 6,900 $400
6,900 7,900 $500
7,900 8,900 $600
8,900 9,900 $700
9,900 14,900 $1,200
14,900 19,900 $1,700
19,900 24,900 $2,200
24,900 29,900 $2,700
29,900 $2,700 plus $0.06/
pound2
NOTES:
1 Where the excess total weight is greater than the limits specified
by a United States or New York State Department of
Transportation excess weight permit, the permit shall, for the
purposes of computing the fine, be deemed void, and the amount
of fine shall be determined in accordance with the maximum
weight which would have been in effect for the operation of such
vehicle if the permit to exceed such maximum weight had not been
issued.
2 The $0.06 per pound in addition to the $2,700 is for each pound
greater than 29,900 pounds.
(3) A violation of the provisions of this section by any vehicle or
combination of vehicles whose weight exceeds the weight
limitations specified by a permit issued by the United States or
New York State Department of Transportation shall be punishable
by fines levied on the registered owner of the vehicle or vehicles,
whether at the time of the violation the vehicle was in the charge of
the registered owner or his agent or lessee, in accordance with the
following schedule in addition to the fines as prescribed in
Subsection Q(1) of this section:
§ 254-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-13.1
1:413
Percentage of
Excess Weight
Greater Than1
Percentage of
Excess Weight
Less Than or
Equal To Amount of Fine
0% 5.0% $100
5.0% 10.0% $200
10.0% 15.0% $350
15.0% 20.0% $600
20.0% 25.0% $1,000
25.0% 30.0% $1,600
30.0% $2,450
NOTE:
1 Where the excess axle or axles' weight is greater than the limits
specified by a permit issued by the United States or New York
State Department of Transportation, the permit shall, for the
purposes of computing the fine, be deemed void, and the amount
of the fine shall be determined in accordance with the maximum
weight which would have been in effect for the operation of such
vehicle if the permit to exceed such maximum weight had not been
issued.
(4) In connection with the weighing of a vehicle or combination of
vehicles, if it is found that there is a violation of Subsection K and
also of Subsections I and J or both Subsections I and J of this
section, there shall be a single fine imposed, and the maximum
amount of such fine shall not exceed the highest fine that could be
imposed under this section.
(5) The court may impose any sentence authorized by this section;
provided, however, that any such sentence must include a fine as
provided in this section.
(6) All fines collected as a result of the above schedule shall remain the
property of the Village of Suffern.
§ 254-13.1 SUFFERN CODE § 254-13.1
1:414
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 254-14. Application of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 254-15. All-night parking. [Amended 9-14-1998 by L.L. No.
11-1998; 10-18-2004 by L.L. No. 14-2004]
§ 254-16. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XI (§ 254-61), attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 254-17. No stopping.
No person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XII (§ 254-62), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 254-18. No standing.
No person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIII (§ 254-63), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 254-19. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule XIV
(§ 254-64) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule XIV, attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
A. Parking is prohibited on all public roads in the Village of Suffern, except
public roads in the Central Business District as defined in § 254-25.1,
whenever snow is accumulating on the roadway and if snowfall has
been forecast. Upon the commencement of snowfall, parking on all such
public roads is prohibited until snowfall has ceased and the street is
cleared of snow to the curb or edge of pavement. Parking shall be
prohibited on all public roads in the Central Business District whenever
temporary “no parking” signs are posted for snow control or removal.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a violation of this
section shall be punishable by a fine of $100 per offense.
B. In addition to the prohibition set forth in § 254-15A, parking is
prohibited on all public roads in the Central Business District, as
defined in § 254-25.1A of this chapter, from 3:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
§ 254-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-20
1:415
§ 254-20. Time-limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XV (§ 254-65) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule XV of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described in said Schedule XV, attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 254-21. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XVI (§ 254-66) except at the angle designated and
only within the painted stall lines. On all streets or portions thereof where
angle parking is now or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked
thereon shall be parked with the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 254-22. Handicapped parking spaces.
No person shall park a vehicle in a space designated as a handicapped
parking space in Schedule XVII (§ 254-67), except as provided in Article IV
of this chapter.
§ 254-23. Loading zones. [Amended 5-11-1992 by L.L. No. 2-1992]
The locations described in Schedule XVIII (§ 254-68), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones. Such loading
zones shall be off limits to other than vehicles using them for the purposes
intended during such hours and on such days as may be posted thereon
for the information of the public. Loading zones shall be barred to parking
by the general public during the hours posted thereon. At times other than
those reserved for its purpose, the loading zone shall be available for public
parking subject to all other generally applicable laws and regulations. The
days and hours of operation of the loading zones shall be such as are
prescribed from time to time by resolution of the Village Board.
§ 254-24. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XIX (§ 254-69), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 254-25. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XX (§ 254-70), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 254-25.1. Valet parking. [Added 3-16-1993 by L.L. No. 2-1993]
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings set forth herein:
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT — An area which includes Lafayette
Avenue from its intersection with Orange Avenue to its intersection
§ 254-20 SUFFERN CODE § 254-25.1
1:416
with Washington Avenue; Orange Avenue from its intersection with
Chestnut Street to its intersection with Lafayette Avenue; Chestnut
Street from the railroad tracks to its intersection with Orange Avenue.
VALET PARKING — A system whereby the operator of a motor vehicle
provides custody of an idling motor vehicle to a person authorized to
drive the motor vehicle to another location for the purpose of providing
off-street parking of the same and subsequently returning the motor
vehicle to said person by delivering the motor vehicle to the same
location.
B. Valet parking. No person shall operate, permit or cause to be operated
valet parking unless a permit therefor has been issued by the Board of
Trustees pursuant to the provisions of this section. The Board of
Trustees may, upon application, issue a permit for valet parking in the
Central Business District, upon compliance with the following
standards, criteria and procedures:
(1) Valet parking may be authorized only between the hours of 5:00
p.m. and 1:00 a.m.
(2) The applicant must demonstrate the manner in which valet parking
is to be accomplished, including the location at which cars will be
received and returned and parked, the anticipated daily volume of
usage and the establishments which will utilize such arrangement.
(3) If valet parking is to be accomplished by contract with an
independent operator ("operator"), a copy of the contract must be
provided, which contract is subject to approval by the Board of
Trustees.
(4) A list of the identities of the individuals who will operate the valet
parking, ages, social security numbers, motor vehicle operator's
license numbers, a list of traffic infractions within the past three
years and a list of criminal convictions, if any, must accompany
such application.
(5) Certificate of insurance.
(a) The applicant and operator must provide a certificate of
insurance from an insurance carrier licensed to do business in
the State of New York, demonstrating the following insurance
coverages:
[1] Liability: $1,000,000/$3,000,000.
[2] Property damage: $50,000/$150,000.
(b) The certificate of insurance shall also name as an additional
insured the Village of Suffern, its agents, employees, officers
and officials. Such certificate shall provide at least 30 days'
notice of cancellation and shall be subject to the approval of
the Board of Trustees.
§ 254-25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-25.1
1:417
(6) The applicant and operator shall execute an agreement, in a form
to be approved by the Village Attorney, agreeing to defend,
indemnify and hold harmless the Village of Suffern, its agents,
employees, officers and officials, from all claims, judgments and
expenses of any kind, including attorney's fees arising from the
valet parking operations.
(7) Upon receipt of a complete application, the application shall be
referred to the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works,
the Chief of Police, the Parking Authority and such other agencies
or employees as are deemed appropriate for a review and
recommendation with respect to the safety of the proposed
operations. The application shall be accompanied by a fee in
accordance with the Standard Fee Schedule.125
(8) Upon receipt of the recommendations and report from the
Superintendent of Public Works, the Chief of Police and such other
agencies or persons to which the application has been referred, the
Board of Trustees shall hold a public hearing on such application,
which hearing shall be advertised in the manner provided in
Chapter 32, Adoption of Local Laws, Article I, of the Code of the
Village of Suffern.
(9) In approving such application, the Board of Trustees may impose
such reasonable conditions and restrictions as it deems
appropriate to safeguard the safety and convenience of the public.
(10) A permit issued to conduct valet parking shall be valid for such
time as the Board of Trustees may provide, which period may not
exceed one year. The procedures set forth herein must be complied
with annually as a prerequisite thereof, except no public hearing on
a renewal application shall be required unless the Board of
Trustees deems it advisable to conduct a public hearing on a
particular application. [Amended 11-19-2001 by L.L. No.
10-2001]
(11) An applicant or operator who fails or neglects to comply with the
conditions or restrictions imposed as a condition of a permit
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in § 254-47 of this chapter, and such permit may
be suspended for a specified period of time or may be revoked by
direction of the Chief of Police. An owner or operator who is
aggrieved by such suspension or revocation may appeal such
determination to the Board of Trustees in writing within five days of
said suspension or revocation. The aggrieved applicant or owner
may submit the particulars of his appeal in writing to the Board of
Trustees within five days of said suspension or revocation or may
demand a hearing within said five-day period. If a hearing is
demanded, the Board of Trustees may designate a hearing officer
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 254-25.1 SUFFERN CODE § 254-25.1
1:418
§ 254-25.2. Fire zones. [Added 6-21-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street or parts thereof described in
Schedule XXI (§ 245-71), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 254-25.3. Parking restrictions. [Added 8-18-2003 by L.L. No.
7-2003; amended 11-15-2004 by L.L. No. 15-2004]
The following is prohibited on all Village streets for more than 1/2 hour,
except when actively delivering or providing a permitted service:
to hear such appeal and to render a report and recommendation to
the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees may sustain, modify
or reverse such suspension or revocation.
(12) A person operating or causing to be operated valet parking without
a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in § 254-47 of this chapter.
A. Parking of trucks with a weight in excess of five tons;
B. Parking of tractors and/or trailers:
C. Parking of vehicles with commercial plates, taxi, livery, or limousine
plates or vehicles with painting, signs or any type of writing associated
with advertising or denoting a commercial enterprise;
D. Parking of mobile homes, boats, recreational vehicles or their trailers.
§ 254-25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-25.3
1:419

ARTICLE IV
Parking for the Handicapped
§ 254-26. Parking permits.
§ 254-27. Establishment of spaces for handicapped parking in
parking areas of shopping centers.
A. The Village Clerk of the Village of Suffern shall be designated as the
agent to distribute special parking permits issued by the Commissioner
of Motor Vehicles pursuant to § 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of
the State of New York.
B. The Clerk shall adopt the application forms and procedures as
promulgated by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles for the issuing of
these parking permits. These permits shall be issued to residents of the
Village of Suffern who are eligible for them under the guidelines
established by the State Advocate for the Handicapped.
C. All permits issued by the Village Clerk shall be valid for a period of one
year, except in the case where the disability is temporary in nature, in
which case, the Clerk is authorized to issue a permit for a duration of a
shorter period.
D. A vehicle bearing such special vehicle identification permit when
parked shall not be deemed in violation of any of the provisions of the
rules and regulations governing parking in the Village of Suffern,
except where such vehicle shall be parked in a bus stop or a taxi stand;
within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, a fire zone, fire lane, firehouse, a
driveway or a crosswalk; or is double parked or is parked for a period in
excess of the time restrictions set by the Village of Suffern or during
prohibited hours.
E. Any person to whom a permit has not been issued and who shall use a
permit issued pursuant to this section for any purpose other than
parking a motor vehicle while transporting a physically handicapped
person shall be guilty of a violation within the meaning of the Penal
Law.
A. All owners of shopping centers which have filed a written request with
the Village of Suffern to regulate traffic in parking areas, pursuant to
§ 164-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall
create parking spaces to be used solely by vehicles displaying parking
permits for handicapped persons.
B. These parking spaces shall be located in the general parking area of the
shopping center and shall be in close proximity to an entrance of the
stores in the shopping center.
C. The spaces shall be 13 feet wide and shall be laid out in such a manner
so as not to compel handicapped individuals to wheel or walk behind
parked cars.
§ 254-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-27
1:421
D. The spaces should be outlined in reflectorized green paint and each
space shall be designated by the uniform sign authorized for such
purpose established by the Department of Transportation Federal
Highway Administration.
E. Each shopping center covered by this section shall establish
handicapped parking spaces as follows:
Capacity
(parking spaces) Minimum Number of Spaces
7 to 50 2
51 to 100 3
101 to 150 4
§ 254-27 SUFFERN CODE § 254-27
1:422
ARTICLE V
Municipal Parking Areas
§ 254-28. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IMPOUNDMENT — Removal of a motor vehicle to a storage facility either
by a police officer of the Village of Suffern or by a contractor for towing
and storage in response to a request from a police officer of the Village of
Suffern.
§ 254-29. Parking permits required.
It shall be unlawful lo park a motor vehicle in the following areas, unless
there is displaying on the rear left window a parking permit issued by the
Village of Suffern Parking Authority:
LOT A Orange Avenue (right of Police Station)
LOT B Chestnut Street
LOT C Orange Avenue (left of Police Station)
LOT D Route 59 (under Thruway bridge)
LOT E Ballfield lot
Lot O 120 Orange Avenue [Added 1-7-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
§ 254-30. Application for parking permits.
Applications for parking permits shall be made to the Village Office. Fees for
parking permits shall be established by the Parking Authority. Preference
will be given to people employed in the Village of Suffern with respect to
Lot B and Lot C. All other permits will be sold on a nonpreferential basis, in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Parking Authority.
§ 254-31. Transferability of permits.
Permits issued hereunder for any particular lot may be used by any
passenger motor vehicles in that lot.
§ 254-32. Parking in designated areas only. [Amended 5-17-2004 by
L.L. No. 8-2004]
A. It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle at any of the lots
enumerated in § 254-29 unless the vehicle is parked in the area
designated for parking. Operators of motor vehicles attending
recreational or athletic events at the ballfield may park in other areas of
the ballfield for a period not to exceed three hours, but may not park
within the ballfield enclosure.
§ 254-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-32
1:423
§ 254-32.1. Capital One parking lot. [Added 8-2-2010 by L.L. No.
5-2010]
§ 254-33. All-night parking prohibited; exception for permit
parking. [Amended 2-5-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
The parking of motor vehicles in the parking lots enumerated in § 254-29
is prohibited between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except parking
during such hours is permitted in designated spaces if there is displayed on
the rear left window a valid parking permit issued by the Village of Suffern
Parking Authority.
§ 254-33.1. Weight limit. [Added 5-22-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995]
All motor vehicles having a gross weight in excess of four tons are excluded
from the parking lots enumerated in § 254-29 of this chapter. A violation
of this section is punishable as provided in § 1-12 of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 254-34. Impoundment.
Any motor vehicle parked in violation of § 254-33 of this article may be
impounded, with or without the issuance of a summons for unlawful
parking, in accordance with the procedures set forth herein.
§ 254-35. Impoundment without prior notice. [Amended 10-18-2004
by L.L. No. 14-2004]
A vehicle may be impounded without giving prior notice to the owner:
B. It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in Lot A (Orange Avenue) or
in the New Jersey Transit Park and Ride Lot (Chestnut Street and
Ramapo Avenue) other than with the front of the vehicle facing in.
A. It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in the Capital One Bank
parking lot, located at the northwest corner of Lafayette Avenue and
Orange Avenue, except in conformance with this section.
B. Patrons of the businesses located in the Central Business District of the
Village of Suffern may park in the designated spaces in the Capital One
Bank parking lot during the following hours: Monday through Friday,
6:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m.; Saturday, 3:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m.; Sunday, 10:00
a.m. to 2:00 a.m.
C. The lot may not be used by merchants or business owners/operators or
for valet parking.
D. The following provisions of Chapter 254 of the Code of the Village of
Suffern shall apply to use of the Capital One Bank parking lot by
noncustomers of the Bank as provided herein: § 254-28; §§ 254-34
through 254-41.
§ 254-32 SUFFERN CODE § 254-35
1:424
§ 254-36. Notification of owner.
§ 254-37. Redemption of impounded vehicles.
Vehicles impounded by the Village shall be redeemed only under the
following circumstances:
§ 254-38. Post-impoundment hearing.
As to any vehicle impounded pursuant to this article by or at the request
of the Village of Suffern, its agents or employees, a person who has a
legal entitlement to possession of the vehicle has a right to a post-seizure
administrative hearing to determine whether there was probable cause to
A. If parked in violation of § 254-33 of this chapter; or
B. If the motor vehicle poses an immediate danger to the public safety; or
C. When a motor vehicle is parked on a public street in the Village of
Suffern outside the Central Business District while snow is
accumulating or in the Central Business District while prohibited for
snow control or removal.
A. Not more than 48 hours after impoundment of a motor vehicle, the
Police Department shall mail a notice to the registered owner of the
vehicle and to any other person who claims the might of possession of
the vehicle. The notice shall be mailed to the registered owner at the
address provided by the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles
or the corresponding agency of any other state. If a police officer, who
has knowledge of the impoundment, has reason to believe that an
owner is residing at some different address which is known to the
officer, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to such owner in a
manner designated, as nearly practicable, to give actual notice. The
notice shall contain particulars of the impoundment, redemption and
the opportunity to contest the propriety of the impoundment as
hereinafter provided.
B. Similar notice shall be given to each person who seeks to redeem an
impounded vehicle, except that notice need not be mailed as provided
in Subsection A if a vehicle is redeemed prior to the mailing of such a
notice.
A. Only a registered owner, a person authorized by the registered owner
or one who has purchased a vehicle from the registered owner, who
produces proof of ownership or authorization and signs a receipt
therefor, may redeem an impounded vehicle.
B. Any person so redeeming a vehicle impounded by the Village shall pay
to the towing contractor the costs of impoundment (towing and storage)
prior to redeeming such vehicle, except as provided for § 254-40. Such
costs shall not exceed $35 by reason of towing such vehicle and $5 for
storage charges per day or fraction thereof.
§ 254-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-38
1:425
impound the vehicle if such person files a written demand with the Village
of Suffern within 10 days after such person has learned such vehicle has
been impounded or within 10 days after the mailing of the date set in the
notice specified in § 254-36, whichever occurs first.
§ 254-39. Conduct of hearing.
§ 254-40. Decision of the hearing officer.
The hearing officer shall only determine that as to the vehicle in issue
either there was a probable cause to impound the vehicle or there was
no such probable cause. In the event that the hearing officer determines
that there was no probable cause, the hearing officer shall prepare and
date a certificate of no probable cause, copies of which shall be given
to the possessor of the vehicle and the Police Department. Upon receipt
of the possessor's copy of such certificate, the garage having custody of
the vehicle shall release the vehicle to its possessor. Upon a finding of
no probable cause, towing and storage fees shall be paid by the Village
of Suffern. If the possessor fails to present such certificate to the garage
having custody of the vehicle within 24 hours of its receipt, excluding such
days when the garage is not open for business, the possessor shall assume
A. A hearing shall be conducted before a hearing officer designated by the
Mayor within 48 hours of receipt of a written demand therefor from the
person seeking the hearing unless such person waives the right to a
speedy hearing. Saturdays, Sundays and Village holidays are to be
excluded from the calculation of the forty-eight-hour period. The
hearing officer shall be someone other than the person who directed
the impounding and storage of the vehicle. The sole issue before the
hearing officer shall be whether there was probable cause to impound
the vehicle in question. The phrase "probable cause to impound" shall
mean such a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary care and
prudence to believe that there was violation of this article.
B. The hearing officer shall conduct a hearing in an informal manner and
shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence. The person
demanding the hearing shall carry the burden of establishing that such
person has the right to possession of the vehicle. The Police Department
shall carry the burden of establishing that there was probable cause to
impound the vehicle in question. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
hearing officer shall prepare a written decision. A copy of such a
decision shall be provided to the person demanding the hearing and the
registered owner of the vehicle (if not the person requesting the
hearing). The hearing officer's decision in no way affects any criminal
proceeding in connection with the impound in question and any
criminal charges involved in such proceeding may only be challenged in
the appropriate court. The decision of the hearing officer is final.
Failure of the registered or legal owner or his agent to request or attend
a scheduled post-seizure hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right
to such hearing.
§ 254-38 SUFFERN CODE § 254-40
1:426
liability for all subsequent storage charges. Such certificate shall advise the
possessor of such requirement.
§ 254-41. Record of impounded vehicles.
The Police Department shall keep, and make available for public inspection,
a record of all vehicles impounded by it under the provisions of this article.
The record shall include at least the following information:
§ 254-42. (Reserved)126
§ 254-43. Issuance of tickets by Parking Authority. [Amended
8-2-2010 by L.L. No. 5-2010; 3-5-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
The employees of the Parking Authority of the Village of Suffern are
authorized to issue tickets for violation of this article and for violation of
any parking regulation set forth in the Code of the Village of Suffern, any
local law, ordinance, Mayor's promulgation or the New York State Vehicle
and Traffic Law if such violation occurs in any of the parking lots specified
in § 254-29 of this article, the Capital One Bank parking lot, or on any of the
following streets: Lafayette Avenue, Chestnut Street, Suffern Place, East
Park Place, Park Avenue from Lafayette Avenue to its intersection with East
Park Place and Orange Avenue, Ramapo Avenue, Meadow Avenue, Ridge
Avenue, East and West Park Avenue, East and West Maple Avenue, East
and West Maltbie Avenue, Oak Terrace, Jersey Avenue, First Avenue and
Mansfield Place.
A. Manufacturer's trade name or make.
B. Vehicle license number and state of registration.
C. Vehicle identification number.
D. Such other descriptive information as the Chief of Police deems useful
for purposes of vehicle identification.
E. Basis for impoundment, including reference to the appropriate section
or sections of this article.
F. Disposition of the vehicle and date of disposition.
126. Editor's Note: Former § 254-42, Violations, was repealed 10-18-2004 by L.L. No. 14-2004.
§ 254-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-43
1:427

ARTICLE VI
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 254-44. Authority to impound vehicles.
§ 254-45. Storage and charges.
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this article, the Police
Department may store or cause such vehicle to be stored in a suitable place
at the expense of the owner. Such owner or person in charge of the vehicle
may redeem the same upon payment to the person with whom stored of the
amount of all expenses actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such
removal and storage, as provided in § 254-35 of this chapter.
§ 254-46. Notice of removal.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to ascertain to the extent
possible the owner of the vehicle or the person having the same in charge,
and to notify him of the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the
amount which will be required to redeem same. Said Police Department
shall also without delay report the removal and disposition of any vehicle
removed as provided in this article to the Village Clerk.
A. When any vehicle is parked on any public street or public parking lot in
the Village of Suffern in violation of § 254-15A of this chapter, or during
a flood, fire or other public emergency, which affects that portion of the
public street or parking lot upon which said vehicle is parked, said
motor vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the Police
Department. [Amended 10-18-2004 by L.L. No. 14-2004]
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway or public parking
lot within the Village where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, said vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the
Police Department.
§ 254-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-46
1:429

ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 254-47. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-11-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision
of this chapter which is not a violation of any provision of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York shall, for a first conviction thereof,
be punished by a fine of not more than $50 or by imprisonment for not
more than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, except that for
the violation of unauthorized parking in a handicapped parking space, the
fine for a first offense shall be not more than $100; for a second conviction
within 18 months thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than 45 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction within
18 months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine
of not more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 254-48. When effective.
§ 254-49. Severabillty.
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision
of this chapter shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such adjudication shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the article,
section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 254-50. Repealer.
All prior ordinances, regulations and rules, or parts thereof, of this Village
regulating traffic and parking are hereby repealed, except that this repeal
shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for
any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance, regulation or rule
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
A. Except those parts, if any, which are subject to approval under § 1684 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, this chapter and
any regulations adopted hereunder shall take effect as provided by law.
B. Any part or parts of this chapter and any regulations adopted
hereunder which are subject to approval under § 1684 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall take effect from and after
the day on which approval in writing is received from the New York
State Department of Transportation.
§ 254-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-50
1:431

ARTICLE VIII
Schedules
§ 254-51. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-4, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 254-52. Schedule II: Speed Limits.127
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-5, speed limits other than 30
miles per hour are established as indicated upon the following streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Bon Aire Circle [Added
1-9-2017 by L.L. No.
1-2017]
25 Entire length
Bon Aire Circle West
[Added 1-9-2017 by
L.L. No. 1-2017]
25 Entire length
Boulevard [Added
8-2-2010 by L.L. No.
4-2010]
25 Entire length
Cypress Road 15 At Hillside Avenue and Cypress
Road
Cypress Road 15 250 feet south of Sylvan Way
Cypress Road [Added
6-2-2008 by L.L. No.
7-2008]
25 Entire length, except where 15
mph applies
Forest Drive 15 40 feet east of Willow Drive
Hallet Place 15 15 feet west of Chestnut Street
Hillcrest Road [Added
1-9-2017 by L.L. No.
1-2017]
25 Entire length
Hillside Avenue 15 15 feet north of Terrace Avenue
127. Editor's Note: Some of the entries in the location column of this schedule are actually
descriptions of where the signs are located based on a sign survey done by the Village and
not descriptions of the actual locations of the speed limit restrictions.
§ 254-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-52
1:433
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Hillside Avenue [Added
6-2-2008 by L.L. No.
7-2008]
25 Entire length, except where 15
mph applies
James Street 15 Entire length
Lafayette Avenue 40 35 feet west of Village line
Lonergan Drive [Added
12-3-2007 by L.L. No.
13-2007]
25 Entire length
Maplewood Boulevard 15 20 feet east of Beechwood Road
Maplewood Boulevard
[Added 9-7-2011 by
L.L. No. 15-2011]
25 Entire length (except where 15
mph applicable)
Memorial Drive [Added
10-15-2013 by L.L. No.
10-2013]
25 Entire length
Milford Lane [Added
1-9-2017 by L.L. No.
1-2017]
25 Entire length
Oakdale Manor [Added
9-7-2011 by L.L. No.
15-2011]
25 Entire length
Orange Avenue 35 From the northerly Village line to
the New York State Thruway
overpass
Orange Avenue 35 From the southerly Village line to
Maple Avenue
Parkside Drive [Added
10-5-2015 by L.L. No.
10-2015]
25 Entire length
Ramapo Avenue 10 10 feet north of West Park Place
Ramapo Avenue [Added
4-10-2006 by L.L. No.
1-2006]
25 Entire length (except for 10-mileper-
hour
Riverside Drive [Added
3-5-2007 by L.L. No.
6-2007]
25 Entire length
Ruby Street 15 Entire length
§ 254-52 SUFFERN CODE § 254-52
1:434
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Spicer Road [Added
12-3-2007 by L.L. No.
13-2007]
25 Entire length
Temple Lane [Added
12-3-2007 by L.L. No.
13-2007]
25 Entire length
Washington Avenue
[Added 8-2-2010 by
L.L. No. 4-2010]
25 Entire length
Wayne Avenue 35 From the easterly Village line to
the New York State Thruway
overpass
Woodland Drive [Added
6-17-2002 by L.L. No.
3-2002]
25 Lafayette Avenue to Hillside
Avenue
Yorkshire Drive [Added
4-10-2006 by L.L. No.
1-2006]
25 Entire length
§ 254-53. Schedule III: School Speed Limits.
In accordance with § 254-6, no person shall drive a vehicle in excess of the
speeds indicated below, in the areas designated below, during school days
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
(Reserved)
§ 254-54. Schedule IV: One-Way Streets.128
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-7, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
128. Editor's Note: Some of the entries in the location column of this schedule are actually
descriptions of where the signs are located based on a sign survey done by the Village and
not descriptions of the actual limits of the one-way streets.
§ 254-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-54
1:435
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Bon Aire Circle — From Campbell Avenue to
Milford Lane
Boynton Place East From Orange Avenue to
Washington Avenue
Chestnut Street North 25 feet up the ramp on left side
Chestnut Street North At intersection with Orange
Avenue
Hallet Place [Added
4-17-2000 by L.L. No.
3-2000]
East Wayne Avenue to Chestnut
Street
Hallet Place Extension
[Added 4-17-2000 by
L.L. No. 3-2000]
East Orange Avenue to Chestnut
Street
James Street East From Prospect Street to
Woodland Drive
Mansfield Place East/south From Park Avenue to East
Maple Street
Memorial Drive East From Wayne Avenue to Utopian
Avenue (when municipal pool is
open)
Washington Avenue — On traffic island near Orange
Avenue
§ 254-55. Schedule V: U-Turn Prohibitions.129
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-8, no person shall make a U-turn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Chestnut Street 10 feet north of Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue At intersection with Orange Avenue
Lafayette Street Chestnut Street
§ 254-56. Schedule VI: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-9, no person shall make a turn of
the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
129. Editor's Note: Some of the entries in the location column of this schedule are actually
descriptions of where the signs are located based on a sign survey done by the Village and
not descriptions of the actual locations of the U-turn prohibitions.
§ 254-54 SUFFERN CODE § 254-56
1:436
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours At Intersection of
Exit from property at
corner of Washington
Avenue and Lafayette
Avenue
East Left All Washington Avenue
Exit from property at
corner of Washington
Avenue and Lafayette
Avenue
South Left All Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue East Left All Chestnut Street
Lafayette Avenue East Left All Entrance to property at
corner of Washington
Avenue and Lafayette
Avenue
Orange Avenue South Left All Chestnut Street
Orange Avenue South Left All Washington Avenue
Washington Avenue North Left All Entrance to property on
corner of Lafayette
Avenue
Washington Avenue South Right All Orange Avenue
§ 254-57. Schedule VII: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-10, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on
Red Signal onto
Lafayette Avenue East Washington Avenue
Washington Avenue North Lafayette Avenue
§ 254-58. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-11, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Antrim Avenue North Lafayette Avenue
Athletic Field (Ramapo
Avenue)
East Ramapo Avenue
§ 254-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-58
1:437
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Beech Road Both Forest Drive
Beech Road North Sylvan Way
Berkeley Circle East Wayne Avenue
Bon Aire Circle North Milford Lane
Bon Aire Circle North Campbell Avenue
Bon Aire Circle East Bon Aire Circle
Bon Aire Circle South Milford Lane
Boulevard West Washington Avenue
Bridge Street Both Riverside Drive
Brook Street North Highland Avenue
Brook Street South Boulevard
Brook Street — Riverside Drive
Burlington Avenue North Yorkshire Drive
Burlington Avenue South Sagamore Drive
Cedar Avenue South Lafayette Avenue
Center Street North Highland Avenue
Center Street South Boulevard
Chadick Place Both Lexington Avenue
Chadick Place Northwest Wayne Avenue
Chadick Place Southeast Utopian Avenue
Chatham Street South Parkside Drive
Chelsea Court West Lancaster Drive
Chestnut Street North Wayne Avenue
Claremont Lane West Bon Aire Circle
Clinton Place East Antrim Avenue
Clinton Place West Washington Avenue
Crane Place West Wayne Avenue
Crestwood Drive East Forest Knoll Drive
Crestwood Drive West Foxwood Avenue
Cross Street East Washington Avenue
Cross Street West Wayne Avenue
Cypress Road East Sylvan Way
Cypress Road West Forest Drive
Cypress Road — At entrance to Connors school
Danbury Court West Bon Aire Circle
§ 254-58 SUFFERN CODE § 254-58
1:438
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Division Street South Lafayette Avenue
Doxbury Lane East Parkside Drive
Doxbury Lane West Chatham Street
Dunnery Court West Ramapo Avenue
Durham Lane South Maplewood Boulevard
East Maltbie Avenue East Washington Avenue
East Maltbie Avenue West Orange Avenue
East Maltbie Avenue West Washington Avenue
East Maple Avenue Both Washington Avenue
East Maple Street West Orange Avenue
East Park Place East Park Avenue
East Park Place West Orange Avenue
Essex Lane North Bon Aire Circle
Essex Lane South Yorkshire Drive
Fairview Place West Hillside Avenue
First Street East Ramapo Avenue
Forest Drive East Cypress Road
Forest Drive West Woodland Drive
Forest Knoll Drive North Maplewood Boulevard
Forest Knoll Drive South Parkside Drive
Foxwood Avenue Both Maplewood Boulevard
Foxwood Avenue North Hillside Avenue
Foxwood Avenue [Added
8-7-2006 by L.L. No.
9-2006]
North Meadowbrook Lane
Hallett Place East Chestnut Street
Hallett Place North Wayne Avenue
Hallett Place South From Wayne Avenue to Chestnut
Street
Highland Avenue Both Oakdale Manor
Highland Avenue Both Riverside Drive
Hillcrest Drive Both Forest Drive
Hillcrest Road [Added
2-12-2004 by L.L. No.
3-2004]
Both Sunset Drive
Hillside Avenue Both James Street
§ 254-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-58
1:439
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Hillside Avenue North Boulevard
Interstate Street East Hillside Avenue
James Street East Woodland Drive
James Street West Hillside Avenue
Jersey Avenue Both Ramapo Avenue
Lancaster Drive Both Sagamore Avenue
Lenox Court West Bon Aire Circle
Lexington Avenue Both Chadick Place
Lincoln Street Both Prairie Avenue
Lincoln Street Both Rockland Terrace
Lincoln Street West Washington Avenue
Lonergan Drive North Boulevard
Maplewood Boulevard
[Amended 10-25-1996
by L.L. No. 8-1996]
Both Foxwood Avenue
Maplewood Boulevard East Chatham Street
Maplewood Boulevard
[Added 8-15-1994 by
L.L. No. 10-1994]
East Forest Knoll Drive
Maplewood Boulevard
[Added 7-14-1994 by
L.L. No. 6-1994]
West Forest Knoll Drive
Maplewood Boulevard [Repealed 5-16-1994 by L.L. No. 4-1994]
Mansfield Place South East Maple Avenue
Mansfield Place West Park Avenue
Meadow Avenue Both Jersey Avenue
Meadow Avenue Both Oak Terrace
Meadow Avenue Both West Maltbie Avenue
Meadow Avenue Both West Maple Avenue
Meadowbrook Lane East Foxwood Avenue
Meadowbrook Lane West Maplewood Boulevard
Memorial Drive [Added
2-26-1996 by L.L. No.
1-1996]
Both Utopian Avenue
Milbury Street East Burlington Avenue
Milbury Street West Stockbridge Avenue
Milford Lane East Bon Aire Circle
§ 254-58 SUFFERN CODE § 254-58
1:440
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Milford Lane West Sylvan Way
Oak Terrace Both Ramapo Avenue
Oakdale Manor North Lafayette Avenue
Oliver Street East Washington Avenue
Oliver Street West Orange Avenue
Oxford Court — Bon Aire Circle
Park Avenue North Lafayette Avenue
Park Avenue South East Maple Avenue
Parkside Drive North Yorkshire Drive
Parkside Drive West Forest Knoll Drive
Pavilion Road South Wayne Avenue
Prairie Avenue Both Boulevard
Prairie Avenue Both Lincoln Street
Prairie Avenue South South Street
Prospect Place South James Street
Ramapo Avenue [Added
2-1-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
Both West Maltbie Avenue
Revere Court West Essex Lane
Ridge Road Both West Maltbie Avenue
Ridge Road Both West Maple Avenue
Ridge Road West Oak Terrace
Riverside Drive [Added
10-4-2010 by L.L. No.
7-2010]
Both Bridge Street
Riverside Drive North Lafayette Avenue
Riverside Drive South Boulevard
Rockland Terrace North Boulevard
Rockland Terrace
[Added 8-24-2015 by
L.L. No. 8-2015]
North and
south
Lincoln Street
Ruby Street East Temple Lane
Ruby Street West Rockland Terrace
Salem Court East Stockbridge Avenue
Salem Court West Parkside Drive
Sagamore Drive East Lancaster Drive
§ 254-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-58
1:441
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
South Street West Orange Avenue
Spicer Road East Temple Lane
Spicer Road West Rockland Terrace
Stewart Circle East Wayne Avenue
Stockbridge Avenue North Yorkshire Drive
Stockbridge Avenue South Sagamore Avenue
Suffern Place South Lafayette Avenue
Sunderland Place North Milbury Street
Sunset Drive Both Hillcrest Road
Sunset Drive [Added
7-10-2006 by L.L. No.
6-2006]
North Sylvan Way
Sunset Drive West Woodland Drive
Sylvan Way Both Cypress Road
Sylvan Way [Added
7-10-2006 by L.L. No.
6-2006]
Both Vista Way
Temple Lane North Lonergan Drive
Terrace Avenue East Hillside Avenue
Terrace Avenue West Woodland Drive
Tilton Road South Lafayette Avenue
Utopian Avenue South Memorial Drive
Valleyview Terrace North Maplewood Boulevard
Valleyview Terrace South Meadowbrook Lane
Vista Way Both Hillcrest Road
Vista Way South Sylvan Way
Vista Way West Woodland Drive
Ward Street East Hillside Avenue
Ward Street West Woodland Drive
Washington Avenue North Wayne Avenue
Washington Avenue South Orange Avenue
Wayne Avenue West Orange Avenue
West Maltbie Avenue East Ramapo Avenue
West Maple Avenue Both Ramapo Avenue
West Park Place Both Ramapo Avenue
Willow Drive Both Forest Drive
§ 254-58 SUFFERN CODE § 254-58
1:442
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Willow Drive North Sunset Drive
Willow Drive South Terrace Avenue
Woodland Drive North Lafayette Avenue
Woodland Drive South Hillside Avenue
Yorkshire Drive East Cragmere Road
Yorkshire Drive [Added
7-9-2007 by L.L. No.
10-2007]
Both Essex Lane
§ 254-59. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-12, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Foxwood Avenue Both Maplewood Boulevard
Hillside Avenue North Woodland Drive
Hillside Avenue South Interstate Street
Orange Avenue South Wayne Avenue
Parkside Drive West Foxwood Avenue
Sylvian Way West Sunset Drive
Wayne Avenue Both Orange Avenue
§ 254-60. Schedule X: Truck Route System.
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-13, a truck route system upon
which trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations in excess of five tons
may travel is hereby established on the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
Lafayette Avenue Entire length
Orange Avenue Entire length
Wayne Avenue Entire length
§ 254-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-61
1:443
§ 254-61. Schedule XI: Parking Prohibited at All Times.130
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-16, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Antrim Avenue West From Lafayette Avenue to Clinton
Place
Beech Road [Added
12-11-2013 by L.L. No.
13-2013]
East South of intersection with Forest
Drive
Bon Aire Circle — From a point 300 feet south of
Milford Lane to a point 350 feet
south thereof
Bon Aire Circle [Added
9-18-2000 by L.L. No.
9-2000]
East Entire length
Bon Aire Circle [Added
9-18-2000 by L.L. No.
9-2000]
West From Campbell Avenue to Milford
Lane
Bon Aire Circle [Added
9-18-2000 by L.L. No.
9-2000]
East From Milford Lane to the
intersection with Bon Aire Circle
Boulevard North From Rockland Terrace to
Washington Street
Boulevard South From Prairie Avenue to a point 25
feet east thereof
Boulevard South From Washington Avenue to a
point 25 feet east thereof
Boynton Place Both Entire length
Bridge Street North From Riverside Drive to a point 50
feet east thereof
Cedar Lane — Dead end
Chestnut Street East From Lafayette Avenue to the
railroad tracks
Chestnut Street West From a point 233 feet south of
Lafayette Avenue to a point 73
feet south thereof
Chestnut Street West From a point in front of the post
office entrance to the south side
of the driveway
130. Editor's Note: Some of the entries in the location column of this schedule are actually
descriptions of where the signs are located based on a sign survey done by the Village and
not descriptions of the actual locations of the parking restrictions.
§ 254-61 SUFFERN CODE § 254-61
1:444
Name of Street Side Location
Chestnut Street ramp East From Chestnut Street to a point
21 feet south thereof
Clinton Place North From Antrim Avenue to a point 20
feet west of Antrim Avenue
Clinton Place North From Washington Avenue to a
point 35 feet east thereof
Clinton Place [Amended
5-11-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
South From Washington Avenue to a
point opposite the end of the
school property
Cross Street North From Wayne Avenue to a point 60
feet east thereof
Cross Street North 20 feet from Wayne Avenue
Cross Street North 35 and 45 feet west of Pleasant
Avenue
Cross Street [Added
9-18-1995 by L.L. No.
6-1995]
North From Pleasant Avenue to
Washington Avenue
Cross Street South 50 feet from Washington Avenue
Cross Street South From Wayne Avenue to a point 40
feet east thereof
Cross Street South 20 and 65 feet from Wayne
Avenue
Cross Street South 100, 150 and 200 feet from Wayne
Avenue
Cypress Road [Added
7-6-2009 by L.L. No.
8-2009]
Both From the intersection with Forest
Drive to a point 275 feet south
Danbury Court Both On circle
Doxbury Lane North From Chatham Street to a point
50 feet east thereof
Doxbury Lane South 400 feet from Chatham Street
Dunnery Court Both On circle
East Maltbie Avenue North 100 feet east of Orange Avenue
East Maltbie Avenue North From Washington Avenue to a
point 30 feet west thereof
East Maltbie Avenue South Driveway: 140 feet east of Orange
Avenue
East Maltbie Avenue South Driveway: 30 feet east of Orange
Avenue
§ 254-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-61
1:445
Name of Street Side Location
East Maltbie Avenue South From Washington Avenue to a
point 25 feet east thereof
East Maple Avenue
[Added 6-4-2012 by
L.L. No. 8-2012]
Both From the intersection of
Washington Avenue to a point 40
feet east thereof
East Maple Avenue South 35 feet east of Washington Avenue
East Park Place [Added
8-20-1990 by L.L. No.
5-1990]
North From Park Avenue to a point 70
feet west
East Park Place South From Park Avenue to Orange
Avenue
East Park Place South 120 feet east of Orange Avenue
Essex Lane East 80 feet south of Bon Aire Circle
Essex Lane East 60 feet south and 30 feet north of
Revere Court
Essex Lane [Added
11-18-2002 by L.L. No.
6-2002; amended
10-9-2007 by L.L. No.
12-2007]
West From the intersection of Bon Aire
Circle to a point 125 feet south
and from a point 265 feet south of
Bon Aire Circle to a point 340 feet
south of Bon Aire Circle
Essex Lane [Added
3-7-2011 by L.L. No.
3-2011]
West From the driveway on the west
side of Essex Lane in the vicinity
of 5 Essex Lane to a point 30 feet
south thereof
Essex Lane [Repealed
11-18-2002 by L.L. No.
6-2002]
Hallet Place [Repealed
4-17-2000 by L.L. No.
3-2000]
Hallet Place [Added
4-17-2000 by L.L. No.
3-2000]
Both (east
and west)
From Wayne Avenue to a point 95
feet south
Hallet Place [Added
4-17-2000 by L.L. No.
3-2000]
North From Chestnut Street to a point
85 feet west
Hallet Place [Added
4-17-2000 by L.L. No.
3-2000; amended
6-18-2001 by L.L. No.
6-2001]
North From Orange Avenue to a point
240 feet east
§ 254-61 SUFFERN CODE § 254-61
1:446
Name of Street Side Location
Hallet Place [Added
4-17-2000 by L.L. No.
3-2000]
South From Orange Avenue to a point
150 feet east
Hillcrest Avenue West 25 feet north of Vista Way
Hillcrest Road East From Vista Way to Lafayette
Avenue
Hillcrest Road West From Lafayette Avenue to a point
35 feet south thereof
Hillcrest Road West 90 feet from Lafayette Avenue
Hillcrest Road West 20 feet south of Sunset Drive
Hillcrest Road West From a point 90 feet south of
Vista Way to Sunset Drive
Hilltop Apartments
parking lot
North Pavilion Road
Lafayette Avenue Both From the easterly Village line to
Division Street
Lafayette Avenue North From Chestnut Street to a point
50 feet west thereof
Lafayette Avenue North Front of 26 Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue North From Suffern Place to a point 15
feet east thereof
Lafayette Avenue North From Washington Avenue to a
point 150 feet west thereof
Lafayette Avenue South 50 feet west of Division Street
Lafayette Avenue South Driveway at 81 Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue South From Orange Avenue to a point 30
feet east thereof
Lafayette Avenue South From Washington Street to a point
210 feet west thereof, except
buses
Lenox Court — On circle
Lonergan Drive West Opposite Hallett Park
Mansfield Place East 180 and 320 feet north of East
Maple Avenue
Mansfield Place North 120 and 35 feet east of Park
Avenue
Mansfield Place South 25 and 125 feet east of Park
Avenue
Mansfield Place South From Park Avenue to the corner
opposite Dr. Beer's property
§ 254-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-61
1:447
Name of Street Side Location
Maplewood Boulevard North 100 and 300 feet west of Chatham
Street
Maplewood Boulevard South 10 feet east of Village line
Maplewood Boulevard South At intersection with Beechwood
Road
Maplewood Boulevard South 50 feet east of Beechwood Road
Maplewood Boulevard South 100 and 300 feet east of Forest
Knoll Drive
Memorial Drive
[Amended 4-20-1998
by L.L. No. 3-1998]
Both Entire length (including east side
of Horton Field Parking Lot)
Milford Lane [Added
11-20-2000 by L.L. No
10-2000]
North Bon Aire Circle to Bon Aire Circle
West
Milford Lane [Added
3-10-2008 by L.L. No.
2-2008]
South From the intersection of Bon Aire
Circle to a point 135 feet west
Milford Lane North Bon Aire Circle West to Sylvan
Way
Oakdale Manor East From Lafayette Avenue to a point
35 (or 20) feet south thereof
Oakdale Manor West From Lafayette Avenue to Bridge
Street
Oak Terrace South 120 feet west of Ridge Road
Oliver Street [Added
8-20-1990 by L.L. No.
5-1990]
Both From Washington Avenue to a
point 30 feet west
Orange Avenue East From Washington Avenue south to
the Village line
Orange Avenue East Front of Acura
Orange Avenue East From East Maltbie Avenue to a
point — feet south thereof
Orange Avenue East 50 feet north of Lafayette Avenue
Orange Avenue East In front of #4 Orange Avenue
Orange Avenue East 5 feet south of South Street
Orange Avenue East 100 feet north of Town Service
Orange Avenue East At Village border
Orange Avenue East At Wayne Avenue
Orange Avenue East From Wayne Avenue north to the
northwest Village line
§ 254-61 SUFFERN CODE § 254-61
1:448
Name of Street Side Location
Orange Avenue North From Wayne Avenue to a point 84
feet northwest thereof
Orange Avenue West Entire length
Oxford Court — On circle
Oxford Court — 40 feet from Bon Aire Circle
Park Avenue East Entire length
Park Avenue South From East Park Place to East
Maple Avenue
Park Avenue West 50 feet north of East Maple
Avenue
Park Avenue West 10 feet north of East Maple
Avenue
Park Avenue West From Lafayette Avenue to a point
immediately south of the driveway
leading to Dr. Petrone's house
Park Avenue West 100 feet south of Lafayette
Avenue
Park Avenue West 160 and 30 feet north of Mansfield
Place
Park Avenue West 30 and 115 feet south of
Mansfield
Parkside Drive North 200 feet east of Chatham Street
Parkside Drive North 200, 220, 400 and 420 feet west
of Doxbury Lane
Parkside Drive North 50, 150 and 225 feet west of
Salem Court
Parkside Drive North 20 feet west of Yorkshire Drive
Parkside Drive South Opposite Chatham Street
Parkside Drive South 700 feet east of Chatham Street
Parkside Drive South 200 feet east of Chatham Street
Parkside Drive South Opposite and 200 feet east of
Doxbury Lane
Parkside Drive South At the Foxwood Pond
Parkside Drive South 100 feet west of, at intersection
with and 200 feet east of Salem
Court
Pat Malone Drive
[Added 5-11-1992 by
L.L. No. 2-1992]
North In front of the full length of
fencing at the O & R natural gas
station
§ 254-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-61
1:449
Name of Street Side Location
Pavilion Road East 30 feet south of entrance to
American Legion
Pavilion Road West 20 and 40 feet south of entrance
to Tall Oaks Apartments
Pleasant Avenue [Added
6-17-2002 by L.L. No.
4-2002]
East From Cross Street to a point 65
feet north
Pleasant Avenue [Added
6-17-2002 by L.L. No.
4-2002]
West From a point 65 feet north of
Cross Street to Washington
Avenue
Pleasant Avenue
[Repealed 6-17-2002
by L.L. No. 4-2002]
Prairie Avenue Both From a point 15 feet east of
Boulevard to a point 15 feet west
thereof
Prairie Avenue [Added
1-5-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
West From the intersection of South
Street to a point 50 feet north
thereof
Ramapo Avenue East From West Maltbie Avenue to
Chestnut Street
Ramapo Avenue East 40 feet north of West Park Place
Ramapo Avenue West 60 and 25 feet north of First
Street
Ramapo Avenue West 30 feet north of Jersey Avenue
Ramapo Avenue West 80 feet south of Oak Terrace
Ramapo Avenue West 30 feet north of Oak Terrace
Ramapo Avenue West 20 feet north of State Street
Ramapo Avenue West From West Park Place to West
Maltbie Avenue
Revere Court On circle
Riverside Drive East From Boulevard to a point 35 feet
south thereof
Riverside Drive East From Highland Avenue to
Lafayette Avenue
Riverside Drive West From Boulevard to a point 15 feet
north thereof
§ 254-61 SUFFERN CODE § 254-61
1:450
Name of Street Side Location
Riverside Drive [Added
9-15-2003 by L.L. No.
8-2003; amended
3-5-2013 by L.L. No.
2-2013]
West From Lafayette Avenue to a point
280 feet south thereof
Salem Court North 100 feet west of Stockbridge
Sagamore Drive — Cul-de-sac
Somerset Drive
[Repealed 10-18-1993
by L.L. No. 6-1993]
Somerset Drive [Added
10-18-1993 by L.L. No.
6-1993; amended
2-26-1996 by L.L. No.
2-1996]
North Bon Aire Circle west to 50 feet
west of the fire hydrant
Somerset Drive — Cul-de-sac
Suffern Place East Entire length
Sussex Court — On circle
Sylvian Way North West side of west entrance to
L.P.L. Fire House
Sylvian Way North 10 feet east of east drive-way to
L.P.L Fire House
Tall Oaks Apartments
parking lot
South Pavilion Road
Temple Lane [Added
10-5-2015 by L.L. No.
11-2015]
West Entire length of park
Vista Way North At intersection and 5 feet west of
Hillcrest Road
Vista Way North 150 and 250 feet west of Sylvian
Way
Vista Way South 50 feet west of Hillcrest Road
Vista Way South From Hillcrest Road to a point
150 feet east thereof
Vista Way South 225 feet east of Hillcrest Road
Vista Way South 125 feet west of Sylvian Way
Washington Avenue East From Boulevard to a point 25 feet
north thereof
Washington Avenue East From Boulevard to a point 25 feet
south thereof
§ 254-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-61
1:451
Name of Street Side Location
Washington Avenue East From a point 25 feet north of
Boulevard to a point 25 feet south
of Boulevard
Washington Avenue East From Clinton Place to a point 20
feet south thereof
Washington Avenue East From East Maltbie Avenue to a
point 20 feet south thereof
Washington Avenue East From East Maple Avenue to a
point 20 feet south thereof
Washington Avenue East From East Maple Avenue to a
point 30 feet north thereof
Washington Avenue
[Added 6-4-2012 by
L.L. No. 8-2012]
East To a point 40 feet north and 4 feet
south of its intersection with East
Maple Avenue
Washington Avenue East From Lafayette Avenue to the
railroad tracks
Washington Avenue East From Lafayette Avenue to Wayne
Avenue
Washington Avenue East From Orange Avenue to a point 30
feet north thereof
Washington Avenue North Entire length
Washington Avenue West From Lafayette Avenue to a point
140 feet north thereof
Washington Avenue West From Lafayette Avenue to Orange
Avenue
Washington Avenue West From the railroad tracks to a point
50 feet north thereof
Washington Circle
[Added 11-3-2008 by
L.L. No. 14-2008]
Both From the intersection with
Lafayette Avenue (both) to a point
60 feet east
Wayne Avenue South From the easterly Village line to a
point 500 feet west of Chestnut
Street
West Maltbie Avenue North From Ramapo Avenue to a point
25 feet east thereof
West Maltbie Avenue North From Ramapo Avenue to a point
50 feet west thereof
West Maltbie Avenue South From Ramapo Avenue to a point
60 feet west thereof
West Maple Avenue North From Ramapo Avenue to a point
30 feet west thereof
§ 254-61 SUFFERN CODE § 254-61
1:452
Name of Street Side Location
West Maple Avenue South From Ramapo Avenue to a point
30 feet west thereof
West Park Place Both From Ramapo Avenue to Meadow
Avenue
West Park Place North From Ramapo Avenue to a point
30 feet west thereof
West Park Place South From Ramapo Avenue to the
railroad tracks
Woodland Drive East From Lafayette Avenue to a point
50 feet south thereof
Woodland Drive West 75 and 200 feet south of Lafayette
Avenue
Yorkshire Drive South From Parkside Drive to a point 60
feet west thereof
§ 254-62. Schedule XII: No Stopping.131
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-17, no person shall stop a vehicle
upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Chestnut Street East 55 feet north of Lafayette Avenue
Chestnut Street [Added
1-11-1999 by L.L. No.
1-1999]
East From Ramapo Avenue to a point
425 feet north
Division Street East 150 feet from Lafayette Avenue
Hillcrest Road West 30 feet from Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue North Opposite Antrim Avenue
Lafayette Avenue North 100 feet east of Cedar Lane
Lafayette Avenue North 20 feet west of Hillcrest Road
Lafayette Avenue North 100 feet east of Oakdale Manor
Lafayette Avenue North 50, 150 and 250 feet west of Ross
Towers entrance
Lafayette Avenue North Intersection of Tilton Road
Lafayette Avenue North 45 feet west of the Village line
Lafayette Avenue North 120 and 300 feet west of the
Village line
131. Editor's Note: Some of the entries in the location column of this schedule are actually
descriptions of where the signs are located based on a sign survey done by the Village and
not descriptions of the actual locations of the no-stopping restrictions.
§ 254-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-62
1:453
Name of Street Side Location
Lafayette Avenue North 100 feet west of Washington
Avenue
Lafayette Avenue North 100 feet west of Woodland Drive
Lafayette Avenue South At intersection with Antrim
Avenue
Lafayette Avenue South 350 and 420 feet east of Hillcrest
Road
Lafayette Avenue South 150 and 400 feet east of Oakdale
Manor
Lafayette Avenue South 300 and 150 feet west of
Woodland Drive
Lafayette Avenue South 60 feet east of Woodland Drive
Lonergan Drive East Upper, lower and middle ends of
Hallett Park
Lonergan Drive West Opposite Hallett Park
Memorial Drive South At entrance to Village pool
Oliver Street [Added
8-20-1990 by L.L. No.
5-1990]
Both From Washington Avenue to a
point 30 feet west
Orange Avenue East 80 feet south of Chestnut Street
Orange Avenue East 80 feet north of East Maple
Avenue
Orange Avenue East 30 feet south of East Park Place
Orange Avenue East 30 feet north of East Park Place
Orange Avenue [Added
6-16-1996 by L.L. No.
4-1997]
West Opposite East Park Place to a
point 350 feet south
Ramapo Avenue West 75 feet south of Chestnut Street
Washington Avenue East 80 feet north of Lafayette Avenue
Washington Avenue East 250 feet north of Lafayette
Avenue
Washington Avenue East 50 feet south of railroad tracks
Washington Avenue West 120 and 50 feet north of Lafayette
Avenue
§ 254-62 SUFFERN CODE § 254-63
1:454
§ 254-63. Schedule XIII: No Standing.132
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-18, no person shall stand a
vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Chestnut Street East 55 feet north of Lafayette Avenue
Chestnut Street [Added
1-11-1999 by L.L. No.
1-1999]
East From Ramapo Avenue to a point
425 feet north
Division Street East 150 feet from Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue South First Federal Drive-in
Lonergan Drive East Upper, lower and middle ends of
Hallett Park
Lonergan Drive West Opposite Hallett Park
Memorial Drive South At entrance to Village pool
Oliver Street [Added
8-20-1990 by L.L. No.
5-1990]
Both From Washington Avenue to a
point 30 feet west
Orange Avenue East 80 feet south of Chestnut Street
Orange Avenue East 80 feet north of East Maple
Avenue
Orange Avenue East 30 feet south of East Park Place
Orange Avenue East 30 feet north of East Park Place
Orange Avenue [Added
6-16-1997 by L.L. No.
4-1997]
West Opposite East Park Place to a
point 250 feet south
Park Avenue West 50 feet north of East Maple
Avenue
Ramapo Avenue West 75 feet south of Chestnut Street
Washington Avenue East 80 feet north of Lafayette Avenue
Washington Avenue East 250 feet north of Lafayette
Avenue
Washington Avenue East 50 feet of railroad tracks
Washington Avenue West 120 and 50 feet north of Lafayette
Avenue
West Park Place North 90 feet west of Ramapo Avenue
132. Editor's Note: Some of the entries in the location column of this schedule are actually
descriptions of where the signs are located based on a sign survey done by the Village and
not descriptions of the actual locations of the no-standing restrictions.
§ 254-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-64
1:455
§ 254-64. Schedule XIV: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.133
In accordance with this provisions of § 254-19, no person shall park a
vehicle between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets
or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/ Days Location
Bon Aire Circle Both 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m./All
From Campbell Avenue
to Milford Lane
Chestnut Street West 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m./
—
Clinton Place North School hours/
school days
—
Clinton Place
[Amended
5-11-1992 by L.L.
No. 2-1992]
North School hours/
school days
All along school
property
Cypress Road
[Added 11-3-2008
by L.L. No.
15-2008]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From the entrance to
R.P. Connor School to a
point 70 feet south
East Maltbie Avenue
[Added 7-16-2001
by L.L. No. 7-2001]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
Entire length east of
Washington Avenue
East Maltbie Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
70 feet east of Orange
Avenue
East Maltbie Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
160 feet east of Orange
Avenue
East Maltbie Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
100 feet west of
Washington Avenue
East Maple Avenue
[Added 7-16-2001
by L.L. No. 7-2001]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
Entire length east of
Washington Avenue
East Maple Avenue [Repealed 7-16-2001 by L.L. No. 7-2001]
133. Editor's Note: Some of the entries in the location column of this schedule are actually
descriptions of where the signs are located based on a sign survey done by the Village and
not descriptions of the actual locations of the parking restrictions.
§ 254-64 SUFFERN CODE § 254-64
1:456
Name of Street Side Hours/ Days Location
East Maple Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
20 feet west of
Mansfield Place
East Maple Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m./-
65 feet east of
Mansfield Place
East Maple Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
40 feet east of Orange
Avenue
East Maple Avenue [Repealed 7-16-2001 by L.L. No. 7-2001]
East Maple Street North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
50 feet west of
Mansfield Place
East Maple Street North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
30 feet west of Park
Avenue
East Park Place North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m./-
80 feet east of Orange
Avenue
East Park Place North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
150 and 130 feet west
of Park Avenue
Forest Drive [Added
11-3-2008 by L.L.
No. 15-2008]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
5:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday
From the intersection
of Forest Drive and
Cypress Road to a point
100 feet west
Jersey Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
5 feet east of Ramapo
Avenue
Jersey Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
35 feet west of Ramapo
Avenue
Jersey Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
60 feet west of Ramapo
Avenue
§ 254-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-64
1:457
Name of Street Side Hours/ Days Location
Lafayette Avenue North 9:00 a.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday
Front of 28 Lafayette
Avenue
Lafayette Avenue
[Added 7-9-2012 by
L.L. No. 12-2012]
South 5:00 p.m. to
1:00 a.m.
1 Lafayette Avenue (1
space) (immediately
west of driveway)
Lafayette Avenue
[Added 3-16-1993
by L.L. No. 2-1993]
South 5:00 p.m. to
1:00 a.m./-
21 to 23 Lafayette
Avenue (2 spaces)
Lafayette Avenue South 9:00 a.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday
79 to 81 Lafayette
Avenue
Lincoln Street Both 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
Entire length
Mansfield Place West 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
300 feet north of East
Maple Avenue
Mansfield Place West 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
120 feet north of East
Maple Avenue
Maplewood
Boulevard
North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m./-
At intersection with
Beechwood Road
Maplewood
Boulevard
North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m./-
At intersection with
Meadowbrook Lane
Maplewood
Boulevard
South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
At intersection with
Meadowbrook Lane
Maplewood
Boulevard
South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
20 feet east of Village
line
Meadow Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
100 feet north of Jersey
Avenue
§ 254-64 SUFFERN CODE § 254-64
1:458
Name of Street Side Hours/ Days Location
Meadow Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
100 feet north of Oak
Terrace
Meadow Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
65 feet north of West
Maltbie Avenue
Meadow Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
60 feet south of West
Maple Avenue
Meadow Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
40 feet north of West
Maple Avenue
Meadow Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
70 feet north of Jersey
Avenue
Meadow Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
60 feet north of Oak
Terrace
Meadow Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
60 feet south of Oak
Terrace
Meadow Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
5 feet south of West
Maple Avenue
Meadow Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
35 feet south of West
Maltbie Avenue
Meadow Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
100 feet north of West
Maple Avenue
Meadowbrook Lane North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
20 feet west of
Beechwood Road
§ 254-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-64
1:459
Name of Street Side Hours/ Days Location
Meadowbrook Lane North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
100 feet west of
Beechwood Road
Meadowbrook Lane South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
30 feet east of
Maplewood Boulevard
Meadowbrook Lane South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
Opposite Beechwood
Road
Oak Terrace North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
35 feet east of Meadow
Avenue
Oak Terrace North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
60 feet west of Ramapo
Avenue
Oak Terrace South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
35 feet east of Meadow
Avenue
Oak Terrace South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
70 feet west of Ramapo
Avenue
Oliver Street North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m./—
100 feet from corner
Park Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
20, 120 and 200 feet
north of East Maple
Avenue
Ramapo Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
50 feet north of
Dunnery Court
Ramapo Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
110 feet south of Jersey
Avenue
§ 254-64 SUFFERN CODE § 254-64
1:460
Name of Street Side Hours/ Days Location
Ramapo Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
30 feet north of Oak
Terrace
Ramapo Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
15 feet south of West
Maltbie Avenue
Ramapo Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
100 feet north of West
Maltbie Avenue
Ramapo Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
15 feet south of West
Maple Avenue
Ramapo Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
75 feet south of West
Park Place
Ridge Road East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
100 feet north of West
Maltbie Avenue
Ridge Road East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
At corner of West
Maple Avenue
Ridge Road West 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
35 feet south of West
Maple Avenue
Ridge Road West 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
110 feet north of West
Maltbie Avenue
Washington Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m./—
20 feet south of East
Maple Avenue
Washington Avenue East 2:00 p.m. to
3:00 p.m./school
days
110 feet south of
Lafayette Avenue
Washington Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m./—
75 feet north of East
Maple Avenue
§ 254-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-64
1:461
Name of Street Side Hours/ Days Location
Washington Circle
[Added 3-25-2009
by L.L. No. 1-2009]
Both 10:00 a.m. to
2:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Washington Street East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m./—
50 feet north of East
Maltbie Avenue
West Maltbie Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
15 feet east of Meadow
Avenue
West Maltbie Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
25 feet west of Meadow
Avenue
West Maltbie Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
20 feet east of Ramapo
Avenue
West Maltbie Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
75 feet west of Ramapo
Avenue
West Maltbie Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
50 feet west of Ridge
Avenue
West Maltbie Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
40 feet west of Meadow
Avenue
West Maltbie Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
120 feet west of
Ramapo Avenue
West Maltbie Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
35 feet east of Ramapo
Avenue
West Maple Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
30 feet east of Meadow
Avenue
§ 254-64 SUFFERN CODE § 254-64
1:462
Name of Street Side Hours/ Days Location
West Maple Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
35 feet east of Meadow
Avenue
West Maple Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
55 feet west of Meadow
Avenue
West Maple Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
80 feet east of Ramapo
Avenue
West Maple Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
70 feet west of Ramapo
Avenue
West Maple Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
20 feet east of Ridge
Avenue
West Maple Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
90 feet east of Ridge
Avenue
West Maple Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
45 feet west of Ridge
Avenue
West Maple Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
30 feet west of Ramapo
Avenue
West Maple Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
100 feet west of
Ramapo Avenue
West Maple Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
45 feet west of Ridge
Avenue
West Park Place North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
30 feet east of Meadow
Avenue
§ 254-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-64
1:463
Name of Street Side Hours/ Days Location
West Park Place South 7:00 a.m. to
9:00
a.m./Monday to
Friday
95 feet west of Ramapo
Avenue
§ 254-65. Schedule XV: Time Limit Parking. [Amended 6-21-2004 by
L.L. No. 11-2004; 9-6-2005 by L.L. No. 7-2005; 6-5-2006 by L.L. No.
4-2006; 5-7-2008 by L.L. No. 5-2008; 10-6-2008 by L.L. No. 13-2008;
7-6-2009 by L.L. No. 7-2009; 1-3-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012; 2-9-2012
by L.L. No. 3-2012; 9-17-2013 by L.L No. 9-2013; 11-12-2013 by L.L.
No. 11-2013; 7-14-2014 by L.L. No. 7-2014; 5-4-2015 by L.L. No.
5-2015; 2-1-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016; 9-4-2018 by L.L. No.
10-2018134]
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-20, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets. If these provisions can be construed to provide
more than one time limit for a particular location, the shorter time period
shall apply.
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Antrim Avenue
Antrim Avenue
Cedar Lane Both 3 hrs.; anytime Entire length
Chestnut Street Both 1 hr.; anytime From Wayne Avenue
to Hallett Place
Chestnut Street East 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., Monday to
Thursday and
Saturday; 9:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m., Friday;
except Sundays and
holidays
50 feet north of the
overpass
Chestnut Street East 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., Monday to
Thursday and
Saturday; 9:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m., Friday;
except Sundays and
holidays
40 feet north of
Lafayette Avenue
134. Editor's Note: Some of the entries in the location column of this schedule are actually
descriptions of where the signs are located based on a sign survey done by the Village and
not descriptions of the actual locations of the parking restrictions.
§ 254-64 SUFFERN CODE § 254-65
1:464
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Chestnut Street East 2 hrs.; — 20 feet north of
railroad tracks
Chestnut Street East 2 hrs.; — 25 feet south of
Wayne Avenue
Chestnut Street East 15 minutes Last spot facing
northbound in front of
Chestnut Street Park
Chestnut Street West 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., Monday to
Thursday and
Saturday; 9:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m., Friday;
except Sundays and
holidays
100 feet north of
Lafayette Avenue
Chestnut Street West 15 minutes 40 feet north of
Lafayette Avenue
Intersection
Chestnut Street West 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., Monday to
Thursday and
Saturday; 9:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m., Friday;
except Sundays and
holidays
10 feet north of
Lafayette Avenue
Cross Street Both 1 hr.; anytime —
East Maltbie
Avenue
North 3 hrs.; anytime From Orange Avenue
to a point 30 feet west
of Washington Street
East Maltbie
Street
South 3 hrs.; anytime From Orange Avenue
to Washington Avenue
East Maple
Avenue
North 15 minutes 40 feet east of
Washington Avenue,
library only
East Maple
Avenue
North 20 minutes; 7:00 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m.
From Park Avenue to
a point 105 feet west
East Maple
Avenue
South 20 minutes; 7:00 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m.
From a point 55 feet
east of Orange
Avenue to a point 225
feet east of Orange
Avenue
East Park Place North 1 hr.; anytime From Park Avenue to
Orange Avenue
§ 254-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-65
1:465
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Lafayette Avenue North 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., Monday to
Thursday and
Saturday; 9:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m., Friday;
except Sundays and
holidays
150 feet west of
Chestnut Avenue
Lafayette Avenue North 15 minutes (between
the hours of 5:00
p.m. and 10:00 a.m.)
In front of 2 Lafayette
Avenue (1 space)
Lafayette Avenue North 15 minutes 62 Lafayette Avenue
50 feet from Chestnut
Street
Lafayette Avenue North 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., Monday to
Thursday and
Saturday; 9:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m., Friday;
except Sundays and
holidays
10 feet west of 26
Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue North 15 minutes In front of 62
Lafayette Avenue (1
space)
Lafayette Avenue North 15 minutes In front of 72
Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue North 15 minutes In front of 92
Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue North 15 minutes In front of 100
Lafayette Avenue (1
space)
Lafayette Avenue North 15 minutes In front of 104
Lafayette Avenue (1
space)
Lafayette Avenue North 2 hrs.; —/— 15 feet east of Suffern
Place
Lafayette Avenue North 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., Monday to
Thursday and
Saturday; 9:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m., Friday;
excluding days and
holidays
150 and 350 feet west
of Suffern Place
§ 254-65 SUFFERN CODE § 254-65
1:466
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Lafayette Avenue North 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., Monday to
Thursday and
Saturday; 9:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m., Friday;
except Sundays and
holidays
100 feet west of
Washington Avenue
Lafayette Avenue South 2 hrs.; —/— 20 feet east of
Chestnut Street
Lafayette Avenue South 2 hrs.; —/— 200 feet west of
Chestnut Street
Lafayette Avenue South 15 minutes In front of 43
Lafayette Avenue (1
space)
Lafayette Avenue South 15 minutes In front of 55
Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue South 15 minutes In front of 65
Lafayette Avenue (1
space)
Lafayette Avenue South 15 minutes In front of 73 and 75
Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue South 15 minutes; 3:00
p.m. to 9:00 a.m.
In front of 75
Lafayette Avenue (2
spaces)
Lafayette Avenue South 9:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m., Monday to
Friday
75 Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue South 15 minutes In front of 81
Lafayette Avenue (1
space)
Lafayette Avenue South 2 hrs.; —/— 150 feet east of
Orange Avenue
Lafayette Avenue South 2 hrs.; —/— On corner of Park
Avenue and Lafayette
Avenue
Lafayette Avenue South 15 minutes First parking spot
east of Park Avenue in
the eastbound lane
Lafayette Avenue South 2 hrs.; —/— Opposite Suffern
Place
§ 254-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-65
1:467
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Mansfield Place Both 3 hrs.; anytime From Dr. Beer's
property to Maple
Avenue
Mansfield Place North 2 hrs.; anytime From Park Avenue to
the east end of Dr.
Beer's property
Oakdale Manor East 2 hrs.; anytime From Bridge Street to
20 feet south of
Lafayette Avenue
Orange Avenue East 3 hrs.; —/— 55 feet north of East
Maltbie Avenue
Orange Avenue East 3 hrs.; —/— 90 feet south of East
Maple Avenue
Orange Avenue East 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., Monday to
Thursday and
Saturday; 9:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m., Friday;
except Sundays and
holiday days
100 feet south of
Lafayette Avenue
Orange Avenue East 3 hrs.; —/— 60 feet north of Oliver
Street
Orange Avenue East 15 minutes In front of 114
Orange Avenue
Park Avenue East 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. except on
Sundays
From East Maple
Avenue to Mansfield
Place
Park Avenue East 2 hrs.; —/— From Lafayette
Avenue to a point 223
feet south
Ramapo Avenue West 1 hr.; —/— 125 feet south of
Chestnut Street
Ramapo Avenue West 2 hrs.; anytime From a point 30 feet
south of the north end
to West Park Place
Sagamore
Avenue
Both 3 hrs.; anytime From the intersection
of Sagamore Avenue
with Stockbridge
Avenue to the cul-desac
§ 254-65 SUFFERN CODE § 254-65
1:468
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
South Street North 3 hrs.; —/— 40 feet east of Orange
Avenue
South Street North 3 hrs.; —/— 30 feet west of Prairie
Avenue
South Street North 3 hrs.; —/— 50 feet west of
Rockland Terrace
South Street South 3 hrs.; —/— 50 feet west of
Orange Avenue
South Street South 3 hrs.; —/— 50 feet west of
Rockland Terrace
Suffern Place West 15 minutes 2 Suffern Place 30
feet north of
Lafayette Avenue
Suffern Place Both 2 hrs. Entire length
Washington
Avenue
East 15 minutes; —/— 40 feet north of East
Maple Avenue
Washington
Avenue
West 1 hr.; anytime From Pleasant
Avenue to Cross
Street
Washington
Circle
East 1 hr.; anytime Entire length
§ 254-66. Schedule XVI: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-21, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle
designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 254-67. Schedule XVII: Handicapped Parking Spaces. [Amended
3-19-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001; 12-12-2005 by L.L. No. 10-2005;
7-9-2012 by L.L. No. 11-2012; 9-9-2015 by L.L. No. 9-2015; 9-4-2018
by L.L. No. 10-2018]
In accordance with § 254-22, no person shall park a vehicle at any time
in the following locations which are designated as handicapped parking
spaces:
§ 254-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-67
1:469
Name of Street Side Location
Chestnut Street East 10 feet south of Lafayette Avenue
Chestnut Street West 40 feet south of Lafayette Avenue
East Maple Avenue North 50 feet east of Washington Avenue
Lafayette Avenue North 50 feet from Chestnut Street
Intersection
Lafayette Avenue South 20 feet from Chestnut Street
Intersection
Lafayette Avenue North 15 feet west of Suffern Place
Lafayette Avenue South 20 feet east of Park Avenue
Lafayette Avenue South 31 Lafayette Avenue
Parkside Drive North 56-100 Parkside Drive
Parkside Drive North Across from 94-100 Parkside Drive
Parkside Drive North 254-260 Parkside Drive
Parkside Drive North Opposite Salem Court
Village of Suffern "B"
Parking Lot (Chestnut
Street Lot)
West West side of "B" Lot, adjoining
Chestnut Street (first 2 parking spaces
adjoining entrance drive)
§ 254-68. Schedule XVIII: Loading Zones. [Amended 5-11-1992 by
L.L. No. 2-1992; 1-16-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001; 1-3-2012 by L.L. No.
1-2012; 9-4-2018 by L.L. No. 10-2018]
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-23, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue South 21 and 23 Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue South 27 and 31 Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue South 73-75 Lafayette Avenue
Lafayette Avenue South 81-83 Lafayette Avenue
Suffern Place East 7-11 Suffern Place
§ 254-69. Schedule XIX: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-24, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
§ 254-67 SUFFERN CODE § 254-69
1:470
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 254-70. Schedule XX: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 254-25, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
Chestnut Street [Added
5-11-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
East From parking lot exit to railroad
crossing
Hallet Place [Added
2-10-2003 by L.L. No.
1-2003]
North From a point 50 feet east of alley
from Route 202 to a point 250
feet east
Hallet Place [Added
2-10-2003 by L.L. No.
1-2003]
South From the intersection of Hallet
Place and Orange Avenue to a
point 75 feet east
Orange Avenue East From Lafayette Avenue to Wayne
Avenue
§ 254-71. Schedule XXI: Fire Zones. [Added 6-21-1999 by L.L. No.
4-1999]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 254-25.2, no person shall park
a vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets.
Name of Street Side Location
Antrim Avenue [Added
7-11-2011 by L.L. No.
10-2011]
Both From Lafayette Avenue to a point
200 feet south thereof
Cross Street [Added
7-8-2013 by L.L. No.
7-2013]
South Length of 3 Cross Street
Danbury Court — Along the cul-de-sac circle
Lenox Court — Along the cul-de-sac circle
Oxford Court — Along the cul-de-sac circle
Revere Court — Along the cul-de-sac circle
Somerset Drive [Added
7-6-2010 by L.L. No.
3-2010]
North From a point at the intersection of
Bon Aire Circle West, extending
450 feet
Sussex Court — Along the cul-de-sac circle
§ 254-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-71
1:471
Chapter 261
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 96.
Sewers — See Ch. 220.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 239.
Fees — See Ch. A275.
§ 254-71 SUFFERN CODE § 254-71
1:472
ARTICLE I
Water Service
[Adopted 2-8-1971 as Ch. 52 of the 1971 Code]
§ 261-1. Application for introduction of water.
§ 261-2. Metering required; exception.
A. It shall be unlawful for any property owner to obtain water for any
purpose from any source other than water supplied by the Village of
Suffern Water Department, hereinafter called the "Water Department."
It is forbidden for any property owner to dig any wells within the Village
for any purpose except where written application is made to the Suffern
Board of Trustees and permission for such well is given by said Board of
Trustees.
B. All applications for the introduction of water into any premises or for
the extension of any pipes for the conveyance of such water must be
made by the owner or authorized agent of the owner of the premises in
writing upon forms furnished by the Water Department. Every applicant
must agree to abide by the rules and regulations covering water usage.
A. All water except such water as is used for municipal purposes must be
metered.
B. Meters shall be supplied by the Water Department and paid for by
property owners.
C. All meters on or before the first day of October 1992 must be equipped
with a meter interface unit to enable the meter to be read by automatic
(remote) meter reading equipment. Such equipment will be installed at
Village Water Department expense if access is provided for such
installations on or before the 30th day of September 1992. [Added
7-20-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
D. A surcharge of $25 per dwelling unit will be charged for each meter
reading if the owner or person in charge of property has failed,
neglected or refused to allow the installation of approved automatic
(remote) meter reading equipment and the existing meter must be
manually read by Village personnel. In the event that a scheduled
reading is canceled or Village personnel cannot obtain access to read a
meter, an additional surcharge of $25 will be charged for each such
subsequent reading. [Added 2-8-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
E. Notification of telephone number changes; manual reading service
charge. [Added 6-21-1999 by L.L. No. 5-1999]
(1) All water meters being read by use of a telephone circuit must have
the current telephone number for that circuit on file with the Water
Department. When a telephone number used for accessing a water
§ 261-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-2
1:473
§ 261-3. Service lines.
meter is changed, the Water Department must be notified of the
new phone number within 10 days.
(2) If a telephone number for a circuit accessing a water meter is
changed and the Water Department is not notified of the new
number within 10 days, a manual reading service charge of $25 will
be levied against the owner of the building for each living unit
served by that water meter on the occasion of each manual
reading, not to exceed $100 per occurrence.
A. Ground clamps may not be attached to the service pipe closer than two
feet to the house and on the street side of the meter.
B. All service lines from the main line to the curbline shall be installed by
the Water Department up to a maximum of one inch, which installation
shall be paid in advance by the property owner at the rate as set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees in the Standard Schedule of Fees of
the Village of Suffern, for each line, in addition to the price of any
meter.135 [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
C. All service lines from the main line to the curb in excess of one inch
shall be installed and paid for by the property owner after application to
the Water Department and the acquisition of a street opening permit
from the Village. All work for the installation of such service lines shall
be performed by a contractor possessing a current plumbing license
issued by the County of Rockland. [Amended 7-11-2011 by L.L. No.
11-2011; 6-10-2013 by L.L. No. 6-2013]
D. All service lines from the curb to the building shall be installed and paid
for by the property owner.
E. All service lines on state roads and federal roads shall be installed and
paid for by the property owner after application to the Water
Department and the acquisition of a road-opening permit from the
appropriate state or federal agency. Installation from the main to the
meter and proper tests before filling in the ditch shall be made under
the supervision of Department of Public Works or Water Department.
F. When a water meter is enclosed or boxed in or installed in underground
pits by the property owners, there must be an opening or access to such
pit of not less than three square feet in order to permit the Water
Department to make readings or repairs. All meters installed in
underground pits must have the location approval of the Department of
Public Works and must be maintained in waterproof condition.
G. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building except the
Municipal Buildings, unless said building has had a water meter
installed in accordance with this chapter.
135. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 261-2 SUFFERN CODE § 261-4
1:474
§ 261-4. Separate service for each building required.
Each residence or building shall have its separate service connection direct
to the main.
§ 261-5. Branches.
No branch will be allowed to be inserted in any service pipe without a
written permit from the Water Department. Where branches already exist
not provided with stopcocks, in case of default in payment of water rent by
anyone, the main service may be cut off until the back charges are paid, and
the Department shall not be liable for damages from any other consumer
who may thus be deprived of water.
§ 261-6. Laying of pipes; change of grade.
Service pipes must be laid at least four feet below the surface of the ground.
If at any time it shall become necessary for the Water Department to change
the grade of their mains, the property owner or water user shall lower the
grade of the service pipe and fixtures to conform to such change.
§ 261-7. Inspections; shutoff.
Employees of the Water Department may enter and must be permitted
entrance to any premises where a meter is being supplied, or upon any
premises for which application is made for service, for the purpose of
inspecting all pipes and connections with such water service. Water may be
shut off by the Water Department from any service or main for the purpose
of constructing new work, additions or making repairs to the water system.
Whenever possible, due notice will be given, but in case of emergency,
the water may be shut off without notice, and the Village or the Water
Department shall not be responsible for any damage resulting therefrom.
§ 261-8. Restriction on street openings.
No street openings will be made or permitted between November 1 and
April 1 for the purpose of laying new waterlines, except in the case of
emergency repairs.
§ 261-9. Water service outside Village. [Amended 7-18-1977 by L.L.
No. 5-1977]
No water service shall be supplied to any user outside the corporate limits
of the Village of Suffern except by permission of the Board of Trustees. The
Board of Trustees shall not sell nor permit the use of water pursuant to this
section if thereby the supply for the Village or its inhabitants will not be
sufficient. If the Board of Trustees permits connection with the mains of the
Village for the purpose of drawing water therefrom, it shall fix the prices
and conditions therefor and shall require the applicant to install all pipes,
mains and connections at his own cost and to restore all roads, sidewalks
and other property to their original condition. Said provisions shall not
§ 261-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-9
1:475
apply to those water users who are presently being supplied water upon the
date of enactment of this section, and they may continue to receive such
water from the Village of Suffern as long as such users comply with the
other provisions of this article.
§ 261-10. Maintenance by owners.
The owner of property into which water is introduced by a service pipe
will be required to maintain at his own cost and expense said service pipe
from the curb box and the curb box and curb stop and fixtures provided for
delivering or supplying water for any purpose. The curb box must be kept in
view and the top thereof even with the sidewalk or street grade at all times
and in a serviceable condition. In the event that service and fixtures are not
kept in good repair, the Village and the Water Department reserve the right
to terminate water service or to make necessary repairs and charge the
costs to the property owner. The service pipes from the water main must be
laid at the proper depth, as indicated in this article. The Water Department
shall not be responsible for the freezing of any service lines.
§ 261-11. Installation, size and type of meters. [Amended 3-12-1990
by L.L. No. 3-1990; 7-20-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
§ 261-12. Rules and charges. [Amended 7-20-1992 by L.L. No.
4-1992]
A. All water meters must be of a type that registers water use in cubic feet
and must be of a type and kind approved by the Department of Public
Works. Plumbers installing house or other plumbing shall leave
sufficient horizontal space between the meter ball valves, the space
being as follows:
Meter
Horizontal Space
(inches)
5/8-inch 13 1/2
3/4-inch 14 1/2
1-inch 16
B. On and after the first day of October 1992, all new installations must be
equipped with a Village-approved meter interface unit.
A. The Water Department may refuse to allow the water for such services
to be turned on until this article is complied with. Allowance will not be
made for any water bill where the charges result from failure on the
part of the owner or consumer to properly repair any broken, frozen or
defective fixtures or service. All water passing through a meter will be
charged for, whether used or wasted. If a meter gets out of order and
fails to register, the consumer will be charged at the average
consumption as shown by the meter when in order. All rates are based
§ 261-9 SUFFERN CODE § 261-12
1:476
§ 261-13. Testing of meters; charge; repairs. [Amended 3-12-1990
by L.L. No. 3-1990]
Persons making complaints as to the correctness of water bills and claiming
to be overcharged can, by applying to the Water Department, have the
meter examined and the dial reread or, by deposit of an amount set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees in the Standard Schedule of Fees of
the Village of Suffern136 at the office of the Village Clerk, may have the
meter taken out and tested. If the meter is found to be correct within
3%, the deposit will be retained as payment of the time used in testing
the meter. Should the meter be found to overregister more than 3%, the
deposit will be returned and the proper adjustment made on the bill. The
Water Department will repair all meters size 5/8 inch and 3/4 inch. All
meters larger than 3/4 inch must be repaired by an authorized repair
company under Water Department supervision and paid for by the property
owner. All repairs to meters damaged by negligence, vandalism or freezing
shall be paid for by the property owner. If the meters need attention, the
Water Department should be notified at once. Plumbers are not allowed to
remove meters for repairs or any other purpose. All persons are forbidden
to break meter seals, disconnect or in any way tamper with meters without
permission from the Water Department.
§ 261-14. Issuance of bills. [Amended 12-11-1972; 3-21-1994 by L.L.
No. 3-1994; 12-20-1995 by L.L. No. 7-1995; 6-16-1997 by L.L. No.
5-1997]
Bills shall be rendered semiannually on or about May 1 and November 1 of
each year and are due and payable within 30 days from such billing date.
§ 261-15. Water rates; overdue bills.
on semiannual consumption, and no charge will be made for less than
the minimum rate.
B. Subsequent to the 30th day of September 1992, the Village Water
Department will charge $100 plus the cost of the meter interface unit
for the adaptation of an existing or replacement meter to remote
reading capacity.
A. Water rates.137 Water rates will be charged as follows: [Last amended
4-11-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016, effective 6-1-2016]
(1) For consumers within the Village:
(a) For the first 10 units138 or fraction thereof: $35 minimum
charge;
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
137. Editor's Note: For additional provisions related to water rates, see § 261-21C through E.
138. Editor's Note: For the definition of "unit," see § 261-21E.
§ 261-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-15
1:477
§ 261-16. Change of ownership of property.
Water furnished to any property for any purpose stands charged against
such property regardless of change of ownership, and the Water
Department reserves the right to discontinue the service from such
premises for any unpaid bill or bills accumulated by the former owner
or owners and to refuse to turn the same on again until all arrears and
penalties are paid. In the case of a transfer of a property, the Water
Department should be immediately notified so that proper adjustment may
be made of any charges or repair bills against such property. In case the
water is turned off by any agent of the Water Department for proper cause,
no person shall turn water on again without permission from the Water
Department.
§ 261-17. Notice for discontinuance of service.
Persons wishing to discontinue the use of water must give written notice
thereof to the Village Clerk previous to the billing for the current period;
otherwise they will be liable for rent for the ensuing six months.
§ 261-18. Cause for discontinuance of service.
The Superintendent of Public Works may discontinue water service and shut
off the supply from any premises, the owner or occupant of which has failed
to comply with the provisions of any ordinance relating to the character and
construction and maintenance of pipes and connection and the use of the
water or the percentage of waste of water. Such service will not be resumed
until the cause for such discontinuance is removed and the expense of
shutting off and turning on the water, if any, is paid.
(b) For that portion over 10 units and less than 71 units: $3.35 per
unit;
(c) For that portion over 70 units: $3.83 per unit.
(2) For consumers outside the Village limits:
(a) For the first 10 units139 or fraction thereof: $60.
(b) For that portion over 10 units: $4.89 per unit.
B. Overdue bills. All water bills not paid within the period specified in
§ 261-14 shall be assessed a late payment charge of 10% of the gross
amount of the bill. [Amended 7-20-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992;
4-11-2005 by L.L. No. 2-2005; 5-7-2007 by L.L. No. 8-2007]
C. All billings will be done on a meter basis and not on a customer basis.
139. Editor's Note: For the definition of "unit," see § 261-21E.
§ 261-15 SUFFERN CODE § 261-19
1:478
§ 261-19. Permission required to turn on water.
When the water supply to any premises is shut off by the direction of the
Superintendent of Public Works, it shall not be turned on again without the
permission of said Superintendent.
§ 261-20. Assent to conformity to regulations.
All persons who hereafter make application for water service or who
continue the use of the water service after the taking effect of the foregoing
article will be deemed to have assented thereto and to have agreed to
conform to the provisions of said article and to pay the rates hereby
established.
§ 261-21. Additional water rate provisions. [Amended 5-13-1974;
9-27-1976 by L.L. No. 3-1976; 7-13-1983 by L.L. No. 5-1983;
5-29-1985 by L.L. No. 4-1985; 7-20-1992 by L.L. No. 4-1992]
The following rates will be charged semiannually:
§ 261-22. Fire hydrants.
All fire hydrants must meet the specifications of the Department of Public
Works and may only be installed at such locations specified by the
Department of Public Works. All hydrants are under the control of the
Water Department. No person shall use a wrench for opening hydrants
except one furnished for that purpose. No person except an authorized
employee of the Department or of a Fire Department or a person holding
A. (Reserved)140
B. (Reserved)141
C. Surcharges for manual reading. Water bills of customers who have
declined to provide access for the installation of meter interface units
will be surcharged $50 for each manual meter reading. The manual
meter reading surcharge will apply to each billing period for which an
actual or estimated bill is rendered. [Amended 3-5-2018 by L.L. No.
5-2018]
D. Charge for final readings per customer request: $25 per visit.
[Amended 3-21-1994 by L.L. No. 3-1994]
E. For purposes of this article, the term "unit" is defined to mean 100 cubic
feet of water consumed. [Added 4-10-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006;
amended 4-9-2007 by L.L. No. 7-2007]
140. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, concerning water rates for consumers within the
Village, as last amended 5-7-2008 by L.L. No. 3-2008, was removed at the direction of the
Village in connection with L.L. No. 4-2009, adopted 5-4-2009. See now § 261-15A(1).
141. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, concerning water rates for consumers outside the
Village limits, as last amended 5-7-2008 by L.L. No. 3-2008, was removed at the direction
of the Village in connection with L.L. No. 4-2009, adopted 5-4-2009. See now § 261-15A(2).
§ 261-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-22
1:479
a written permit from the Water Department shall disturb any hydrant
or take any water therefrom under any circumstances whatever. In case
damage is done by any person having a permit and taking water from a
hydrant for construction or other purposes, the holder of the permit shall
pay such damages and all costs and expenses that may be incurred by
reason thereof. When necessary to make temporary connection with the fire
hydrants, standard hydrant wrenches and reducing caps, furnished by the
Department, must be used, for which a deposit of $25 each must be made.
These deposits will be refunded if equipment is returned in good condition.
Any person causing damage to a fire hydrant by collision or otherwise
will be held responsible for any damage thereby, and such person must
immediately report to the Police Department the name and address of the
driver and the location of the hydrant.
§ 261-23. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person or persons, corporation or corporations, company or
companies or partnership or partnerships violating any of the
provisions of this article applying to the operation of the Suffern Village
Waterworks shall be subject to the penalties provided in § 1-12 of
Chapter 1, General Provisions. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No.
3-1990]
B. The imposition of a penalty for any violation of this article shall not
excuse the violation nor permit it to continue. The violator shall, where
possible, correct and remedy such violation forthwith. Any
unreasonable delay shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 261-22 SUFFERN CODE § 261-23
1:480
ARTICLE II
Fire Protection Service
[Adopted 6-13-1977 by L.L. No. 4-1977]
§ 261-24. Waterline standards.
All waterlines installed or used for fire protection service shall comply with
the following standards and fee schedules:
§ 261-25. Fees. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
The fees for the service provided shall be billed on a semiannual basis as set
by resolution of the Board of Trustees in the Standard Schedule of Fees of
the Village of Suffern.143
§ 261-26. Issuance and payment of bills; late charge.
§ 261-27. Charges to become a lien.
Unpaid charges, together with the amount of any penalty for nonpayment
within a thirty-day period shall become a lien on the real property upon
which or in connection with which the water is used, and such a lien shall be
prior and superior to every other lien or claim, except the lien of an existing
tax pursuant to § 11-1118 of the Village Law of the State of New York.
A. All service lines from the main line to the curb shall be installed and
paid for by the property owner at the property owner's sole cost and
expense after application to the Water Department and payment, in
advance, of a tapping and inspection fee in a sum as set by resolution of
the Board of Trustees in the Standard Schedule of Fees of the Village of
Suffern and the acquisition of a street opening permit and the payment
of the appropriate fees therefor.142 [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No.
3-1990]
B. Said installation shall contain a water meter or detector check installed
at the sole cost and expense of the property owner at the point of entry
or immediately after the point of entry to the building to be serviced.
A. Bills for the service as provided for herein shall be rendered
semiannually on February 1 and August 1 of each year and are due and
payable on such billing dates.
B. All bills not paid within such dates shall be assessed a late-payment
charge of 10% on the amount of the bill.
142. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
143. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 261-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-28
1:481
§ 261-28. Connection to water meter required.
All waterlines installed or used for fire protection service shall be connected
to a water meter and/or detector check device in accordance with § 261-24B
and which complies with the specifications established by the Department
of Public Works.
§ 261-29. Enforcement; inspection.
This article shall be enforced by the Fire Inspector of the Village of Suffern,
who shall have the authority to issue summonses to those persons who,
in his opinion, are in violation of this article. The Fire Inspector is hereby
empowered to inspect any building or structure to determine whether any
violation of this article exists.
§ 261-30. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any sprinkler system with
waterlines with a diameter of less than two inches that has been installed
prior to the effective date of this article.
§ 261-31. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-12-1990 by L.L. No.
3-1990]
Any person, including any owner or tenant or their agents, who violates the
provisions of this article shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 1-12
of Chapter 1, General Provisions. Each week that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
§ 261-28 SUFFERN CODE § 261-31
1:482
ARTICLE III
Cross-Connection Controls
[Adopted 3-7-2011 by L.L. No. 4-2011]
§ 261-32. Purpose; state regulations; interpretation.
§ 261-33. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR GAP SEPARATION — A physical break between a supply pipe and a
receiving vessel. The air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the
supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case
less than one inch.
APPROVED CHECK VALVE — A check valve that seats readily and
completely. It must be carefully machined to have free moving parts and
assured watertightness. The face of the closure element and valve seat
must be bronze composition or other noncorrodible material which will seat
tightly under all prevailing conditions of field use. Pins and bushing shall be
of bronze or other noncorrodible, nonsticking material, machined for easy,
dependable operation. The closure element, e.g., clapper, shall be internally
weighted or otherwise internally equipped to promote rapid and positive
closure in all sizes where this feature is obtainable.
APPROVED DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY — An assembly of at least
two independently acting check valves, including tightly closing shutoff
valves on each side of the check valve assembly, and suitable leak detector
drains plus connections available for testing the water tightness of each
check valve. This device must be approved as a complete assembly.
APPROVED REDUCED-PRESSURE-PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION
DEVICE — A device incorporating two or more check valves and an
automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two
checks, two shutoff valves, and equipped with necessary appurtenances
for testing. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone
A. The purpose of these regulations is to safeguard potable water supplies
by preventing backflow into public water systems.
B. Regulations of the State of New York, Part 5.1-31(a)(2), require that
when a supplier of water instructs the user of a public water supply to
protect his water service connection by the installation of a protective
device, plans for the installation of the protective device must be
submitted to the supplier of water and to the state for approval.
C. The regulations are to be reasonably interpreted. It is the intent of
these regulations to recognize that there are varying degrees of hazard
and to apply the principle that the degree of protection should be
commensurate with the degree of hazard.
§ 261-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-33
1:483
between the two check valves less than the pressure on the public water
supply side of the device.
APPROVED WATER SUPPLY — Any water supply approved by the New York
State Department of Health.
AUXILIARY SUPPLY — Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than the approved public water supply.
BAROMETRIC LOOP — A loop of pipe rising approximately 35 feet, at its
topmost point, above the highest fixture it supplies.
CERTIFIED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE TESTER — A person who
has a certificate issued by the State of New York Department of Health for
a backflow prevention device tester. He or she shall be provided with an
appropriate identification card which must be renewed every three years.
Failure to perform his or her duties competently and conscientiously will
result in prompt withdrawal of his or her authority.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any unprotected connection between any part of
a water system used or intended to supply water for drinking purposes and
any source or system containing water or substance that is not or cannot be
approved as equally safe, wholesome, and potable for human consumption.
VACUUM BREAKER, NON-PRESSURE TYPE — A vacuum breaker which is
designed so as not to be subjected to static line pressure.
VACUUM BREAKER, PRESSURE-TYPE — A vacuum breaker designed to
operate under conditions of static line pressure.
WATER SUPERVISOR — The consumer or a person on the premises charged
with the responsibility of complete knowledge and understanding of the
water supply piping within the premises and for maintaining the consumer's
water system free from cross-connection and other sanitary defects, as
required by regulations and laws.
§ 261-34. Protection of public water system at service connection.
At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between check valves shall
be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check
valve, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain this reduced
pressure by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is
two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the
atmosphere, thereby providing an air gap in the device. To be approved,
these devices must be readily accessible for maintenance and testing
and installed in a location where no part of the valve will be submerged.
The enclosure must be self-draining, so that the large amount of water
which the relief valve may vent will be disposed of reliably without
submergence of the relief valve.
A.
B. This device must also be approved as a complete assembly.
A. Where protection is required.
§ 261-33 SUFFERN CODE § 261-34
1:484
(1) Each service connection from a public water system for supplying
water to premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be
protected against backflow of water from the premises into the
public water system, unless the auxiliary water supply is approved
as an additional source by the water purveyor and is satisfactory to
the public health agency having jurisdiction with regard to quality
and safety. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it is expressly
prohibited and illegal to allow any well water not under the control
of the Village within the Village of Suffern.
(2) Each service connection from a public water system for supplying
water to premises on which any substance is handled under
pressure in such fashion as to permit entry into the water system
shall be protected against backflow of the water from the premises
into the public waters and waters originating from the public water
supply system which may have been subject to deterioration in
sanitary or chemical quality.
(3) Each service connection from a public water system for supplying
water to premises on which a substance of unusually toxic
concentration or danger to health is handled in liquid form, even
though it is not under pressure, shall be protected against backflow
of the water from premises into the public system. Examples are
hospitals and plating factories using cyanide. This is not intended
to apply to normal household installations.
(4) Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on the service
connection to any premises that have internal cross-connections,
unless such cross-connections are abated to the satisfaction of the
water purveyor. It shall be the responsibility of the water user to
provide and maintain these protective devices, and each one must
be of a type acceptable to the State Health Department.
B. Type of protection. The protective device required shall depend on the
degree of hazard as tabulated below.
(1) At the service connection to any premises where there is an
auxiliary water supply handled in a separate piping system with no
known cross-connection, the public water supply shall be protected
by an approved double-check valve assembly.
(2) At the service connection on any premises on which there is an
auxiliary water supply where cross-connections are known to exist
which cannot be presently eliminated, the public water supply
system shall be protected by an air gap separation or an approved
reduced-pressure-principle backflow prevention device.
(3) At the service connection to any premises on which a substance
that would be objectionable but not necessarily hazardous to health
if introduced into the public water supply is handled so as to
constitute a cross-connection, the public water supply shall be
protected by an approved double-check valve assembly.
§ 261-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-34
1:485
§ 261-35. Protection of potable water system within premises.
(4) At the service connection to any premises on which a substance of
unusual toxic concentration or danger to health is or may be
handled, but not under pressure, the public water supply shall be
protected by an air gap separation or an approved reducedpressure-
principle backflow prevention device. This device shall be
located as close as practicable to the water meter, and all piping
between the water meter and receiving tanks shall be entirely
visible.
(5) At the service connection to any premises on which any material
dangerous to health, or toxic substance in toxic concentration, is or
may be handled under pressure, the public water supply shall be
protected by an air gap separation. The air gap shall be located as
close as practicable to the water meter, and all piping between the
water meter and receiving tanks shall be entirely visible. If these
conditions cannot reasonably be met, the public water supply shall
be protected with an approved reduced-pressure-principle
backflow prevention device, providing the alternative is acceptable
to the water purveyor.
(6) At the service connection to any sewage treatment plant or sewage
pumping station, the public water supply shall be protected by an
air gap separation. The air gap shall be located as close as
practicable to the water meter, and all piping between the water
meter and receiving tanks shall be entirely visible. If these
conditions cannot be reasonably met, the public water supply shall
be protected with an approved reduced-pressure-principle
backflow prevention device.
C. Frequency of inspection of protective devices.
(1) It shall be the duty of the water user on any premises on account of
which backflow protective devices are installed to have competent
inspections made at least once a year, or more often in those
instances where successive inspections indicate repeated failure.
These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the
expense of the water user whenever they are found to be defective.
These tests shall be performed by a qualified backflow prevention
tester, and all test results will be provided to the water purveyor
within 72 hours after the test is made.
(2) Records of such tests, repairs, and overhaul shall also be kept and
made available to the water purveyor and the local Health
Department upon request.
A. Separate drinking water systems. Whenever the Chief Operator of
Water Distribution or Director of Public Works determines that it is not
practical to protect drinking water systems on premises against entry of
water from a source or piping system or equipment that cannot be
§ 261-34 SUFFERN CODE § 261-35
1:486
approved as safe or potable for human use, an entirely separate
drinking water system shall be installed to supply water at points
convenient for consumers.
B. Fire systems. Water systems for fighting fire, derived from a supply that
cannot be approved as safe or potable for human use, shall, wherever
practicable, be kept wholly separate from drinking water pipelines and
equipment. In cases where the domestic water system is used for both
drinking and fire-fighting purposes, approved backflow prevention
devices shall be installed to protect such individual drinking water lines
as are not used for fire-fighting purposes. Any auxiliary fire-fighting
water supply which is not approved for potable purposes but which is so
connected that it may be introduced into potable water piping during an
emergency shall be equipped with an approved automatic chlorination
machine. It is hereby declared that it is the responsibility of the person
or persons causing the introduction of said unapproved or unsafe water
into the pipelines to see that a procedure is developed and carried out
to notify and protect users of this piping system during the emergency
and that special precautions are taken to disinfect thoroughly and flush
out all pipelines which may become contaminated before they are again
used to furnish drinking water. In the event the means of protection of
water consumers is by disinfection of the auxiliary fire-fighting supply,
the installation and its use shall be thoroughly reliable. The public
water supply must be protected against backflow from such dual
domestic fire systems, as detailed in Article II of this chapter.
C. Process waters.
(1) Potable water pipelines connected to equipment for industrial
processes or operations shall be protected by a suitable backflow
prevention device located beyond the last point from which
drinking water may be taken, which device shall be provided on the
feed line to process piping or equipment.
(2) In the event the particular process liquid is especially corrosive or
apt to prevent reliable action of the backflow prevention device, air
gap separation shall be provided. These devices shall be tested by
the water user at least once a year or more often in those instances
where successive inspections indicate repeated failure. The devices
shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found
to be defective. These tests must be performed by a qualified
backflow prevention device tester, and records of tests, repairs,
and replacement shall be kept and made available to the water
purveyor and the Health Department upon request.
D. Sewage treatment plants and pumping stations. Sewage pumps shall
not have priming connections directly off any drinking water systems.
No connections shall exist between the drinking water system and any
other piping, equipment, or tank in any sewage treatment plant or
sewage pumping station.
§ 261-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-35
1:487
E. Plumbing connections.
(1) Where the circumstances are such that there is special danger to
health by the backflow of sewage, as from sewers, toilets, hospital
bedpans and the like, into a drinking water system, a dependable
device or devices shall be installed to prevent such backflow.
(2) The purpose of these regulations is not to transcend local plumbing
regulations but only to deal with those extraordinary situations
where sewage may be forced or drawn into the drinking water
piping. These regulations do not attempt to eliminate at this time
the hazards of back siphonage through Flushometer™ valves on all
toilets but deal with those situations where the likelihood of
vacuum conditions in the drinking water system is definite and
there is special danger to health. Devices suited to the purpose of
avoiding back siphonage from plumbing fixtures are roof tanks,
barometric loops or separate pressure systems separately piped to
supply such fixtures, recognized approved vacuum or siphon
breakers and other backflow protection devices which have been
proved by appropriate tests to be dependable for destroying the
vacuum.
(3) Inasmuch as many serious hazards of this kind are due to water
supply piping which is too small, thereby causing vacuum
conditions when fixtures are flushed or water is drawn from the
system in other ways, it is recommended that water supply piping
that is too small be enlarged whenever possible.
F. Marking safe and unsafe waterlines.
(1) Where the premises contain dual or multiple water systems and
piping, the exposed portions of pipelines shall be painted, banded
or marked at sufficient intervals to distinguish clearly which water
is safe and which is not safe. All outlets from secondary or other
potentially contaminated systems shall be posted as being
contaminated and unsafe for drinking purposes. All outlets
intended for drinking purposes shall be plainly marked to indicate
that fact.
(2) Water supervisor. The local Health Department and the water
purveyor shall be kept informed of the identity of the person
responsible for the water piping on all premises concerned with
these regulations. At each premises where it is necessary in the
opinion of the water purveyor, a water supervisor shall be
designated. This water supervisor shall be responsible for the
installation and use of pipelines and equipment and for the
avoidance of cross-connections.
(3) In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water
system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the local health
officer and water purveyor shall be promptly advised by the person
§ 261-35 SUFFERN CODE § 261-35
1:488
§ 261-36. Recourse for noncompliance.
§ 261-37. Contents of application.
All applications must be accompanied by plans, specifications and an
engineer's or architect's report describing the project in detail. The
application must be signed by a New-York-State-registered professional
engineer or architect. The project must first be submitted to the water
supplier, who will forward it to the local public health engineer. This form
must be prepared in quadruplicate with four copies of all plans,
specifications and descriptive literature. Electronic versions of this
information may be submitted.
§ 261-38. Examples of cross-connection hazards.
The following is an example list of facilities that are especially likely to have
cross-connection hazards. The list is not intended to be all-inclusive.
responsible for the water system so that appropriate measures may
be taken to overcome the contamination.
A. No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected
as required by state regulations and this article.
B. Service of water to any premises may be discontinued by the water
purveyor if a backflow prevention device required by this article and
regulations is not installed, tested, and maintained; if any defect is
found in an installed backflow prevention device; if it is found that a
backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed; or if
unprotected cross-connections exist on the premises, and service will
not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
A. Automotive plants.
B. Auxiliary water systems such as wells.
C. Beverage-bottling plants.
D. Breweries.
E. Food-processing plants.
F. Chemical plants and plating facilities.
G. Film laboratories.
H. Hospitals, medical buildings, sanitariums, morgues and mortuaries.
I. Irrigation systems.
J. Laundries and dye works.
K. Meat-packing plants.
§ 261-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-38
1:489
§ 261-39. Penalties for offenses.
L. Metal manufacturing, cleaning and fabricating plants.
M. Radioactive material production or research plants.
N. Restricted, classified or other facilities closed to the public.
O. Sewage.
P. Buildings heated by boilers where treatment chemicals are used.
Q. Building with certain types of air-conditioning systems.
R. Printing operations.
S. Furniture stripping.
T. Lawn care services.
U. Fire hydrants not under the control of the public water supplier.
A. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in § 261-23 of this chapter.
B. Termination of service.
(1) In addition, upon determination of the Superintendent of Public
Works that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the
Superintendent of Public Works shall notify in writing the owner of
the affected premises by first-class mail at the last known address
of such person, setting forth specifically that water service may be
terminated if the violation is not corrected. If the violation is not
rectified within the time provided in said notice, the
Superintendent of Public Works may cause a notification of
termination of water service to be served on the property owner
and occupants in the same manner setting forth the date of
termination, at least 20 days hence.
(2) The notice of termination shall state that the owner or occupant of
the affected premises shall be entitled to a due process fair
hearing, prior to the termination of service. The owner or occupant
of the premises which will be affected by the termination of service
shall notify the Village Clerk that they request a fair hearing prior
to the termination of service. Said notification of the Village Clerk
shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the Village Clerk within
10 days of the receipt of the notice that the water services will be
terminated. The Board of Trustees shall hear said appeal or may
designate a hearing officer. Said hearing and decision must be
finalized prior to the termination of any water service by the Village
Water Department.
§ 261-38 SUFFERN CODE § 261-39
1:490
Chapter 266
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 96.
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 100.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 127.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 141.
Housing standards — See Ch. 162.
Numbering of property — See Ch. 177.
Site plan regulations — See Ch. 228.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 239.
Zoning and planning application fees — See
Ch. 267.
§ 261-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-39
1:491

ARTICLE I
Statement of Purposes
§ 266-1. Purpose.
Under the authority granted by § 7-700 of the Village Law as amended,
§§ 10, Subdivision 1(ii)e, of the Municipal Home Rule Law and § 10,
Subdivision 6, of the Statute of Local Governments, the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Suffern hereby adopts this chapter, hereinafter referred to as
the "Zoning Law," to promote the purposes set forth in § 7-704 of the Village
Law, including the following:
A. To guide the future growth and development of the Village of Suffern in
accordance with a well considered plan, which plan is embodied in this
Zoning Law.
B. To regulate and limit the height, bulk and location of buildings
hereafter erected, to regulate and determine the area of yards, courts
and other open space and to regulate the density of population in any
given area and, for said purposes, to divide the Village into zoning
districts. These regulations are uniform for each class of buildings
throughout any district, but the regulations in each district differ from
those in other districts. These regulations are designed to secure safety
from fire, flood and other dangers and to promote the public health and
welfare, including, so far as conditions permit, provision for adequate
light, air, convenience of access and the accommodation of solar energy
systems, and are made with reasonable regard to the character of
buildings erected in each district, the value of land and the use to which
it may be put, to the end that these regulations are designed to promote
public health, safety and welfare and the most desirable use for which
the land of each district may be adapted and are intended to conserve
the value of buildings and enhance the value of land and the quality of
life for our residents throughout the Village.
C. To regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries and the
location of buildings designed for specified uses and, for said purposes,
to divide the Village into zoning districts and to prescribe for each such
district the trades and industries that shall be excluded or subjected to
special regulation and the uses for which buildings may not be erected
or altered. This Zoning Law is designed to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare and is made with reasonable consideration,
among other things, to the character of the zoning district, its peculiar
suitability for particular uses, the conservation of property values and
the direction of building development, in accord with a well considered
plan.
D. To carry out the Comprehensive Plan as adopted or amended by the
Planning Board from time to time, which Plan constitutes the basic
long-range guide to the Village's overall and use and development
policies, and which Plan, as it exists or may in the future be amended, is
§ 266-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-1
1:493
to be given conscientious consideration whenever amendments to this
Zoning Law are proposed.
E. To protect the character and the social and economic stability of and to
encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the Village and all
of its neighborhoods.
F. To bring about the gradual conformity of the use of land with the well
considered plan as set forth in this Zoning Law and to minimize
conflicts among the uses of land.
G. To promote the most beneficial relation between the use of land and the
circulation of traffic throughout the Village, having particular regard to
the avoidance of congestion in the streets and the provision of safe and
convenient vehicular and pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to
various uses of land throughout the Village.
H. To provide a guide for public policy and action in the efficient provision
of public facilities and services and for private enterprise in building
development, investment and other economic activity relating to uses of
land throughout the Village.
I. To limit development to that which will not exceed the capacity of
existing and programmed public facilities and services.
J. To avoid hazardous conditions and excessive damage resulting from
stormwater runoff and flooding, and to encourage the appropriate use
and sound management of natural resources throughout the Village.
K. To preserve the natural beauty of the Village; to protect the Village
against unsightly, obtrusive and obnoxious land uses and operations; to
enhance the aesthetic aspect of the natural and man-made elements of
the Village; and to ensure appropriate development with regard to
those elements.
L. To maintain and enhance the quality of life in the older residential areas
of the Village of Suffern and preserve the Village as a community where
citizens of all racial, religious and economic backgrounds can live and
raise their families in stable, well kept and safe neighborhoods.
M. To create a hospitable climate for the pursuit of happiness.
N. To remove to the extent practicable, obstacles to the pursuit of
happiness.
O. To provide more extensive review of properties with sensitive
environmental features in order to avoid adverse impacts to other
properties; to encourage the use of cluster technique on these
properties to further reduce potential adverse environmental impacts.
[Added 11-10-2005 by L.L. No. 8-2005]
§ 266-1 SUFFERN CODE § 266-1
1:494
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 266-2. Introduction.
For the purpose of this Zoning Law, certain words and terms used herein
are defined in this article.
§ 266-3. General construction of language.
The following rules of construction apply to the language of this Zoning
Law:
A. The specific shall control the general.
B. All words used in the present tense include the future tense.
C. All words in the singular number include the plural number, and vice
versa, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates
otherwise.
D. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter,
and vice versa, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates
otherwise.
E. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
F. The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specified examples, but
is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or
circumstances of like kind or character.
G. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation
involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected
by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either. . .or," the conjunction shall be
interpreted as follows:
(1) "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events shall apply.
(2) "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or
events may apply singly or in any combination.
(3) "Either. . .or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
H. The words "building" and "structure" include any part thereof.
I. The words "lot," "plot" and "tract of land" shall include the other.
J. The word "premises" shall include land and buildings thereon.
K. The word "district" shall mean "zoning district."
§ 266-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-3
1:495
§ 266-4. Terms not defined.
Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted
meanings or such as the context may imply.
§ 266-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to the main building on
the lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to that of the main
building. Where an accessory building is attached to the main building in
a substantial manner, as by a wall or roof, such accessory building shall be
considered part of the main building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use which is customarily incidental and subordinate
to the principal use on the lot and located on the same lot therewith, except
that where specifically so provided, accessory off-street parking need not be
located on the same lot. An accessory use may not be accessory to another
accessory use.
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT — [Added 11-16-1998 by L.L. No. 12-1998]:
L. The words "occupied" or "used" shall be considered to be followed by
the words "or intended, arranged or designed to be occupied or used,"
unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
M. References made to officials and official agencies shall mean officials
and official agencies of the Village of Suffern, unless the natural
construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
N. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally.
O. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this Zoning Law and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial establishment where a
substantial portion of the establishment includes an adult bookstore,
adult eating or drinking establishment, adult theater or other adult
commercial establishment, or any combination thereof as defined
below:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — A bookstore which has as a substantial
portion of its stock-in-trade any one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter which
is characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
(a)
Photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
other visual representations which are characterized by an
(b)
(1)
A.
§ 266-3 SUFFERN CODE § 266-5
1:496
emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT EATING OR DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT — An eating or
drinking establishment which regularly features any one or more of
the following:
Live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
(a)
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by an
emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
(b)
Employees who, as part of their employment, regularly expose
to patrons specified anatomical areas and which is not
customarily open to the general public during such features
because it excludes minors by reason of age.
(c)
(2)
ADULT THEATER — A theater which regularly features one or
more of the following:
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions characterized by an emphasis on
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
(a)
Live performances characterized by an emphasis on specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities and which is not
customarily open to the general public during such features
because it excludes minors by reason of age.
(b)
An adult theater shall include commercial establishments
where such materials or performances are viewed from
individual enclosures.
(c)
(3)
ANOTHER ADULT COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — A facility
other than an adult bookstore, adult eating and drinking
establishment, adult theater, commercial studio or business or
trade school which features employees who, as part of their
employment, regularly expose to patrons specified anatomical
areas and which is not customarily open to the general public
during such features because it excludes minors by reason of age.
(4)
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Human genitals in a state of
sexual stimulation or arousal; actual or simulated acts of human
masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or fondling or other
erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or
female breast.
(5)
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Less than completely and
opaquely concealed human genitals, pubic region, human buttock,
(6)
§ 266-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-5
1:497
ALTER — To change, enlarge or rearrange the structural parts of a structure
or to move a building from one location or position to another.
ALTERATION — See "alter."
AMUSEMENT CENTER — Any premises having thereon available for
operation by the general public three or more amusement devices.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the insertion of a
coin, slug, token, plate or disc or by the payment to the manager of the
premises of a fee for the use thereof, may be operated by the public
generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not
registering a score. It shall include, but not be limited to, such devices
as pinball machines, electronic games, skill ball and all games, operations
or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be known.
The term does not include vending machines in which there are not
incorporated gaming or amusement features, nor does the term include any
coin-operated musical devices or rides.
ARTIST — A person who is regularly engaged in the fine arts, such as
painting and sculpture, or in the composition of music on a professional
basis.[Added 12-7-1998 by L.L. No. 14-1998]
ARTIST DWELLING — A building or a portion of a building used as an
accessory residence for an artist operating a studio or gallery in the same
building.[Added 12-7-1998 by L.L. No. 14-1998]
ATTACHED DWELLING UNIT — See "dwelling unit, attached."
anus or female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; or human male genitals in a discernible turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely concealed.
For the purpose of determining whether a substantial portion of an
establishment includes an adult bookstore, adult eating or drinking
establishment, adult theater or other adult commercial establishment,
or combination thereof, the following factors shall be considered: the
amount of floor area and cellar space accessible to customers and
allocated to such uses and the amount of floor area and cellar space
accessible to customers and allocated to such uses, as compared to
the total floor area and cellar space accessible to customers in the
establishment.
B.
For the purpose of determining whether a bookstore has a substantial
portion of its stock in materials defined in Subsection A(1)(a) or (b)
hereof, the following factors shall be considered: the amount of such
stock accessible to customers as compared to the total stock accessible
to customers in the establishment and the amount of floor area and
cellar space accessible to customers containing such stock and the
amount of floor area and cellar space accessible to customers
containing such stock as compared to the total floor area and cellar
space accessible to customers in the establishment.
C.
§ 266-5 SUFFERN CODE § 266-5
1:498
AUTOMOBILE SALES AND SERVICE, FRANCHISE — The factory
authorized outlet of an automobile manufacturer.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE FACILITIES — The conduct
within a fully enclosed building of repairs to the drive train and/or chassis
of vehicles.
AWNING — A structural protective cover made of canvas, plastic or other
material, mounted to a wall and hung over a door, entrance, window or
outdoor service area and intended to provide shade, reduce glare or shelter
persons from rain or inclement weather. Except for retractable awnings
used solely for the purposes described above, all other types of awnings are
prohibited.
BANNER — Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one
or more edges. National flags, state of municipal flags or the official flag of
any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The elevation of a flood having a one-percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — A portion of a building partly underground, but having less
than half its ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
See also "cellar."
BETTING PARLOR — An establishment authorized by the State of New
York and used principally for the placing of wagers by the general public.
Delicatessens, gasoline filling stations and other principal uses authorized
by the State of New York to sell lottery tickets shall not be considered
"betting parlors."
BILLBOARD — A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, entertainment or attraction conducted, sold, offered or existing
elsewhere than on the same lot where such sign is displayed or not for the
principal use of such lot.
BOARDER — A roomer who takes meals with a family with whom he/she
resides on a paying or bartering basis. (See also "roomer" and "single-room
occupancy".)
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Board of Appeals of the Village of Suffern.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The Board of Trustees of the Village of Suffern.
BUFFER — An area of specified dimension extending between the property
line and a required yard which shall remain in its natural state or be
improved with landscape materials as may be required by the approving
authority. The "buffer" shall not be used or otherwise encroached upon by
any activities, including parking or driveway aisles but excluding access
points on the lot, so as to provide for adequate separation and protection
from otherwise inharmonious or incompatible uses. Freestanding signs may
be located in the buffer area subject to site or sign plan approval by the
Planning Board.
§ 266-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-5
1:499
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof, self-supporting or supported by
columns, air pressure or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or
enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.
BUILDING CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code as adopted by the Board of Trustees.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Village of Suffern.
BUILDING, MAIN — A building in which is conducted the principal use of
the lot on which such building is situated.
BUILDING, MULTITENANT — A building containing two or more tenants.
BUILDING, NONCOMPLYING — A structure lawfully existing at the
effective date of this Zoning Law or any amendment thereto affecting such
structure which does not comply with the bulk requirements of this chapter
for the district in which it is situated, irrespective of the use to which such
structure is put.
BULK — The size and shape of buildings, structures and nonbuilding uses;
and the physical relationship of their exterior walls or construction or their
location to the lot lines and other buildings or structures or other walls or
construction of the same building or structure; and all open spaces required
in connection with a building or structure. Bulk requirements include but
are not limited to lot area, lot width, building height, required yards, courts
and development coverage.
BULK, NONCOMPLYING — That part of a building structure or nonbuilding
use which does not conform to one or more of the applicable bulk
requirements of this Zoning Law.
BUS TERMINAL — A building and any associated parking areas used for
the storage, repair and maintenance of buses. A bus stop or area where
passengers are discharged or picked-up, usually adjacent to the street on
which the bus customarily travels, shall not be considered a "bus terminal."
CAFETERIA — A business enterprise engaged in preparing and serving a
full line of food and beverages primarily through the use of a service line
where the customer serves himself or is served from displayed selections
and where table or booth seating facilities are provided; some limited waiter
or waitress service may be provided. See also "restaurant" and "fast-food
eating establishment."
CELLAR — A portion of a building partly or wholly underground, having
half or more than half of its ceiling height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be deemed to be a "story." See also
"basement."
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Official certification that a building or
structure conforms to this Zoning Law and the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code and may be occupied. See also "certificate of
use."
§ 266-5 SUFFERN CODE § 266-5
1:500
CERTIFICATE OF USE — Official certification that a building or structure
or part thereof conforms to the use requirements and other pertinent
provisions of this Zoning Law and may be used in conformity with law.
CHANGE OF USE — A change of use of a building, structure or lot is
interpreted for purposes of this Zoning Law as:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of the
Village of Suffern, an individual as may be designated from time to time by
resolution of the Village of Suffern Board of Trustees.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The plan adopted by the Planning Board
pursuant to § 7-722 of the Village Law.
CORNER LOT — See "lot, corner."
COVERAGE — See "development coverage."
CRITICAL ENVIRONMENTAL AREA OVERLAY — The land areas shown on
the Critical Environmental Area Map adopted by the Board of Trustees as
part of the Suffern Zoning Law.[Added 11-10-2005 by L.L. No. 8-2005]
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility with an individual and required number
of assistants providing care for seven or more children, depending on age,
in accordance with a strict staff/child ratio, for more than three hours a
day but less than 24 hours a day. Centers may be established as the sole
use in an individual building or as an accessory use in a church, school or
other building and may be run by an individual, association, corporation or
institution licensed by the New York State Department of Social Services.
DESIGNATED STREET LINE — See "street line, designated."
DETACHED DWELLING UNIT — See "dwelling unit, detached."
DEVELOPMENT COVERAGE — The percentage of the area of a lot covered
by buildings, parking areas, accessory structures and any impervious
surfaces, including natural impervious features.
DORMITORY — A building or part of a building containing private or
semiprivate rooms which open to a common hallway, which rooms are
sleeping quarters for administrative staff, faculty or students, along with
bathroom, dining, cooking, laundry, lounge and recreation facilities, as
required. Dormitory rooms shall not contain separate cooking, dining or
housekeeping facilities, except that one dwelling unit with complete
housekeeping facilities may be provided for use of a superintendent or
A change that results in a difference in the numerical listing or the use
column (permitted, accessory or special permit) for a use as specified
in § 266-22, Schedule of General Use Requirements.144
A.
A change in the off-street parking standards for a use as specified in
§ 266-22, Schedule of General Use Requirements.
B.
C. A change in a building's facade.
144. Editor's Note: The schedule of general use requirements is located at the end of this
chapter.
§ 266-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-5
1:501
supervising staff for every 50 dormitory rooms or major part thereof. No
more than one communal dining room shall be provided in any building
or structure used for dormitory purposes. Single-family, two-family and/or
other multiple residential facilities, other than that described above, are not
to be considered as "dormitories." Private rooms may be occupied by no
more than one person, and semiprivate rooms may be occupied by no more
than two persons.
DUMPSTER — Any portable container, receptacle or device of a type
commonly used for the depositing of refuse, garbage, junk, trash or other
materials intended for disposal and designed to be brought and taken away
by truck or as a trailer, or a bin that a garbage truck lifts, empties into its
hopper, and lowers, on the spot.[Added 1-7-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
DWELLING — A building containing one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A single dwelling located in its own separate
building which does not abut any other dwelling.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building containing three or more dwelling
units.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building containing a single dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provisions for living, cooking,
sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one family.
DWELLING UNIT, ATTACHED — A dwelling unit sharing a common side or
rear wall or walls with another dwelling unit or units, but occupying the
entire volume within its portion of the building from the lowest habitable
level to the roof, and having its own separate entrance or entrances to the
outside. This type of dwelling unit, in units of three or more, is also known
as a "townhouse" or "row house."
FACULTY HOUSING — Dwelling units of any type used for the faculty or
staff of a not-for-profit school or college.
FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption
living and cooking together as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit; or, one
or more persons living together as a nonprofit housekeeping unit which is
the functional and factual equivalent of a traditional family.
FAST-FOOD EATING ESTABLISHMENT — A business enterprise primarily
engaged in the sale of pre-prepared or quickly prepared food and beverages
in disposable containers or wrappers, selected by patrons from a limited
line of specialized items, such as hamburgers, chicken, pizza, tacos, hot
dogs, ice cream or yogurt, for consumption either on or off the premises,
in a facility in which a major portion of the sales to patrons is at a standup
type counter. "Fast-food eating establishments" providing drive-through
or drive-in facilities for purchase of food and beverages from a vehicle are
prohibited.
FLEA MARKET — A farmer's market, bazaar or similar activity, by whatever
name, or those uses which involve the setting up of two or more
§ 266-5 SUFFERN CODE § 266-5
1:502
independently operated booths, tables, racks or similar display areas for the
purpose of selling merchandise or other items offered for sale by individual
vendors or concessionaires, each of whom generally rents selling space
from the flea market operator. A "flea market" may be either an openair
market or held within a fully enclosed structure. In addition, it may
be a temporary event of public interest or may operate as a permanent
establishment with fixed business hours. A "flea market," as defined herein,
shall not be intended to include a garage sale or fund-raising event or
festival sponsored by a religious, charitable or civic organization.
FLOOD FRINGE AREA — The area within the Floodplain District which is
not within the floodway.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
FLOOR AREA — The horizontal area of a story of a building, measured
from the exterior faces of exterior walls, or in the case of a common wall
separating two buildings, from the center line of such common wall, and
including porches, balconies and raised platforms, but excluding cornices,
roof overhangs, gutters or chimneys projecting not more than three feet,
and steps and terraces not more than three feet above the average adjacent
ground elevation.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS (GFA) — The total floor area of all stories of a
building.
FOOD PRODUCT — A combination of ingredients, whether prepared
separately or processed together, solid or liquid, intended for human
consumption.[Added 5-22-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
FRONTAGE — See "lot frontage."
FRONT LOT LINE — See "lot line, front."
FRONT YARD — See "yard, front."
GALLERY — A building or a portion of a building used as a place to display
or sell original works or art.[Added 12-7-1998 by L.L. No. 14-1998]
GARAGE, PARKING — See "parking garage."
GARAGE, TENT — Any tent used as a parking garage, garden shed or
storage shed, including tents used to store motor vehicles, garden
equipment, recreational vehicles, or other materials or equipment.[Added
7-21-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003]
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — A business enterprise engaged in the
retail sale, direct to the motorist, of gasoline, and which may also include
the sale of retail convenience store items, oil, tires, accessories and services
for motor vehicles, including minor repair or routine maintenance work, but
not including body work, painting or major repair.
§ 266-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-5
1:503
GRADE —
GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA) — See "floor area, gross (GFA)."
HEIGHT, BUILDING — The vertical distance from grade to the level of the
highest point of the roof if the roof is flat or mansard, or to the mean level
between the eaves and the highest point of the roof if the roof is of any
other type. Where grade is defined to be the average level of the ground
adjacent to the exterior walls of the building, in no case shall the height of
the building on the street side exceed 1 1/4 times the maximum allowable
height, measured from the elevation of the curb opposite the center of the
building wall on the street side.
HEIGHT, CEILING — The average distance between the finished floor and
the ceiling in any room. Where a room has an unfinished ceiling, the
distance shall be measured to the average of the lowest permanent
obstruction.
HELIPAD — An area used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters, but
excluding any auxiliary or related helicopter services, such as refueling,
maintenance, storage or passenger or cargo handling facilities, except for
outdoor tie-down space.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A geographically defined area designated by the
Village Board, possessing a significant concentration or continuity of
landmarks, improvements or landscape features in which historic events
occurred or having special public value because of notable architectural or
other features relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of the community
of such significance as to warrant conservation and preservation. Said
district may have within its boundaries noncontributing buildings or other
structures that, while not of such historic and or architectural significance
to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual
character of the district.
HISTORIC LANDMARK (OR LANDMARK SITE) — A structure or site,
designated by the Village Board, at which historic events occurred or which
has special public value because of notable architectural or other features
relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of the community and which is of
such significance as to warrant conservation and preservation.
For buildings adjoining one street only, the elevation of the curb at the
center of the wall adjoining the street. All walls approximately parallel
to and not more than 15 feet from a street shall be considered as
adjoining a street for purposes of grade measurement.
A.
For buildings adjoining more than one street, the average of the
elevations of the curbs at the centers of all walls adjoining streets as
previously defined.
B.
For buildings having no wall adjoining a street, the average level of the
ground adjacent to and extending for a distance of 10 feet from the
exterior walls of the building.
C.
§ 266-5 SUFFERN CODE § 266-5
1:504
HOME OCCUPATION — The performance of a service (and not the sale of
goods) for gain customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling unit by
the residents thereof, which use is incidental and secondary to the use of
the dwelling for residential purposes and does not change the character
thereof, does not involve the keeping of a stock-in-trade and does not have
any exterior evidence of such accessory use except for one identification
sign as permitted in § 266-331 of this Zoning Law.
HOSPITAL HELIPORT — An area within the property lines of a private
or public hospital, used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters only for
the purpose of air ambulance operations and emergency medical service,
excluding ancillary or related helicopter services, such as refueling,
maintenance, storage or passenger or cargo handling facilities.[Added
7-15-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
HOUSEHOLD PET — An animal commonly kept in a dwelling unit by the
inhabitants thereof for amusement or companionship, such as a dog, cat,
bird, fish, gerbil, hamster or nonpoisonous snake. Any other animal is not a
"household pet."
INDOOR THEATER — A building or structure whose primary use is for
the presentation of dramatic, comedic, musical or similar performances or
motion pictures.
JUNKYARD — The deposit or storage on a lot of one or more unlicensed,
wrecked or broken down vehicles or parts thereof, for a period of 48
hours or more shall be deemed to constitute a junkyard. The foregoing
shall not apply to an automotive repair use conducted in accordance with
the conditions, terms and restrictions of a special permit therefor and
the provisions of this Zoning Law and applicable site plan requirements,
conditions and restrictions.[Added 6-20-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994;
amended 6-19-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT — An accessory use of a building or structure for
performance by persons on-premises of music, acting or other amusements
for the benefit of an audience or patrons, whether or not for commercial
purposes. "Live entertainment" shall include but not be limited to
entertainment provided by musicians, live bands, disc jockeys, puppeteers,
magicians and comedians.
LOT, CORNER — A lot located at the junction of and fronting on two or more
streets intersecting at an angle of less than 135°.
LOT, FLAG — Lots or parcels with less frontage on a public street than
is normally required. The flag pole is an access corridor to lots or parcels
located behind lots or parcels with normally required street frontage.
LOT FRONTAGE — The distance for which a lot line of a zone lot adjoins a
public street, from one lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distant
lot line intersecting the same street.
LOT LINE, FRONT — In the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the
lot line separating the lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, each
lot line which abuts a street shall be deemed to be a front yard line. In the
§ 266-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-5
1:505
case of a through lot abutting more than one street, the owner may elect
any street line as the "front lot line," except that where the majority of lots
in any block are developed, the "front lot line" shall be the same as that used
by such other lots.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line which is generally opposite the front lot
line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than the front lot line and the rear lot
line.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between side lot lines measured along a line
(parallel to a line connecting the end points of the front lot line) drawn at
the required front setback line.
MEDICAL OFFICE BUILDING — An office building whose occupants
principally comprise health-care providers such as physicians, dentists and
therapists. Such medical office building may also contain related tenants,
including medical laboratories, diagnostic facilities, pharmacies, retailers
of durable medical supplies, limited non-medical retail uses (such as food
service or sundries occupying no more than 500 square feet of floor area)
principally serving building occupants and visitors, and other uses similar
in nature to those noted.[Added 2-12-2004 by L.L. No. 4-2004]
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — See "dwelling, multifamily."
NURSERY SCHOOL — Any private school designed to provide daytime care
or instruction for children three years of age and older, for less than three
hours a day per session, and no more than two sessions per day.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by the Board of Trustees pursuant to
§ 7-724 of the Village Law.
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — See "dwelling, one-family."
OWNERSHIP, SAME — Includes all vested or contingent interests of any
person or his agent, representative, successor or assignee, and irrespective
of whether or not such interest is recorded, in the following circumstances:
PARKING AREA MAP — A map adopted by the Board of Trustees defining
proposed parking facilities in the CB District.
PARKING GARAGE — A building for the parking or storage of motor
vehicles and in which no other use is conducted.
Direct ownership by such person or his or her spouse, child, parent,
sibling or spouse of sibling, heir or next of kin, agent, corporation, firm,
entity, partnership or unincorporated association.
A.
Ownership of property by different corporations, firms, partnerships,
entities or unincorporated associations, in which a person is a
stockholder, a partner or associate, or his or her spouse, child, parent,
sibling or spouse of sibling, heir or next of kin owns an interest of
10% or greater in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity or
unincorporated association.
B.
§ 266-5 SUFFERN CODE § 266-5
1:506
PARKING LOT — An off-street area containing one or more parking spaces
with passageways and driveways accessory thereto for use on a transient
basis.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of one
motor vehicle.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or
not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association or any other entity, including state and local governments and
agencies.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments that offer a service to the public,
such as but not limited to dry cleaners, barbershops, hair, nail and tanning
salons, shoe repair shops, tailors and seamstresses and fitness health clubs,
but not including repair of automobiles or other vehicles, laundromats,
betting parlors operated by the State of New York or checking-cashing
businesses.[Amended 6-21-2004 by L.L. No. 10-2004]
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of Suffern.
PLAT — A drawing prepared in a manner prescribed by the Subdivision
Regulations of the Village of Suffern, showing the layout of a proposed
subdivision, including, but not restricted to, road and lot layout and
dimensions, key plan, topography and drainage, all proposed facilities,
including plans and profiles, at suitable scale and in such detail as required
by the Subdivision Regulations.145
PORCH — A terrace which has a roof and which is attached to a building.
PRIVATE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL — An institution conducting a regularly
scheduled curriculum of study similar to that of the public elementary
schools and operated in accordance with the Education Law of the State of
New York.
PRIVATE MEMBERSHIP CLUB — A not-for-profit organization or
corporation organized to cater exclusively to its members and their guests,
including land, buildings and facilities for recreational, athletic, social,
professional and cultural purposes. The members of the organization shall
have a financial interest in and method of control of the assets and
management of the private membership club.
PRIVATE SECONDARY SCHOOL — An institution conducting a regularly
scheduled curriculum of study similar to that of the public secondary
schools and operating in accordance with a charter issued by the Board of
Regents of the State of New York.
PUBLIC EMERGENCY FACILITY — A building or structure owned and
operated by public agencies whose functions include responding to life-
145. Editor's Note: See Ch. 239, Subdivision of Land.
§ 266-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-5
1:507
and property-threatening emergencies, such as a fire, ambulance or police
facility.
PUBLIC NONEMERGENCY FACILITY — A building or structure owned and
operated by a public agency responsible for administering or providing
nonemergency services to the residents of the Village, including
governmental offices, libraries and museums.
PUBLIC RECREATION FACILITY — A building, structure or area owned and
operated by a public agency for the purpose of providing activities for the
relaxation, leisure and strengthening of the body and mind, including ball
fields, parks, pools, playfields, tennis courts, baseball fields and associated
accessory parking.
PUBLIC SCHOOL — An educational institution operated by a public school
district in accordance with the Education Law of the State of New York.
PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY — A building or structure owned and operated
by a public agency responsible for operating and maintaining public
infrastructure, including sewage treatment plants, water supply and water
treatment facilities and municipal public works buildings.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any person duly authorized to furnish to the public,
under public regulation, electricity, gas, water, sewage treatment, steam,
cable television or telephone or telegraph service. Cellular telephone
companies are not considered to be a "public utility" for purposes of this
Zoning Law.
REAR LOT LINE — See "lot line, rear."
REAR YARD — See "yard, rear."
RECREATION FACILITIES — Facilities designed and used for active and
passive participatory athletic and general recreation activities, such as
health clubs, gymnasia, dance halls, skating rinks, swimming pools, tennis
courts, ball fields, bowling alleys and billiard rooms; excluded are facilities
intended for spectator activities, such as stadia and arenas, and any
structure maintained for the amusement, patronage or recreation of the
public.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT — A zoning district in which the primary permitted
use is residential. The R-15, R-10, R-7.5, R-5, 2R-5, 2R-5(P), MR-50 and
MR-15 Districts constitute "residence districts."
RESTAURANT — A business enterprise engaged in preparing and serving
food and beverages selected from a full menu by patrons seated at a table
or counter, served by a waiter or waitress, and consumed on the premises.
See also "fast-food eating establishment."
RETAIL LAUNDRY (OR LAUNDROMAT) — A business enterprise with
facilities for the washing of clothing which deals directly with ultimate
consumers and which does not exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
RETAIL SALES — Establishments that deal in the sale of goods directly to
the public, not including gasoline stations.
§ 266-5 SUFFERN CODE § 266-5
1:508
ROOMER — An unrelated person (not a family member) renting from the
primary tenant of a dwelling unit not more than a single room therein,
without individual cooking or sanitary facilities. (See also "boarder" and
"single-room occupancy.")
SCHOOL OF SPECIAL INSTRUCTION — Any nonpublic school engaged in
the teaching of specialized courses of study, including, but not limited to,
technical, financial, accounting or secretarial subjects.
SEQRA — The State Environmental Quality Review Act146 and its
implementing regulations (6 NYCRR Part 617).
SETBACK — The horizontal distance from such lot line to the part of the
building or of the story, respectively, which is nearest to such lot line, which
shall be deemed to be the distance that such building or story is set back or
that it sits back from such lot line.
SIDE LOT LINE — See "lot line, side."
SIDE YARD — See "yard, side."
SIGN — Any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses any color form
graphic, illumination, symbol or writing to advertise, announce the purpose
of or identify the purpose of a person or entity or to communicate
information of any kind to the public.
SIGN, AWNING/CANOPY — Any sign that is a part of or attached to an
awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a
door, entrance window or outdoor service area.
SIGN, FACADE — Any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches of, a
wall, painted on the wall surface of or erected and confined within the limits
of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such
wall or building and which displays only one sign surface.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — Any sign supported by structures or posts that
are placed on or anchored in the ground and that are independent from any
building or other structure.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING — Any sign that does not conform to the
requirements of this Zoning Law.
SIGN PLAN — A plan depicting the size, location, materials and content of
a sign, which plan shall be the sole permitted display for any sign subject to
the site plan regulations.147
SIGN, PORTABLE — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure or a sign designed to be transported, including,
but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels,
signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons
used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or
painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless
said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
146. Editor's Note: See Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
147. Editor's Note: See Ch. 228, Site Plan Regulations.
§ 266-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-5
1:509
SIGN, ROOF — Any sign erected or constructed wholly on and over the
roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically
above the highest portion of the roof.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not
permanently mounted.
SIGN, WINDOW — Any sign, picture, symbol or combination thereof
designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale or service that is placed inside a window or upon the
window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
SINGLE-ROOM OCCUPANCY — The renting out, by other than the primary
tenant in residence of a dwelling unit, of a single room without individual
cooking or sanitary facilities. "Single-room occupancies" are not permitted
in any zoning district. (See also "boarder" and "roomer.")
SITE PLAN — A map showing the design for the layout, arrangement and
use of buildings and land, including accessory uses, facilities and services,
and meeting the requirements of the Site Plan Regulations of the Village of
Suffern.148
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTOR — A device or combination of devices which
relies upon solar radiation as an energy source, that is employed for the
purposes of the heating or cooling of a building, the heating of water or the
generation of electricity.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished
floor level immediately above the basement is less than seven feet above
grade, such basement or cellar shall not be considered a "story."
STORY, HALF — The topmost story having a ceiling height of at least 7 1/
2 feet and a floor area that is 1/2 or less of the floor area of the story
immediately beneath it.
STREET — An existing state, County or Village highway or road, public or
private, or a way shown on a subdivision plat approved by the Planning
Board or on a plat duly filed and recorded in the Office of the County Clerk
prior to the appointment of the Planning Board and the grant to such Board
of the power to approve subdivision plats, including all of the land within
the right-of-way.
STREET, COLLECTOR — Streets which collect the traffic generated on local
streets and serve a relatively short, convenient and direct means of access
from the various development areas of the Village to the secondary street
system.
STREET LINE, DESIGNATED — The line between the street and the lot or,
if one has been created, a line established by the Official Map as the future
street right-of-way, whether or not in public ownership.
148. Editor's Note: See Ch. 228, Site Plan Regulations.
§ 266-5 SUFFERN CODE § 266-5
1:510
STREET, LOCAL — Streets whose prime function is to give direct access
to abutting property. "Local streets" are the internal part of the system to
provide movements within the residential neighborhoods or other land use
areas.
STREET, MAJOR — Streets or highways serving to connect through streets
with each other and also to handle internal movements within the Village.
STREET, SECONDARY — Streets serving to connect major streets with each
other and also to handle internal movements within the Village.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on or below the ground or attachment to something having location
on or below the ground. Included are above- and below-ground swimming
pools, parking garages, storage sheds, satellite receiving antenna and
dishes and tennis courts, but not anything requiring only simple paving or
surfacing of the ground, such as parking lots, driveways or sidewalks.
STUDIO — A building or a portion of a building used as a place of work by
an artist.[Added 12-7-1998 by L.L. No. 14-1998]
SURETY — Escrow in the form of a cash deposit, security or irrevocable
letter of credit or such other form as may be acceptable to the Village
Attorney.
SWIMMING POOL — A man-made body of water or receptacle for water
having a depth of more than 24 inches and a water surface area of more
than 80 square feet and constructed, installed or maintained in or above
ground outside any building.
TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINER — Any portable container, receptacle,
or device of a type commonly used for the temporary storage of personal
property and other matter. The term shall include, but not be limited to,
portable on-demand storage units (PODS®).[Added 1-7-2019 by L.L. No.
1-2019]
TENT — Any structure, enclosure, or shelter constructed of silk, cotton,
canvas, polyethylene, fabric or other pliable material supported in any
manner except by air or solely covering the contents protected by the
material. A permitted tent shall be deemed an accessory building.[Added
7-21-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003]
TERRACE — An unroofed flat platform covered with a surface material.
A terrace which has a roof and which is attached to a building shall be
considered a porch.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — See "dwelling, two-family."
USE — The specific purpose for which land, water, a building or a structure
is designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained.
USE, NONCONFORMING — A use of a building, structure or land that does
not conform to any one or more of the applicable regulations as to use in the
zoning district in which it is located, which use was lawful under the Zoning
Law or Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time the use was established.
§ 266-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-5
1:511
VILLAGE ENGINEER — The Superintendent of Public Works or such other
person as may be appointed to that position by the Board of Trustees.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a building or group of
buildings, which lies between the building or group of buildings and the
nearest lot line. In measuring a yard, the line of a building shall be deemed
to mean a line parallel to the nearest lot line, drawn through the point of
the building or group of buildings which is nearest to such lot line, and the
measurement shall be taken at right angles from the lot line to the nearest
line of the building. Where a buffer area is required, the buffer area shall
be deemed to commence at the lot line and the yard requirement shall be
deemed to commence from the interior line of the buffer area.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the front lot line and the nearest line of the building. For corner
lots, refer to § 266-15H of this Zoning Law.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying
between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the building.
YARD, REQUIRED — A required yard is that portion of a yard meeting the
minimum yard requirements of § 266-23 of this Zoning Law, measured from
the lot line.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between a side lot line and the nearest line of the
building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard or, in the
absence of either of such yards, to the front and rear lot line, as the case
may be.
§ 266-5 SUFFERN CODE § 266-5
1:512
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 266-6. Enumeration of districts. [Amended 11-10-2005 by L.L. No.
8-2005; 4-6-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009]
The Village of Suffern is hereby divided into the following classes of zoning
districts:
Residential
Districts:
R-15 One-Family Residence (minimum lot size: 15,000
square feet)
R-10 One-Family Residence (minimum lot size: 10,000
square feet)
R-7.5 One-Family Residence (minimum lot size: 7,500
square feet)
R-5 One-Family Residence (minimum lot size: 5,000
square feet)
2R-5 Two-Family Residence (one- and two-family
dwellings)
2R-5(P) Two-Family Residence (one- and two-family
dwellings; public facilities)
MR-15 Multifamily Residence (low-rise multiple residences
at maximum gross density of 15 dwellings per acre)
MR-50 Multifamily Residence (high-rise multiple residences
at maximum gross density of 50 dwellings per acre)
TDD Transit Development District (high-rise multiplefamily
residences at a maximum density of 65
dwelling units per acre which may include
commercial component on first floor)
Nonresidential
Districts:
PO-40 Professional Office (minimum lot size: 40,000 square
feet)
PO-15 Professional Office (minimum lot size: 15,000 square
feet)
CB Central Business (commercial uses within the central
business district)
GB General Business (commercial uses outside the
central business district)
PLI Planned Light Industrial
M Manufacturing
Overlay Districts:
§ 266-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-6
1:513
HD Historic District (protection of historic structures)
NOTE: The HD District was not created at the time
of the adoption of this Zoning Law. However, it is
listed here in anticipation of its creation subsequent
to Zoning Law adoption.
FP Floodplain (supplemental performance standards for
structures)
CEAO Critical Environmental Area Overlay District
(supplemental standards)
Scenic Overlay District (supplemental standards)
§ 266-7. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of these zoning districts are hereby established as shown on
a map entitled "Zoning Map, Village of Suffern, New York," dated December
1993, and as may be amended from time to time and certified by the Village
Clerk. This map, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made a part
of this Zoning Law. The official copy of this map is kept by the Village Clerk
in accordance with § 266-64 of this Zoning Law.149
§ 266-8. Interpretation of Zoning District boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the locations of any boundaries shown on the
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Zoning district boundary lines follow lot lines, streets, municipal
boundaries, rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-way or watercourses or are
parallel or perpendicular thereto, unless such district boundary lines
are fixed by dimensions, as shown on the Zoning Map.
B. Where zoning district boundaries are shown approximately following
streets, rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-way or watercourses, the center
line thereof shall be such boundaries.
C. Where zoning district boundaries are shown approximately following
municipal boundaries or lot lines, such municipal boundaries or lot lines
shall be the district boundaries.
D. Where zoning district boundary lines divide a lot, the location of any
such boundary, if not indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by
use of the map scale appearing thereon.
E. If the zoning district classification of any property is in question, it shall
be deemed to be in the most restrictive adjoining district.
149. Editor's Note: A copy of the Zoning Map is located in a pocket at the end of this volume.
§ 266-6 SUFFERN CODE § 266-9
1:514
§ 266-9. Restrictiveness of districts.
Where zoning districts are referred to as more restrictive or less restrictive,
the designations shall refer to the order in which the districts are listed in
§ 266-6 of this Zoning Law, the first listed being the most restrictive.
§ 266-10. Lots in two or more zoning districts or municipalities.
Where a lot in one ownership of record is divided by one or more zoning
district boundaries or municipal lines, the following shall apply:
§ 266-11. Street classification.
For the purpose of providing for the development of a system of streets and
highways in the Village and for the future improvement, reconstruction and
widening of streets and highways, including provision for sidewalks, curbs
and drainage facilities, each street in the Village is hereby designated by
one of the following street classifications: major streets, secondary streets,
collector streets and local streets. The classification of each street is based
on its present and estimated future traffic volume and its relative
importance and function in the comprehensive system of streets and
highways as specified in the Village Development Plan. The required front
yard and maximum building height for any lot shall be measured as set
forth for each street classification in § 266-20 of this Zoning Law. The street
classification for this purpose of each street or highway or portion thereof
in the Village shall be set forth on the Official Map of the Village of Suffern.
A. Uses permitted in one zoning district shall not extend into another
district where they would not otherwise be permitted.
B. Bulk requirements shall be measured from lot lines or zoning district
lines, whichever is more restrictive.
§ 266-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-11
1:515

ARTICLE IV
General Regulations
§ 266-12. Application of regulations.
§ 266-13. Relation to other regulations.
§ 266-14. Existing uses; nonconforming uses; prohibited uses.
A. Conformity required. No building shall be erected, constructed, moved,
altered, rebuilt or enlarged, nor shall any land, water or building be
used, designed or arranged to be used for any purpose except in
conformity with this Zoning Law.
B. Minimum requirements. In interpreting and applying this Zoning Law,
the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum
requirements necessary for the protection and promotion of the public
health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
A. Other applicable codes standards and regulations. There are many
other applicable codes, standards and regulations of the Village of
Suffern, Rockland County, and New York State in addition to this Zoning
Law. These include the Subdivision Regulations,150 Site Plan
Regulations,151 the State Environmental Quality Review Act,152 the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and the
Plumbing Code.
B. Conflicting standards. This Zoning Law shall not be deemed to affect in
any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants or other agreements
between parties. Where this Zoning Law imposes a greater or lesser
restriction upon the use of buildings or land or upon the erection,
construction, establishment, movement, alteration or enlargement of
buildings than are imposed by other zoning laws, rules, regulations,
licenses, certificates or other authorizations, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
A. Continuing existing uses, buildings and structures.
(1) Except as otherwise provided herein, the lawfully permitted use of
lands or buildings and the lawfully permitted existence of buildings
or structures at the time of the adoption of this Zoning Law may be
continued although such use, building or structure does not
conform to the standards specified in this Zoning Law for the
district in which such lands, buildings or structures are located.
Similarly, except as otherwise provided herein, whenever a zoning
classification or the restrictions affecting property within a district
shall be changed hereafter so as to render nonconforming a use,
150. Editor's Note: See Ch. 239, Subdivision of Land.
151. Editor's Note: See Ch. 228, Site Plan Regulations.
152. Editor's Note: See Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 266-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-14
1:517
building or structure then presently or theretofore lawfully
existing, such use, building or structure may nevertheless continue
subject to the conditions set forth below. Said use shall be deemed
nonconforming, and said buildings and structures shall be deemed
to possess noncomplying bulk.
(2) Any use lawfully in existence as of the effective date of this Zoning
Law which is by this Zoning Law made a special permit use in the
district in which it is located shall be presumed to have a special
permit to the extent such use is legally conforming as of the date
immediately prior to the effective date of this Zoning Law. Any
further extension of such use shall require approval as an
amendment to the special permit.
B. Nonconforming use of land, buildings or structures.
(1) Except as otherwise provided herein, the nonconforming use of
land may be continued; provided, however, that no such
nonconforming use shall be physically enlarged or intensified, nor
shall it be extended to occupy a greater area of land than that
occupied by such use at the time of the adoption of this Zoning Law,
unless specifically allowed by other provisions in this Zoning Law,
nor shall any such nonconforming use be moved in whole or in part
to any other portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied by such
nonconforming use at the time of the adoption of this Zoning Law.
(2) A building or structure, the use of which does not conform to the
use regulations for the district in which it is situated, shall not be
enlarged, extended or altered structurally unless the use therein is
changed to a conforming use or to conform to an order of the
Building Inspector to correct an unsafe condition.
(3) No nonconforming use of a building or structure shall be enlarged
or extended.
(4) No nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming
use, except as provided in § 266-14E of this Zoning Law.
(5) If a nonconforming use ceases operation for any reason for six
continuous months during any twelve-month period or is changed
to a conforming use for any period of time, any future use of the
land, building or structure shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this Zoning Law. Substantial cessation of activities
consistent with or required for the operation of such
nonconforming use or substantial vacancy of the building or
structure in which the nonconforming use was conducted, together
with substantial cessation of activities consistent with or required
for the operation of such nonconforming use, shall be deemed to
constitute a discontinuance thereof within the meaning of this
Zoning Law, irrespective of whether an intention to abandon the
nonconforming use may exist.
§ 266-14 SUFFERN CODE § 266-14
1:518
(6) If any building or structure in which any nonconforming use is
conducted or maintained is hereafter removed, the subsequent use
of the land on which such building or structure was located and the
subsequent use of any building or structure thereon shall be in
conformity with the standards specified by this Zoning Law for the
district in which such land is located.
C. Noncomplying bulk. A building or structure that is conforming in use
but does not comply with the lot dimension, yard dimension, height,
building coverage, off-street parking, loading or similar bulk
requirements of this Zoning Law shall be deemed to possess
noncomplying bulk. No permit shall be issued that will result in the
increase of any such noncompliance, but any building or structure or
portion thereof may be altered to decrease its noncomplying bulk.
D. Reconstruction.
(1) Should a building or structure, the use of which or the use of a
portion of which is nonconforming or which possesses
noncomplying bulk, be destroyed or damaged by any means to an
extent of 50% or more of the replacement cost of the building or
structure used in connection therewith at the time of the
reconstruction, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or used
except in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Law.
(2) Should a building or structure, the use of which or the use of a
portion of which is nonconforming or which possesses
noncomplying bulk, be destroyed or damaged to an extent of 50%
or less of the replacement cost of the building or structure,
exclusive of and and foundation, used in connection therewith at
the time of the reconstruction, it may be reconstructed and any
accompanying nonconforming use continued, provided that the
reconstruction is commenced within one year of the date of such
damage, and further provided that it shall be reconstructed in
accordance with a plan approved by the Planning Board, where the
Planning Board has original jurisdiction, so as to result, where
reasonable, in greater conformity with this Zoning Law.
E. Change to other nonconforming use. On application, any
nonconforming use of land, buildings or structures may be changed to
another nonconforming use, upon approval by the Board of Appeals,
based upon a finding that the proposed use is more appropriate to the
district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such
change, the Board of Appeals may impose whatever conditions and
safeguards it may deem necessary or appropriate, including site plan
approval by the Planning Board to further the purposes of this Zoning
Law.
F. Improvement of nonconforming uses. In order that nonconforming uses
may gradually be brought into greater conformity with this Zoning Law
and the adverse external effects of such nonconforming uses may be
§ 266-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-14
1:519
reduced, the owner of the land, building or structure so used may be
permitted to make limited changes to such building, structure or use
in conjunction with a site plan approval whereby, through landscaped
screening and buffer areas, control of noise, smoke, odors, lighting,
architectural changes, location and layout of parking areas and access
drives or by any other appropriate means, these purposes may be
achieved. An application for approval for such plan shall be made to
the Planning Board which may then grant approval or approval with
modifications, provided that they find that the purposes of this section
shall be met.
G. Residential uses in the PO-15 District.
(1) As-of-right residential uses lawfully existing at the date of adoption
of this section of the Zoning Law in the PO-15 District are deemed
to be permitted as-of-right.
(2) Extension or enlargement. To the extent that the district bulk
regulations permit, on application to and with the approval of the
Board of Appeals, a nonconforming, lawfully preexisting,
residential use may be extended up to, but not exceeding, a fiftypercent
increase in its floor area. However, it may not be extended
for the purposes of accommodating an additional family.
H. Prohibited uses. The uses listed below are prohibited in the Village of
Suffern and for which the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not grant use
variances.
(1) Manufacturing uses involving primary production of the following
products from raw materials:
(a) Asphalt, cement, charcoal and fuel briquettes.
(b) Chemicals: aniline dyes, ammonia, carbide, caustic soda,
cellulose, chlorine, carbon black and bone black, creosote,
hydrogen and oxygen, industrial alcohol, nitrates
(manufactured and natural) of an explosive nature, potash,
plastic materials and synthetic resins, pyroxylin, rayon yarn
and hydrochloric, nitric, phosphoric, picric and sulfuric acids.
(c) Coal, coke and tar products, including gas manufacturing;
explosives; fertilizers; gelatin, glue and size, animal.
(d) Linoleum and oilcloth; matches; paints, varnishes and
turpentine.
(e) Rubber (natural or synthetic); soaps, including fat rendering;
starch.
(2) The following processes: nitrating of cotton or other materials;
milling or processing of flour, feed or grain; magnesium foundry;
reduction, refining, smelting and alloying of metal or metal ores;
refining secondary aluminum; refining petroleum products, such as
§ 266-14 SUFFERN CODE § 266-14
1:520
§ 266-15. Miscellaneous regulations.
gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, lubricating oil, distillation of wood or
bones; reduction and processing of wood pulp and fiber, including
paper mill operations.
(3) Operations involving stockyards and slaughterhouses, grain
elevators, slag piles and keeping, breeding and raising of livestock
for commercial purposes.
(4) Bulk or wholesale storage of gasoline aboveground and the storage
of explosives, except under license from the State of New York and
in a manner and place conforming to the laws of the State of New
York and the American Table of Distances, and provided that no
more than 50,000 pounds is stored in any one magazine.
(5) Dumps and junkyards, except those owned and operated by the
Village.
(6) Incineration of waste materials, except in plants owned and
operated by the Village.
(7) Any other use, whether specified above or not, that is of such a
nature as to be detrimental to neighboring properties by reason of
emission of odor, dust, refuse matter, garbage, smoke, vibration,
gas, noise, radioactivity, electromagnetic emission or any other
factor that is dangerous to the comfort, peace, enjoyment, health
and safety of the area and the community.
(8) Water towers or water tanks, except those owned and operated by
the Village or unless they are accessory to a principal industrial or
laboratory office use in a PLI or M District.
(9) Heliports or aircraft landing and takeoff facilities of any
description, excepting helipads as provided in this Zoning Law. This
prohibition also applies to the use of any open land or water body
whether or not improved for such use.
A. Lot for every building. Every building hereafter erected shall be located
on a lot and there shall be no more than one main building and its
accessory buildings on one lot, except for multifamily and
nonresidential buildings in districts where such uses are permitted.
Where more than one principal building is permitted on the same lot, a
principal building shall be separated from other principal buildings by a
minimum distance of 15 feet or a distance equal to the height of the
shorter. All buildings, whether principal or accessory, permanent or
temporary, on the same lot shall be separated by a minimum distance of
10 feet.
B. Subdivision of a lot. In the event of a subdivision of a lot containing an
existing building, both the existing building and any proposed buildings
shall conform to the requirements of this Zoning Law.
§ 266-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-15
1:521
C. Irregularly shaped lots. Where a question exists as to the proper
application of any of the requirements of this Zoning Law to a particular
lot because of its peculiar or irregular shape, the Board of Appeals shall
determine how the requirements of this Zoning Law apply as provided
in § 266-54E of this Zoning Law.
D. Obstructions to vision at intersections in residential districts. At the
intersection of two or more streets in a residential district, no fence,
wall, structure, shrubbery or other obstruction shall be erected or
placed on any part of that area that would obscure a clear sight line
within the triangular area formed by the designated street line and a
straight line between two points, each a minimum of 25 feet back from
the intersection of the designated street line prolonged. In the event
there is no designated street line, the right-of-way line shall be used.
E. New buildings on lots smaller than minimum required area. A permit
may be issued for the erection of a building for a permitted use on a lot
for which a valid conveyance has been recorded prior to the adoption of
this Zoning Law, notwithstanding that the area or dimensions of such
lot are less than that required for the district in which such lot is
located, provided that:
(1) The lot met the requirements of the prior Zoning Law and
Subdivision Regulations153 at the time the deed to the lot was
recorded or the title to the lot was conveyed.
(2) All yard setbacks and other building related requirements which
are in effect at the time of the obtaining of the building permit are
complied with.
(3) The ownership of such lot was not the same as any other lot or lots
contiguous thereto at the time of the adoption of this Zoning Law or
any predecessor thereto which occasioned the substandard
condition. If the opposite is the case, such other lot or lots, or so
much thereof as may be necessary, shall be combined with the firstnamed
lot to make one or more conforming lots.
(4) Where the required area or dimensions of lots are changed by an
amendment to this Zoning Law, any lot legally in existence on that
date not in contiguous ownership and made nonconforming by such
amendment may be built upon as provided in this section.
F. Yard for every building. No yard or other open space provided for any
building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Zoning
Law shall be included as any part of the yard or open space for any
other building. No yard or any other open space on one lot shall be
considered as a yard or open space for a building or any other lot.
G. Use of yards. [Amended 7-21-2003 by L.L. No. 6-2003]
153. Editor's Note: See Ch. 239, Subdivision of Land.
§ 266-15 SUFFERN CODE § 266-15
1:522
(1) A single-family or two-family dwelling in any district may have up to
two accessory structures within any required side or rear yard,
provided that no such structures are of the same type or use; such
structures do not contain facilities for water supply or sewage
disposal; and otherwise are not to be utilized as a dwelling, and
provided: [Amended 9-12-2016 by L.L. No. 8-2016]
(a) Each accessory structure may not exceed 10 feet in median
height; median height shall be measured from the ground to
the midpoint between the top plate of the wall to the highest
peak of the roof;
(b) Each accessory structure must be set back at least five feet
from any side or rear property line; and
(c) The floor area of each accessory structure shall be not more
than 100 square feet.
(2) Accessory parking in residential districts. In all residential
districts, off-street parking shall be set back five feet from the side
and rear lot lines. Off-street parking shall not be permitted within
the front yard, except as follows:
(a) Where a lot is used for a single-family or two-family dwelling,
off-street parking may be permitted in the front yard only
within a paved driveway. Within the front yard, no driveway
shall exceed 10 feet in width. Where a driveway gives access to
a garage opening(s) located within the front facade of a
dwelling, the driveway width may exceed 10 feet, but shall not
exceed the width of the garage opening(s) plus one foot on
either side of the garage opening(s), or 25 feet, whichever is
less. For purposes of these regulations, the front facade is any
portion of the exterior wall of the dwelling opposite to and
facing the front lot line.
(3) Accessory parking in nonresidential districts. In any nonresidential
district except the PL1 District, required off-street parking spaces
may be located within a required side or rear yard.
(4) Accessory loading. Except in the PL1 District, off-street loading
spaces may be located within a required side or rear yard, provided
such spaces do not block access to required off-street parking areas
or required parking spaces.
H. Yards on corner and flag lots.
(1) On a corner lot, each lot line which abuts a street shall be deemed
to be a front lot line and the required yard along both lot frontages
shall be a required front yard. The owner shall elect, and so
designate on a site plan, which of the remaining two required yards
shall be the required side yard and which shall be the required rear
yard.
§ 266-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-15
1:523
(2) On a flag lot, the area and dimensions of the pole portion of the lot
shall not be used in satisfying any standards contained in the bulk
requirements for the district in which the lot is or will be located.
All yard and setback requirements shall be satisfied on the flag
portion of the lot.
I. Structural projections permitted into required yards.
(1) Walls and fences may be allowed in required yards, subject to the
requirements of § 266-15K of this Zoning Law.
(2) An arbor, open trellis, flagpole, unroofed first floor steps or
unroofed terrace shall be permitted in any required yard.
(3) A retractable awning or movable canopy may project not more than
10 feet into any required yard. All other types of awning are
prohibited.
(4) Cornices or eaves may project not more than 18 inches into a
required yard.
(5) Window sills or belt courses may project not more than six inches
into a required yard.
(6) An open fire escape may project not more than six feet into a
required rear yard, but shall not project into any front or side yard.
J. Exceptions to height limitations. The height limitations of this Zoning
Law shall not apply to:
(1) Church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments, observation
towers, chimneys, smoke stacks, derricks, flagpoles, radio towers,
masts and aerials, where such structures do not extend more than
15 feet above the roof of the building to which they are attached or
above the highest roof on the lot where such structure is
freestanding.
(2) Rooftop bulkheads, elevator penthouses, water towers, water
tanks, monitors, fire towers, hose tower, cooling towers or solar
energy collectors, provided that such features shall not extend
more than 15 feet above the roof and the total area covered by such
features shall not exceed 20% of the horizontal area of the roof on
which they are located. Said features shall be concentrated in the
same general location of the rooftop to the maximum extent
practicable and shall be screened by a wall. Where the lot on which
they are located is in or adjacent to a residence district, rooftop
features shall be set back from the edge of the roof at least one foot
for each one foot by which such features exceed the maximum
height otherwise specified for the district in which they are located.
K. Fences and walls. Fences and walls, including retaining walls, are
permitted within required yards, provided that:
§ 266-15 SUFFERN CODE § 266-15
1:524
(1) Such fences or walls do not exceed four feet in height if located in a
required front yard and six feet in height in any other required
yard, except that a fence of not less than 3/4 open construction may
have a maximum height of eight feet where located in a
nonresidential district.
(2) The fence or wall meets the requirements of § 266-15D of this
Zoning Law.
(3) If any such fence or wall located within a required yard has only
one finished or more attractive side, such side shall face the
neighboring property or street.
(4) Electrically charged fences, barbed wire, razor wire or cut steel
fences and other fences constructed of sharp materials are not
permitted within residential areas. Barbed wire or cut steel is
permitted as a part of a fence in a nonresidential area, provided
that such barbed wire or cut steel is located at least eight feet
above the ground.
L. Outdoor storage. Except where otherwise specifically permitted, no
outdoor storage of any kind or outdoor display of goods for sale shall be
permitted in any district.
M. Solar access and energy considerations.
(1) Solar energy systems, which are devices used to capture the sun's
radiation and transform it into usable heat or electricity, are
permitted as a part of and may be attached to any building.
(2) Installation of solar energy systems shall require the issuance of a
building permit.
(3) Access to sunlight for present and potential solar energy systems,
both on and off site, as well as building siting, orientation and
landscaping, shall be considered by all approving agencies as a
part of their review of any application.
N. Development constraints. In order to limit construction in areas with
developmental limitations, the following requirements shall apply in all
zoning districts: [Amended 9-25-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
(1) Utility rights-of-way and designated streets. Not more than 50% of
any land within easements or rights-of-way for overhead utilities or
within a designated street line shall be counted as part of any
minimum lot area requirement. No buildings, structure, yard or
land proposed for prolonged habitual human occupancy shall be
located within the easement; however, a road may traverse the
easement.
(2) Land under water (applicable prior to development). Not more than
50% of the area of that portion of a lot that is proposed to be
disturbed may be counted as part of any lot area if subject to the
§ 266-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-15
1:525
following: ponds; freshwater wetlands regulated by the Army Corps
of Engineers; streams under the jurisdiction of the Rockland
County Drainage Agency; areas within the Federal Emergency
Management Agency designated one-hundred-year floodplain; that
portion of any freshwater wetland and any one-hundred-foot
control area designated by the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation. No buildings or structures may be
located in such areas.
(3) Steep slopes (applicable prior to development).
(a) Not more than 50% of the land area of that portion of each lot
that is proposed to be disturbed may be counted as part of any
lot area if subject to the following:
[1] For residentially zoned properties, slopes over 30%.
[2] For nonresidentially zoned properties, slopes over 20%.
(b) No construction shall be permitted on that portion of a lot with
a slope in excess of the foregoing.
(c) No portion of the land area of that portion of a lot with a slope
in excess of 50% may be counted as part of the minimum lot
area of a parcel.
(4) Rock outcrops (applicable prior to development). Not more than
50% of the area of that portion of a lot that is proposed to be
disturbed with rock outcrops in excess of 50 square feet may be
counted as part of the lot area of a parcel. No buildings or
structures may be located thereon.
O. Tents. [Added 7-21-2003 by L.L. No. 5-2003]
(1) Tents accessory to residential uses. No tent shall be erected, used,
or maintained on a lot for any purpose other than a small tent
customarily and temporarily used for recreational purposes, e.g.,
outdoor camping, and in conjunction with a single- or two-family
dwelling on the same lot. A tent shall not exceed 144 square feet of
gross floor area. Recreational tents shall meet the same yard
requirements as accessory buildings.
(2) Event tents. Notwithstanding the above, the temporary use of tents
for community, religious, charitable, amusement or recreational
purposes shall be permitted on a temporary basis. In no event shall
a temporary tent for said events be erected for a period of time that
exceeds 14 calendar days.
(3) Tents prohibited. Nothing herein shall permit the erection of a tent
garage on any lot in the Village of Suffern. Any tent erected for a
period of time that exceeds 14 calendar days shall be deemed to be
a tent garage and shall be prohibited.
§ 266-15 SUFFERN CODE § 266-15
1:526
P. Temporary storage containers. [Added 1-7-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
(1) Temporary storage containers shall be permitted under the
provisions of this section. Not more than one container shall be
allowed per residential lot. Containers shall not exceed 128 square
feet and eight feet in height. The temporary storage container must
be a minimum of five feet from any side or rear yard property line;
in no instance shall the container be placed in a required front
yard, unless in a permitted driveway, nor shall it be placed in a
public right-of-way or easement.
(2) A permit is required from the Building Inspector for the placement
of a temporary storage container after being in place for a total of
more than 14 days in any 180-day period. The permit shall
authorize such container to remain for a period not to exceed 30
days thereafter.
(3) Upon application made within five days of the expiration of the
permit specified in Subsection P(2), the Building Inspector may
grant a permit to extend the initial thirty-day time period for an
additional 180 days, provided the applicant has a valid and existing
building permit for construction activities at the property, or
applies for such a building permit simultaneously with the
application for an extension.
(4) No permit shall be issued for another temporary storage container
for the same residential lot until two years from the issuance of a
previously issued permit, except if the ownership of the lot
changes.
(5) The permit must be displayed in a conspicuous place on the
temporary portable storage container.
(6) Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section by failing
to obtain a permit and/or by placing or permitting any container to
be situated on a residential lot in violation of this section, including
providers of such containers, or in violation of an issued permit
shall be considered to be in violation of the Zoning Code, subject to
penalty as per § 266-15 of the Zoning Code, in addition to
revocation of the permit, if applicable. The fee for the permit for
the temporary storage container shall be established as per Village
Board resolution.
Q. Dumpsters. [Added 1-7-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
(1) Dumpsters shall be permitted under the provisions of this section.
Not more than one dumpster shall be allowed per one- or twofamily
residential lot. Dumpsters shall not have capacity greater
than 30 yards. The dumpster must be a minimum of five feet from
any side or rear yard property line; in no instance shall the
dumpster be placed in a required front yard, unless in a permitted
driveway, nor shall it be placed in a public right-of-way or
§ 266-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-15
1:527
§ 266-16. Performance standards.
easement. Dumpsters must be properly maintained and emptied
or replaced when capacity has been reached. Dumpsters may only
be used for disposal purposes, and not for storage of materials or
property.
(2) A permit is required from the Building Inspector for the placement
of any dumpster whose capacity is two yards or greater, after being
in place for more than 14 days in any 180-day period. The permit
shall authorize such dumpster to remain for a period not to exceed
90 days thereafter.
(3) No permit as set forth in this section shall be required for
placement of a dumpster on a one- or two-family residential lot
provided the dumpster is placed and used in accordance with a
properly issued and active building permit that has been issued by
the Building Inspector for construction or demolition activities at
the property at which the dumpster is located, and in accordance
with the requirements of Subsection Q(1) hereof. The Building
Inspector may order removal of a dumpster as provided for in this
section if the work permitted to be conducted pursuant to the
building permit is not ongoing or otherwise in violation of the
building permit.
(4) No permit shall be issued for another dumpster for the same
residential lot until two years from the issuance of a previously
issued permit, except if the ownership of the lot changes.
(5) The permit must be displayed in a conspicuous place on the
dumpster.
(6) Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section by failing
to obtain a permit and/or placing or permitting any dumpster to be
situated on a residential lot in violation of this section, including
providers of such dumpsters, or in violation of an issued permit,
shall be considered to be in violation of the Zoning Code and
subject to penalty as per § 266-15 of the Zoning Code, in addition to
revocation of the permit, if applicable. The fee for the permit for
the dumpster shall be established as per Village Board resolution.
A. Conformance required. No special permit use or nonresidential use
shall hereafter be established, altered, moved or expanded unless it
complies with the performance standards set forth in this section.
Continued conformance with such standards shall be a requirement for
the continuance of any certificate of occupancy or certificate of use.
Central utility systems serving three or more dwelling units, including,
but not limited to, systems providing heat, water, air-conditioning,
sewage treatment, garbage collection and electrical power, shall be
deemed to be nonresidential uses for the purposes of this section.
§ 266-15 SUFFERN CODE § 266-16
1:528
B. Purposes. Consistent with the general purposes of this Zoning Law,
performance standards shall set specific controls on potentially
objectionable external aspects of nonresidential uses so as to:
(1) Reduce to a reasonable minimum the dissemination of smoke, gas,
dust, odor or other atmospheric pollutants outside the building in
which the use is conducted.
(2) Prevent the discharge of untreated or insufficiently treated wastes
into any watercourse.
(3) Prevent the dissemination of vibration, heat, noise or
electromagnetic interference beyond the immediate site on which
the use is located.
(4) Prevent physical hazard by reason of fire, explosion, radiation or
any similar cause.
C. Standards for noise.
(1) Method of measurement. For the purpose of measuring the
intensity and frequencies of sound, sound level meters and octave
band filters shall be employed. Octave band analyzers calibrated
with pre-1960 octave bands (American Standards Association
Z24.10-1953, Octave Band Filter Set) shall be used. Sounds of
short duration, which cannot be measured accurately with the
sound level meter, shall be measured with an impact noise filter in
order to determine the peak value of the impact.
(2) Maximum permitted sound pressure level. The decibels resulting
from any activity, whether open or enclosed, shall not exceed at any
point, on or beyond any lot line, the maximum decibel level for the
designated octave band as set forth in the following table, except
that where the lot lies within 200 feet of a residence district,
whether within or without the Village, the maximum permitted
decibel level at any point on or beyond the district boundary shall
be reduced by six decibels from the maximum permitted level set
forth in the table, and further, except that such reduction shall also
apply to any sound emitted between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m., and between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekends and
holidays.
Octave Band
(cycles per second)
Sound Pressure Level
(decibels)
0 — 74 66
75 — 149 58
150 — 299 55
300 — 599 50
600 — 1,199 45
§ 266-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-16
1:529
Octave Band
(cycles per second)
Sound Pressure Level
(decibels)
1,200 — 2,399 42
2,400 — 4,799 38
4,800 — 20,000 35
(3) Exemptions: The following uses and activities shall be exempt from
the noise level regulations:
(a) Noises not directly under the control of the property user.
(b) Noises emanating from construction and maintenance
activities between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays.
(c) The noises of safety signals, warning devices, emergency
pressure relief valves or other emergency warning signals.
(d) Transient noises of moving sources, such as automobiles,
trucks, airplanes and railroads.
D. Standards for vibration.
(1) Method of measurement. For the purpose of measuring vibration, a
two-component measuring system approved by the Village
Engineer shall be employed.
(2) Maximum permitted steady state and impact vibration
displacement. No activity shall cause or create a steady state or
impact vibration on any lot line with a vibration displacement by
frequency bands in excess of that indicated in the following table:
Vibration Displacement
(in inches)
Frequency
(cycles per
second) Steady-State Impact
Under 10 0.0005 0.0010
10 — 19 0.0004 0.0008
20 — 29 0.0003 0.0006
30 — 39 0.0002 0.0004
40 and over 0.0001 0.0002
E. Standards for smoke, dust and other atmospheric pollutants.
(1) General control. The emission of smoke and other particulate
matter shall not be permitted, regardless of quantity, if it will be in
§ 266-16 SUFFERN CODE § 266-16
1:530
any way detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare or comfort
or a source of damage to property.
(2) Method of measurement of smoke. For the purpose of grading the
density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart shall be used to
determine the total smoke units emitted. A reading shall be taken
every minute for an hour. Each reading shall be multiplied by the
number of minutes during which it was observed and the product
added.
(3) Maximum permitted emission of smoke. There shall be no
measurable emission of smoke, gas or other atmospheric pollutant.
The emission of one smoke unit per hour and smoke with
discernible density of Number 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart
shall be prohibited.
(4) Maximum permitted emission of dust. No emission of fly ash, dust,
fumes, vapors, gases and other forms of air pollution shall be
permitted which can cause any damage to health, to animals or
vegetation or to other forms of property or which can cause any
excessive soiling of any paint; and in no event shall any emission of
any solid or liquid particles in concentrations exceeding 0.3 grain
per cubic foot of the conveying gas or air at any point be permitted.
For measurement of the amount of gases resulting from
combustion, standard corrections shall be applied to a stack
temperature of 500° F. and 50% excess air.
F. Standards for odorous matter. No land use shall be permitted which
results in the creation of odors discernible beyond the lot line which are
of such intensity and character as to be detrimental to the health and
safety of the public or which interfere unreasonably with the comfort of
the public.
G. Standards for toxic matter. No use shall be permitted which will cause
any dissemination whatsoever of toxic or noxious matter beyond the lot
on which the use is conducted or impregnate the soil to a depth of more
than three inches. For the purpose of this section, "toxic or noxious
matter" is defined as any solid, liquid or gaseous matter, including, but
not limited to, gases, vapors, dusts, fumes and mists containing
properties which by chemical means are:
(1) Inherently harmful and likely to destroy life or impair health; or
(2) Likely to cause injury to the well-being of persons or damage to
property.
H. Standards for radiation and electromagnetic interference.
(1) Radiation. The handling, storage or disposal of radioactive
materials or waste by-products, whether or not licensed by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, shall be conducted only in
accordance with the standards established in Title 10, Chapter 1,
§ 266-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-16
1:531
Part 20, Code of Federal Regulations, Standards for Protection
Against Radiation, as amended, and in accordance with any other
applicable laws or regulations.
(2) Electromagnetic interference. No operation shall be permitted
which produces any perceptible electromagnetic interference with
normal radio or television reception in any area within or without
the Village.
I. Standards for fire, explosive hazard and heat.
(1) Fire and explosive hazard. The storage or manufacture of solid
materials or solid products which burn actively, which have a low
ignition temperature, which have a high rate of burning or which
create great heat under ordinary temperature conditions shall be
subject to the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code. The storage or manufacture of explosives is
prohibited.
(2) Heat. There shall be no emission of heat which would cause a
temperature increase in excess of 1° F. along any lot line, whether
such change is in the air, in the ground or in any watercourse or
water body.
J. Standards for liquid or solid wastes. The discharge of any or all wastes
shall be permitted only if in complete accordance with all standards,
laws and regulations of the Rockland County Health Department, New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, Village of
Suffern or any other regulatory agency having jurisdiction. Facilities for
the storage of solid waste shall be so located and designed as to be
screened from the street or from any adjoining property and so as to
prevent the breeding of rodents or insects.
K. Procedure.
(1) In the case of any application for the establishment of a use subject
to the performance standards, the approving authority may require
the applicant, at its own expense, to provide such evidence as it
deems necessary to determine whether the proposed use will
conform to said standards.
(2) If the approving authority deems it necessary, expert advice may be
obtained, with the cost of such advice paid for in advance by the
applicant as a condition of further consideration of its application.
The report of any expert consultants shall be furnished to the
applicant.
(3) During the review of site plans, special permits, building permits or
appeals before the Zoning Board of Appeals, the approving
authority will determine if the applicant's proposal will conform to
the performance standards.
§ 266-16 SUFFERN CODE § 266-17
1:532
§ 266-17. Floodplain District.
A. Purposes. The unmanageable use, alteration of topography, excessive
filling, channel encroachment or other acts affect the natural discharge
of water through floodplains and constitute a threat to the health,
safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Village of Suffern and to the
economic vitality of the community. The purpose of the Floodplain
District is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of
the Village of Suffern from hazards due to periodic flooding. This shall
include the protection of persons and property, the preservation of
water quality and the minimizing of expenditures for personal loss,
property damage, insurance and flood control projects.
B. Restrictions. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill for any
purpose, deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment or
other uses shall be permitted which, acting alone or in combination
with existing or future uses, will adversely affect the efficiency or the
capacity of the floodway or increase flood heights, cause increased
velocities or obstruct or otherwise catch or collect debris which will
obstruct flow under flood conditions.
C. Application to the Planning Board. All uses in the Floodplain District
require the issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board pursuant
to the requirements of Article VI of this Zoning Law. The Planning
Board shall require that the applicant submit a plan certified by a
registered professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are
consistent with the flood protection elevation and associated flood
factors for the particular area. Floodproofing measures may be
required for all buildings and structures, other than those which have a
low flood damage potential. Such measures may include the following
where appropriate:
(1) Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement.
(2) Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressure.
(3) Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters.
(4) Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of water
through walls.
(5) Addition of mass or weight to resist flotation.
(6) Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures.
(7) Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to
prevent the entrance of floodwaters.
(8) Pumping facilities to relieve hydrostatic water pressure on external
walls and basement floors.
(9) Elimination of gravity flow drains.
§ 266-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-17
1:533
(10) Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure
or floating debris.
(11)Raising of structures to or above the necessary flood protection
elevation.
D. Flood fringe development standards. If the Planning Board finds, by
virtue of engineering data supplied to it by the applicant, that the area
lies in the fringe of the floodway, otherwise known as the "flood fringe
area," the Planning Board shall not grant such special permit for any
use permitted in such an area unless it meets the following
requirements in addition to those otherwise applicable to it under this
Zoning Law.
(1) New or replacement water supply systems shall be so designed as
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary waste disposal systems shall be located so as to avoid
impairment of or contamination from the systems during flooding.
(3) Any structure built on pilings shall be constructed with the lowest
floor elevated to at least one foot above the base flood level; or
(4) Any structure built on fill shall be constructed so that the first floor
and basement floor are one foot above the base flood elevation. The
fill shall be at a point no lower than one foot below the regulatory
flood-protection elevation at least 15 feet beyond the limits of any
structure or building erected thereon. However, no use shall be
constructed which will adversely affect the capacity of channels or
floodways of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or
any other drainage facility or system.
E. Floodway development standards. If the Planning Board finds, by virtue
of the engineering data supplied to it by the applicant, that the area lies
in the floodway, the Planning Board shall not grant such special permit
for any use permitted in such an area unless it meets the following
requirements in addition to those in § 266-17D of this Zoning Law and
those otherwise applicable to it under this Zoning Law.
(1) Structures shall not be used for human habitation.
(2) All structures shall have a low flood damage potential, shall be
constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of floodwater (i.e., longitudinal
axis parallel to the direction of flood flow and approximately on the
same flow lines as those adjoining structures).
(3) Structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
particularly where damage may result to other structures, or
restrictions created at bridge openings and other narrowing of
streams or rivers.
§ 266-17 SUFFERN CODE § 266-17
1:534
§ 266-18. Critical Environmental Area Overlay District. [Added
11-10-2005 by L.L. No. 8-2005]
(4) Service facilities, such as electrical or heating equipment, shall be
constructed at or above the flood protection elevation for the
particular area or shall be floodproofed. Absolute measures will be
required to prevent explosion potential (boilers) or contamination
of floodwaters by toxic chemicals.
F. Authorization to grant or deny special uses. The special permit uses
listed for this district may be permitted, enlarged or otherwise altered
upon authorization by the Planning Board in accordance with the
standards and protections set forth in this section and such additional
standards as may be set forth for such special uses elsewhere in this
Zoning Law. In permitting a special use or the modification of a special
use, the Planning Board may impose, in addition to those standards and
requirements expressly specified by the Zoning Law, any additional
conditions which the Planning Board considers necessary to protect the
best interests of the surrounding property, the neighborhood and the
Village as a whole. These conditions may include controlling the
location and number of vehicle access points, limiting the number, size
and location of signs and requiring diking, fencing, screening,
landscaping or other facilities to protect adjacent or nearby property.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Critical Environmental Area Overlay
District is to provide an additional measure of review of development
proposals on those remaining undeveloped and underdeveloped lands
with sensitive environmental features, and to encourage flexibility in
layout to best protect sensitive environmental features and to minimize
adverse environmental impacts on neighboring properties or the
Village as a whole.
B. Objectives.
(1) To retain areas adjacent to locations subject to frequent flooding
and floodplains in their natural state to the maximum extent
possible, to preserve water quality, to protect water retention
capabilities, and to facilitate recharge of the water table.
(2) To protect areas generally recognized for vegetative features or
ecological communities, including natural vegetation along lakes,
rivers, floodplains, wetlands and streams, woodlands and stands of
trees.
(3) To protect and enhance scenic resources, including landscapes,
woodlands, meadows, and other environmental features that have a
special scenic character or an historic or aesthetic interest or
value.
§ 266-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-18
1:535
(4) To connect open spaces with each other to the greatest extent
possible to allow for the preservation of habitat and other
environmental features.
(5) To help protect uses that may be dissimilar from one another by
providing wooded buffers to reduce visual and sound impacts and
to allow for increased levels of privacy, particularly for residences
adjacent to public or nonresidential uses.
C. Application to the Board of Trustees. All uses in the Critical
Environmental Area Overlay District require the issuance of a special
permit by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the requirements of Article
VI of this Zoning Law. The Board of Trustees shall consider the
following standards in reviewing applications, but shall not be limited
to these standards, and may consider any factor related to the health,
safety or general welfare of the residents of the Village of Suffern and, if
appropriate, neighboring communities.
(1) The cluster technique shall be considered for all properties shown
on the Critical Environmental Area Map adopted as part of the
Zoning Law.
(2) The Planning Board must obtain authorization from the Board of
Trustees for each application for development in the Critical
Environmental Area Overlay District if cluster zoning is to be
employed.
(3) The Planning Board or Board of Trustees may require the use of the
cluster technique for a particular application based on a statement
of the objectives sought to be achieved.
(4) Areas of utility rights-of-way and designated streets, land under
water, steep slopes, wetlands and any required control areas,
streams, and rock outcrops shall be excluded from the land areas
used for development in the calculation of permitted densities for
construction notwithstanding the fifty-percent provision in
§ 266-15N of the Village Code.
D. Authorization to grant or deny special uses. The special permit uses
listed for this district may be permitted, enlarged or otherwise altered
upon authorization by the Board of Trustees in accordance with the
standards and protections set forth in this section and such additional
standards as may be set forth for such special uses elsewhere in this
Zoning Law. In permitting a special permit use or the modification of a
special use, the Board of Trustees may impose, in addition to those
standards and requirements expressly specified by the Zoning Law, any
additional conditions which the Board of Trustees considers necessary
to protect the best interests of the surrounding property, the
neighborhood and the Village as a whole. These conditions may include,
but are not limited to, controlling the location and number of vehicle
access points, limiting the amount of site disturbance, the amount of
impervious surface or other measures to protect adjacent or nearby
§ 266-18 SUFFERN CODE § 266-18
1:536
§ 266-19. Landmarks and historic districts.
property. The Board of Trustees shall refer any application for a special
permit for development in the Critical Environmental Area Overlay
District to the Planning Board for its review and recommendation prior
to holding a public hearing on the application.
E. Bulk requirements. Except as herein noted, the bulk requirements for
the underlying district shall apply, but may be amended by the Planning
Board when the cluster provision is applied, in which case the site plan
or subdivision plat shall bear the conventional and cluster bulk
requirements.
A. Purpose. It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the
protection, enhancement and perpetuation of landmarks and historic
districts is necessary to promote the economic, cultural, educational
and general welfare of the public. Inasmuch as the identity of a people
is founded on its past and inasmuch as the Village of Suffern has many
significant historic, architectural and cultural resources which
constitute its heritage, this section is intended to:
(1) Protect and enhance the landmarks and historic districts which
represent distinctive elements of the Village of Suffern's historic,
architectural and cultural heritage.
(2) Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past.
(3) Protect and enhance the Village of Suffern's attractions to visitors
and thereby support and stimulate the local economy.
(4) Ensure the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and
development of the Village.
B. Administrative entity. In order to effectuate the purposes declared in
this section, the Planning Board shall be charged with the review and
recommendation of sites for designation as landmarks and historic
districts and shall review all plans for the moving, exterior construction,
alterations or repair, landscaping or demolition of places, sites,
structures or buildings designated as landmarks and all places, sites,
structures or buildings wholly or partly contained within the boundaries
of the historic district.
C. Procedures for designation of landmarks and historic districts.
(1) Any person may request the designation of a landmark or historic
district by submitting to the Planning Board an application for such
designation on a form furnished by the Planning Board. The
Planning Board, in addition, may, on its own motion, initiate
proceedings for the designation of a landmark, landmark site or
historic district. In the case of a request for historic district
designation, the application must be agreed to and signed by at
least 2/3 of the property owners within the proposed district.
§ 266-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-19
1:537
(2) In the event the Planning Board decides to entertain an application
for designation, notice that such designation is being entertained
shall be given by the Planning Board to the owner or owners of the
parcel or parcels on which the proposed landmark or historic
district is situated. Notice shall also be given to the owners of all
property within 200 feet of the exterior boundary lines of the
subject parcel or proposed district. Said owner or owners shall
have the right to confer with the Planning Board prior to final
action by the Planning Board on the application.
(3) The Planning Board shall either recommend approval or
disapproval of an application within 30 days after the receipt of a
completed application. The recommendation may limit itself to the
proposed historic district or landmark as described in the
application or may include modifications thereof.
(4) If the Planning Board recommends disapproval of the application,
the proceedings with regard to the proposed historic district or
landmark shall terminate. The Planning Board shall make its
recommendation within 30 days. An application that has been
denied shall not be resubmitted for a period of one year from the
date of initial filing. The Planning Board's decision shall be mailed
by the Village Clerk to the owners of the subject property and the
Village Board.
(5) The Village Board shall hold a public hearing on all applications for
designation that are recommended for approval by the Planning
Board. Such hearing shall occur within 60 days of the
recommendation of the Planning Board. Such hearing shall be
advertised in accordance with the provisions of § 266-27D of this
Zoning Law. The owner or owners of all property within 200 feet of
the exterior boundary lines of the subject parcel or parcels or
historic district shall be notified in accordance with the provisions
contained in § 266-27D.
(6) The Village Board shall act to approve or disapprove the
designation within 60 days from the close of the public hearing and
receipt of all supporting documentation. Any designation action
shall be preceded by the fulfillment of the requirements of SEQRA.
(7) The Building Inspector, the Planning Board and the owner or
owners of the subject property shall be notified of the decision of
the Village Board, in writing, by the Village Clerk. If the Village
Board approves a designation, the Village Clerk shall also notify the
Tax Assessor of the Town of Ramapo.
D. Criteria for judging the creation of historic districts, designation of
landmarks and reviewing plans.
(1) An individual property may be designated as a landmark:
§ 266-19 SUFFERN CODE § 266-19
1:538
(a) If it possesses special character or historic or aesthetic interest
or value as part of the cultural, political, economic or social
history of the locality, region, state or nation; or
(b) If it is identified with historic personages; or
(c) If it embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural style; or
(d) If it is the work of a designer whose work has significantly
influenced an age; or
(e) Because of a unique location or singular physical
characteristic, represents an established and familiar visual
feature of the neighborhood.
(2) A group of properties may be designated as an historic district if:
(a) It contains properties which meet one or more of the criteria
for designation of a landmark; or
(b) By reason of possessing such qualities, it constitutes a distinct
section of the Village of Suffern.
E. Regulated activities.
(1) Upon receipt of notice that the Planning Board is considering a
property or building for designation as a landmark or as part of an
historic district, the Building Inspector shall not issue any permit
for the demolition, alteration or improvement of said property or
building for a period of 60 days, commencing upon said notice,
unless, prior to the expiration of said time period, there is a final
determination by the Planning Board that said property or building
has not qualified as a landmark or historic district. If, within said
period, the Planning Board has made a recommendation to the
Village Board to designate the property in question as a landmark
or historic district, no building or demolition permit shall be issued
except pursuant to § 266-19G of this Zoning Law.
(2) The Village Clerk shall be responsible for appropriate public
identification of areas designated as landmarks and historic
districts on the Official Map upon notification that the Village
Board has designated a landmark or historic district. Historic
districts shall be also shown on the Zoning Map.154 The Planning
Board shall approve the size, style, color, typography, material of
construction and wording of all privately owned signs and
identifying landmarks, landmark sites and properties within
historic districts, prior to installation, consistent with the
provisions of this section.
154. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is located in the pocket at the end of this volume.
§ 266-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-19
1:539
(3) No person shall carry out any exterior alteration, restoration,
reconstruction, demolition, new construction or moving of a
landmark or property within an historic district, nor shall any
person make any material change in the appearance of such
property, its light fixtures, signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving or
other exterior elements visible from a public street or alley which
affect the appearance and cohesiveness of the historic district,
without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the
Planning Board.
(4) The Planning Board shall review all plans for the moving, exterior
construction, alterations or repair, landscaping or demolition of a
property or building designated as a landmark or located wholly or
partially within an historic district. It shall be the duty of the
Planning Board to review and approve such plans before the
proposed activity is granted a building permit by the Building
Inspector.
F. Standards for decision.
(1) In passing upon an application for a certificate of appropriateness,
the Planning Board shall not consider changes to interior spaces,
unless they are open to the public, or to architectural features that
are not visible from a public street or alley. The Planning Board's
decision shall be based on the following principles:
(a) Properties which contribute to the character of the historic
district shall be retained, with their historic district features
altered as little as possible.
(b) Any alteration of existing properties shall be compatible with
their historic character, as well as with the surrounding
district.
(c) New construction shall be compatible with the district in which
it is located.
(2) In applying the principle of compatibility, the Planning Board shall
consider the following factors:
(a) The general design, character and appropriateness to the
property of the proposed alteration or new construction.
(b) The scale of the proposed alteration or new construction in
relation to the property itself, surrounding properties and the
neighborhood.
(c) Texture, materials and color and their relation to similar
features of other properties in the neighborhood.
(d) Visual compatibility with surrounding properties, including
proportion of the property's front facade, proportion and
arrangement of windows and other openings within the facade,
§ 266-19 SUFFERN CODE § 266-19
1:540
roof shape and the rhythm of spacing of properties on streets,
including setback.
(e) The importance of historic, architectural or other features to
the significance of the property.
G. Certificate of appropriateness application procedure.
(1) Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate of
appropriateness, the owner shall file an application for such a
certificate with the Planning Board. The application shall contain
the following, unless waived by the Planning Board on the basis of
its nonapplicability to the proposed action:
(a) The name, address, location and telephone number of the
applicant.
(b) Location and photographs of the property.
(c) Elevation drawings of proposed changes.
(d) Perspective drawings, including relationship to adjacent
properties.
(e) Samples of colors or materials to be used.
(f) Where the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing
showing the type of lettering to be used, all dimensions and
colors, a description of the materials to be used, method of
illumination and a plan showing the sign's location on the
property.
(g) Any other information which the Planning Board may deem
necessary in order to visualize the proposed work.
(2) No building permit shall be issued for such proposed work until a
certificate of appropriateness has first been issued by the Planning
Board. The certificate of appropriateness required by this Zoning
Law shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any building permit
that may be required by any other zoning law of the Village of
Suffern.
(3) The Planning Board shall review the application in accordance with
the provisions of this section. In reviewing the plans, the Planning
Board may confer with the applicant or his authorized
representative concerning the application.
(4) The Planning Board shall call a public hearing on said application
within 60 days subsequent to the filing of the application, which
hearing shall be advertised in accordance with the provisions of
§ 266-27D of this Zoning Law.
(5) The Planning Board may call witnesses, including historians,
archaeologists, architects, engineers, planning consultants or other
§ 266-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-19
1:541
experts, and may introduce other evidence at such hearing. In
considering any such application, the Board shall bear in mind the
purpose of this section and shall give consideration to any report of
local historical societies and advice of the Village Historian relating
to the general design, arrangement, architectural style, texture,
material and colors of the building or structures in question, the
location on the plot of ground and the relation of such features
to other buildings, structures, trees or other forms of growth,
landmarks, public or private roads and all other such factors
pertaining to the renovation, installation or conservation of any
building or improvement which would be obviously incongruous
with the historic aspects of the surrounding area.
(6) The Board shall approve, modify and approve or disapprove such
plans within 60 days after receipt of a complete application. The
decision of the Planning Board shall be in writing. A copy shall be
sent to the applicant by registered mail and a copy filed with the
Village Clerk.
(7) The determination of the Planning Board shall set forth the reasons
for such determination. The Planning Board shall give notice of any
such determination to the applicant. Such notice shall include a
copy of such determination. Any such determination may prescribe
conditions under which the proposed work shall be done, in order
to effectuate the purposes of this section, and shall include
recommendations by the Board as to the performance of such work.
The Planning Board shall promptly transmit notice of such
determination to the Building Inspector.
H. Hardship criteria.
(1) An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed
demolition has been denied may apply to the Planning Board for
relief on the ground of hardship. In order to prove the existence of
hardship, the applicant shall establish that:
(a) The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return,
regardless of whether that return represents the most
profitable return possible.
(b) The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by
the current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a
reasonable return.
(c) Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property
and preserving it have failed.
(2) An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed
alteration has been denied may apply for relief on the ground of
hardship. In order to prove the existence of hardship, the applicant
shall establish that the property is incapable of earning a
§ 266-19 SUFFERN CODE § 266-19
1:542
reasonable return, regardless of whether that return represents
the most profitable return possible.
I. Hardship application procedure.
(1) After receiving notification from the Planning Board of the denial of
a certificate of appropriateness, an applicant may commence the
hardship process. No building permit or demolition permit shall be
issued unless the Planning Board makes a determination that a
hardship exists.
(2) The Planning Board may hold a public hearing on the hardship
application at which an opportunity will be provided for proponents
and opponents of the application to present their views.
(3) The applicant shall consult in good faith with the Planning Board,
local preservation groups and interested parties in a diligent effort
to seek an alternative that will result in the preservation of the
property.
(4) All decisions of the Planning Board shall be in writing. A copy shall
be sent to the applicant by registered mail and a copy filed with the
Village Clerk. The Planning Board's decision shall state the reasons
for granting or denying the hardship application.
J. Building permits issued and enforcement.
(1) The Building Inspector shall not grant a building permit until such
time that a certificate of appropriateness or certificate of hardship
has been granted by the Planning Board. In no case shall a permit
be issued prior to site plan approval by the Planning Board.
(2) All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness
issued under this Zoning Law shall conform to any conditions
included therein. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to
inspect periodically any such work to assure compliance. In the
event that work is found that is not being performed in accordance
with the certificate of appropriateness or upon notification of such
fact by the Planning Board, the Building Inspector shall issue a
stop-work order and all work shall immediately cease. No further
work shall be undertaken on the project as long as the stop-work
order is in effect.
K. Maintenance and repair of landmarks, landmarks sites or structures in
historic districts.
(1) Nothing in this Zoning Law shall be construed to prevent ordinary
maintenance or repair with like materials of similar quality and
color of any place, site, structure or building designated as a
landmark or landmark site or any property located wholly or partly
within the boundaries of an historic district.
§ 266-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-19
1:543
§ 266-20. Required front yards and maximum height.
(2) No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as
a landmark or included within an historic district shall permit the
property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the
deterioration of an exterior architectural feature which would, in
the judgment of the Planning Board, produce a detrimental effect
upon the character of the historic district as a whole or the life and
character of the property itself.
L. Enforcement of directives against unsafe conditions. This section shall
not apply in any case where the Building Inspector or any authorized
Village enforcement agency orders or directs the construction, removal,
alteration or demolition of any improvement on a landmark site or in an
historic district for the purpose of remedying conditions determined to
be unsafe or dangerous to the life, health or property of any person.
M. Violations. Failure to comply with any provisions of this section shall be
deemed a violation and the violator shall be fined in accordance with
the regulations contained in § 266-51 of this Zoning Law.
N. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Board
relating to hardship or a certificate of appropriateness may, within 30
days of filing the decision with the Village Clerk, commence an Article
78 proceeding.
A. All required front yard depths and all maximum heights based on front
lot lines contained in § 266-23 of this Zoning Law shall be measured
from a line hereby established as the designated street line, which shall
be parallel to the street center line and at the distance from such street
center line specified below for each street classification as established
for each street on the Official Map of the Village of Suffern, except as
otherwise provided herein:
Street
Classification
Distance of Designated Street Line from
Street Center Line
(feet)
Major 40
Secondary 30
Collector 25
Local 25
B. In order to maintain a pedestrian oriented environment and a
consistent streetscape along the segment of Lafayette Avenue between
Washington Avenue and Orange Avenue, the Planning Board may
establish a front building line at any point between the edge of the
right-of-way and otherwise required setback in the zoning district.
§ 266-19 SUFFERN CODE § 266-21
1:544
§ 266-21. Approval of plats; conditions for changes in zoning
provisions.
The Board of Trustees, pursuant to § 7-738 of the Village Law, hereby
empowers the Planning Board, simultaneously with the approval of a plat
or plats to modify applicable provisions of this Zoning Law, subject to the
conditions hereinafter set forth and such other reasonable conditions as
the Board of Trustees may in its discretion add thereto. The purposes of
this authorization are to enable and encourage flexibility of design and
development of land in such a manner as to promote the most appropriate
use of land, to facilitate the adequate and economical provisions of streets
and utilities and to preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open lands.
The conditions hereinabove referred to are as follows:
A. The Planning Board may require the submission of an application for
the use of this procedure if, in its judgment, the application would
benefit the Village and the public interest. If the owner makes written
application for the use of this procedure, it may be followed at the
discretion of the Planning Board, subject to the purposes noted above.
B. This procedure shall be applicable only to lands zoned for residential
purposes, and its application shall result in a permitted number of
building lots or dwelling units which shall in no case exceed the number
which could be permitted, in the Planning Board's judgment, if the land
were subdivided into lots conforming to the minimum lot size and
density requirements of the Zoning Law applicable to the district or
districts in which such land is situated and conforming to all other
applicable requirements; provided, however, that where the plat falls
within two or more districts with differing density requirements, the
Planning Board may approve in any one such district a cluster
development representing the cumulative density as derived from the
summing of all units allowed in all such districts. The dwelling units
shall not be located in areas with impediments listed in § 266-15N of
this Zoning Law.
C. In the case of a residential plat or plats, the dwelling units may be, at
the discretion of the Planning Board and subject to the conditions set
forth by the Board of Trustees, in detached, semidetached, attached or
multistory structures.
D. In the event that the application of this procedure results in a plat
showing lands available for park, recreation, open space or other
municipal purposes directly related to the plat, then the Planning
Board, as a condition of plat approval, may establish such conditions on
the ownership, use and maintenance of such lands as it deems
necessary to assure the preservation of such lands for their intended
purposes. Any conditions relating to Village ownership of the lands shall
be approved by the Village Board prior to the Planning Board granting
final approval to the plat.
§ 266-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-21
1:545
§ 266-21.1. Additional requirements in the PLI District.
E. The proposed site plan or plat, including areas within which structures
may be located, the height and spacing of buildings, open spaces and
their landscaping, off-street open and enclosed parking spaces and
streets, driveways and all other physical features as shown on said plan
or otherwise described, accompanied by a statement setting forth the
nature of such modifications, changes or supplementations of existing
zoning provisions as are not shown on said site plan, shall be subject to
review and public hearing by the Planning Board in the same manner as
set forth on § 7-728 of the Village Law for the approval of plats.
F. On the filing of the plat in the Office of the County Clerk or Register, a
copy shall be filed with the Village Clerk, who shall make appropriate
notations and references thereto on the Village Zoning Map.155
G. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to authorize a change
in the permissible use of such lands as provided in the Zoning Law
applicable to such lands.
H. The authorization herein shall apply to all lands within the incorporated
Village of Suffern.
A. On contiguous parcels of land under single ownership consisting of at
least 100 acres designated for development as a unit as a part of an
application for development approval, the maximum height of any
building shall be 110 feet, exclusive of permitted height exceptions as
set forth in § 266-15J herein. In the event that an application shall
propose a plan of development seeking approval of a building in excess
of 40 feet, the required building setbacks as set forth in § 266-23 shall
be subject to the following requirements:
(1) If the building height of the proposed building shall be greater than
40 feet, the required building setback shall be equal to 125% of the
height of the building to a building height of 65 feet.
(2) If the building height of the proposed building shall be greater than
65 feet, the required building setback shall be equal to 150% of the
height of the building to a building height of 90 feet.
(3) If the building height of the proposed building shall be greater than
90 feet, the required building setback shall be equal to 200% of the
height of the building to a building height of 110 feet.
B. The Planning Board, in its discretion, may modify parking requirements
in this district upon a determination of unique circumstances.
155. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is located in the pocket at the end of this volume.
§ 266-21 SUFFERN CODE § 266-21.2
1:546
§ 266-21.2. Scenic Overlay District. [Added 4-6-2009 by L.L. No.
3-2009]
No subdivision of property, construction or material alteration of any
principal or accessory use within the Scenic Overlay District is permitted
unless said use shall have obtained approval as set forth below. Exceptions
to this are as-of-right accessory improvements such as decks and pools.
A. If it is determined that the use is subject to site development plan
approval, such use shall receive plan approval from the Planning Board
together with the site development plan approval in conformity with the
regulations set forth below in § 266-21.2C and D.
B. All other uses shall be subject to review and approval by the Building
Inspector. The Building Inspector shall issue a building permit upon a
determination of compliance with the regulation set forth below in
§ 266-21.2C and D and other applicable zoning and Building Code
requirements.
C. Review standards. In order to grant approval, the Building Inspector or
Planning Board, whichever is applicable, must find that such structure
or alteration is architecturally compatible with surrounding structures
and that the important scenic and natural features of the site will be
substantially preserved. To the extent practicable, all structures to be
built on land within the Suffern Scenic Overlay District shall be sited
and clustered on the tract in such a way as to avoid or minimize the
obstructing of scenic overlays in this district.
D. Additional standards of review. The additional regulations set forth
below supplement, but do not replace, the use and bulk regulations
otherwise applicable to the underlying zoning districts.
(1) The minimum front yard requirement, as set forth for the
applicable underlying zoning district, may be increased for all
structures and parking areas located within the Suffern Scenic
Overlay District. The side and rear yard may also be increased by
the Planning Board if there are historic or scenic resources which
are to be protected. The intent is to maintain the existing yards as
to the maximum extent. The Planning Board may require the
applicant to document the yards of all properties on the block in
which the parcel is located to determine the appropriate yard
dimension.
(2) The Planning Board may require that the front yard shall be
managed by the property owner in a way that preserves significant
existing vegetation, plant specimens, landforms and water
features; nurtures tree planting and other natural landscaping
efforts; creates dense landscaping buffers; preserves stone walls,
existing fields and similar features; and/or ensures both the
protection of visual buffers and the prominence of key scenic vistas,
including views of historic properties and landscapes.
§ 266-21.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-21.2
1:547
(3) Any necessary intrusions within the front yard area shall be
reduced to the extent practicable by such measures as common
driveways and shared utility services for building sites that may
gain access from the roadways in the Suffern Scenic Overlay
District.
(4) Cluster subdivisions, where appropriate, in accordance with the
Village Law of the State of New York, shall be the preferred
residential land development technique for lands within, adjacent
to or affecting the overall character of a Suffern Scenic Overlay
District, provided that:
(a) All structures and/or parking areas are effectively screened on
a year-round basis by existing landform and/or vegetation or by
substantial new planting and berming as viewed from the
public right-of-way, provided that such treatment does not
diminish the prominence of key scenic vistas including views of
historic properties and landscapes.
(b) A conservation easement, satisfactory to the approving
authority, is granted by the landowner to the Village, a land
trust or similarly qualified entity to ensure that the screening
will be properly maintained and managed or a similarly binding
mechanism as acceptable to the Village Attorney shall be
provided.
(5) Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible. Every attempt shall be made to limit cutting so as to
maintain native vegetation as a screen for structures as seen from
roads, parks and other public overlays within the Suffern Scenic
Overlay District.
(6) No cutting of trees exceeding six inches in diameter (measured at a
height of four feet off the ground) except in accordance with an
approved building permit, site plan, subdivision or timberharvesting
plan. Cutting of all trees in a single contiguous area
exceeding 5,000 square feet shall be prohibited.
(7) Throughout the Suffern Scenic Overlay District,
telecommunications towers shall be discouraged. In all cases, the
Village shall encourage shared use of towers rather than new
construction and reduced tower height to limit the need for
external lighting.
§ 266-21.2 SUFFERN CODE § 266-21.2
1:548
ARTICLE V
District Regulations
§ 266-22. Schedule of General Use Requirements.156
§ 266-23. Table of Dimensional Requirements.157
The accompanying Bulk Table, which lists the height of buildings, the
size and dimension of yards and the area and coverage of lots, and other
matters contained therein is hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this Zoning Law. The dimensional requirements listed for each district as
designated are subject to all other provisions of this Zoning Law and, unless
otherwise indicated, shall be deemed to be the minimum requirement in
every instance of their application.
A. The accompanying Schedule of General Use Requirements, which lists
and defines the use of land and buildings, and all other matters
contained therein is hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this
Zoning Law. The regulations listed for each district as designated are
subject to all other provisions of this Zoning Law.
B. It is intended that the uses set forth for each district shall not be
permitted uses in any other district unless allowed specifically or by
reference as permitted uses in said district. Only those uses listed for
each district as being permitted shall be permitted. Any use not
specifically listed as being permitted shall be deemed to be prohibited.
More than one permitted principal use is permitted on a lot in a
nonresidential district.
156. Editor's Note: The Schedule of General Use Requirements is located at the end of this
chapter.
157. Editor's Note: The Table of Dimensional Requirements is located at the end of this
chapter.
§ 266-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-23
1:549

ARTICLE VI
Special Permit Uses
§ 266-24. Special permit uses generally.
Special permit uses are listed in Articles V and VI of this Zoning Law.
The special permit uses for which conformance to additional standards is
required by this Zoning Law are deemed to be permitted uses in their
respective districts, subject to the satisfaction of the requirements and
standards set forth herein, in addition to all other requirements of this
Zoning Law. All such uses are declared to possess such unique and special
characteristics that each specific use shall be considered as an individual
case. All such uses require site plan approval under the Village of Suffern
Site Plan Regulations,158 except that the Planning Board may waive site
plan approval for special permits where no changes to site elements are
necessary. The reason for waiving site plan approval shall be included in the
minutes.
§ 266-25. Approving agency. [Amended 9-25-1996 by L.L. No.
6-1996]
The Board of Trustees shall be the approving agency for all special permits.
§ 266-26. Informal application. [Amended 9-25-1996 by L.L. No.
6-1996]
§ 266-27. Formal application. [Amended 9-25-1996 by L.L. No.
6-1996]
A. Applicants are encouraged to submit an informal application to discuss
with the Board of Trustees prior to formal submission of a complete and
detailed special permit application. The informal application shall
include a schematic plan with the information listed for such a plan in
the Village of Suffern Site Plan Regulations.159
B. The schematic plan shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees not less
than two weeks prior to the date of the Board of Trustees meeting at
which it is to be considered.
C. At the Board of Trustees meeting, the Board of Trustees shall review
the schematic plan and may schedule a field inspection of the site. The
Board of Trustees shall notify the applicant of any changes
recommended prior to the preparation of a complete site plan.
A. Submission.
158. Editor's Note: See Ch. 228, Site Plan Regulations.
159. Editor's Note: See Ch. 228, Site Plan Regulations.
§ 266-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-27
1:551
(1) Formal application for a special permit shall be made in 10 copies
to the Board of Trustees. The formal application shall include the
following items:
(a) A completed special permit application form.
(b) A written statement describing the nature of the proposed use
and how it will serve to implement the purposes of this Zoning
Law (narrative summary).
(c) A site plan with the information required in the Village of
Suffern Site Plan Regulations.
(d) Completed General Municipal Law 809 Affidavit.
(e) Completed owner's consent affidavit.
(f) Long environmental assessment form, Part I with appropriate
fee.
(g) Application fee: a certified check payable to the "Village of
Suffern" in accordance with the Village of Suffern Fee
Schedule.160
(h) Such other forms as the Planning Board may require.
(2) A complete special permit application, including the information
listed above, shall be submitted not less than three weeks in
advance of the Board of Trustees meeting at which the site plan is
to be reviewed.
B. Referral to Village Planning Board. Upon receipt of a complete special
permit application, the Village Clerk shall refer the same to the Village
Planning Board for its review and written recommendations, including
recommended conditions, which recommendation shall be rendered
within 62 days after receipt of the referral from the Village Clerk. If
such recommendation is not received by the Board of Trustees within
62 days after receipt of said referral, the Board of Trustees may act
without the recommendation of the Village Planning Board. [Amended
11-29-2010 by L.L. No. 9-2010]
C. Referrals. The Board of Trustees shall refer to the Rockland County
Commissioner of Planning for its recommendation all matters within
the provisions of §§ 239-1 and 239-m of the General Municipal Law,
which includes real property lying within 500 feet of the boundary of
any City, Village or Town, or from the boundary of any existing or
proposed County or state park or recreation area; or from the right-ofway
of any existing or proposed County or state parkway, thruway,
expressway, road or highway; or from the existing or proposed right-ofway
of any stream or drainage channel lines; or from the existing or
proposed boundary of any County or state owned land on which a public
160. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 266-27 SUFFERN CODE § 266-27
1:552
building or institution is situated. The Rockland County Commissioner
of Planning shall render a decision within 30 days of referral or within
an extended period if agreed upon. If the Rockland County
Commissioner of Planning shall fail to report within such period of
30 days or such longer period as has been agreed upon, the Board
of Trustees may act without such report. If the Rockland County
Commissioner of Planning disapproves the proposal or recommends
modification thereof, the Board of Trustees shall not act contrary to
such disapproval or recommendation except by a vote of a majority plus
one of all members thereof and after the adoption of a resolution fully
setting forth the reasons for such contrary action. Within seven days
after final action by the Board of Trustees, a report of the final action
as has taken shall be filed with the Rockland County Commissioner of
Planning.
D. Public hearing. The Board of Trustees shall hold a public hearing on the
special permit within 62 days of the date of receipt of a complete
application. An application shall not be considered complete until a
draft environmental impact statement (DEIS) has been accepted or a
negative declaration approved by the Planning Board. No public
hearing may be held until all required recommendations have been
received by the Board of Trustees, or the applicable periods specified in
§ 266-27B and C above of this chapter have elapsed, whichever is first.
E. Public hearing notice. Notice of the public hearing shall be published
once in the official newspaper, not less than 10 or more than 30 days
prior to the date of the hearing. The applicant shall cause notice to be
mailed not less than 10 days prior to the hearing to owners of property
abutting or across the street from the subject property. The applicant
shall cause signs to be posted on such property on each street frontage
indicating the date and purpose of such hearing. The form of such
notices shall be prescribed by the Board of Trustees, and the cost of
such notices shall be paid by the applicant.
F. Decision of Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall approve,
approve with modifications or disapprove the special permit within 62
days of the close of the hearing. The Board of Trustees approval,
approval with modifications or disapproval shall be in written form and
shall include specific findings with respect to the standards as
contained in § 266-28 and, if applicable, § 266-33 of this chapter. The
decision of the Board of Trustees shall be filed in the office of the Village
Clerk within five business days after the decision is rendered and a copy
thereof shall be mailed to the applicant. The time within which to
appeal an Article 78 proceeding commences to run upon filing of the
Board of Trustees decision with the Village Clerk.
G. Extensions of time periods. The applicant may grant extensions of any
of the above stipulated time limits; provided, however, that any
extension of time granted to an official or agency making a report to the
Board of Trustees shall equally extend any subsequent time limit for the
Board of Trustees.
§ 266-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-27
1:553
§ 266-28. General standards for special permit uses. [Amended
9-25-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
All special permit uses shall comply with the following standards, in
addition to the site plan standards of the Village of Suffern Site Plan
Regulations161 and the specific standards for each use listed in § 266-33 of
this chapter. The Board of Trustees shall attach such additional conditions
and safeguards to any special permit as are, in its opinion, necessary
to ensure initial and continued conformance to all applicable standards
and requirements. In reviewing a special permit application, the Board of
Trustees may take into consideration the following:
H. Waiver of requirements for live entertainment. Notwithstanding
anything contained herein to the contrary, when an application is made
for a special permit for live entertainment, the Village Board may waive
the requirement for review by the Planning Board and the provisions of
§§ 266-27A(1)(c), (f), A(2), C and 266-31. Upon receipt of an application
for a special permit for live entertainment, the Village Clerk shall
deliver a copy of same to the Building Inspector for review. The matter
shall then be referred to the Village Board for review and consideration
in accordance with the provisions of § 266-33K. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to provide sufficient information in order
for the Village Board to make its determination in accordance with that
section. The Village Board may waive the requirements of Planning
Board review and approval as set forth herein and otherwise in this
article if it determines that the provisions of § 266-33K have been
adequately addressed and that issuance of a special permit is
appropriate. [Added 6-4-2018 by L.L. No. 9-2018]
A. The location and size of the special permit use, the nature and intensity
of the operations involved in it or conducted in connection with it, the
size of the site in relation to it and the location of the site with respect to
streets giving access to it are such that it will be in harmony with the
appropriate and orderly development of the area in which it is located.
B. The location, nature and height of buildings, walls and fences and the
nature and extent of existing or proposed plantings on the site are such
that the special permit use will not hinder or discourage the
appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings.
C. Operations in connection with any special permit use will not be more
objectionable to nearby properties by reason of noise, traffic, fumes,
vibration or other characteristics than would be the operations of
permitted uses not requiring a special permit.
D. Parking areas will be of adequate size for the particular special permit
use, properly located and suitably screened from adjoining residential
uses, and the entrance and exit drives shall be laid out so as to achieve
maximum convenience and safety.
161. Editor's Note: See Ch. 228, Site Plan Regulations.
§ 266-27 SUFFERN CODE § 266-28
1:554
§ 266-29. Expiration; temporary permits; inspection and change.
§ 266-30. Existing violations.
No special use permit shall be issued for property where the Building
Inspector has found a violation of this Zoning Law and where such violation
has not been corrected, unless the granting of such special use permit and
concomitant site plan approval and implementation thereof will cure such
violation.
§ 266-31. Site plan approval.
Except as provided for herein, special use permit applications require site
plan approval in accordance with the requirements of the Village of Suffern
Site Plan Regulations.162
§ 266-32. Fees.
Application for a special use permit shall be accompanied by a fee as listed
in the fee schedule adopted by the Board of Trustees.163
E. Any additional consideration which relates to the public health, safety
or welfare of the neighborhood, surrounding area, community or
general populace.
A. A special permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use
specified in the permit and shall expire if said use shall cease for more
than 12 months for any reason or if construction, in accordance with
the special permit, has not been completed within 18 months from the
date of issue or if all such required improvements are not maintained
and all conditions and standards complied with throughout the duration
of the special permit use.
B. The approving agency may issue a special permit for a specific period of
time.
C. In connection with issuance of a special permit, the approving agency
may establish a schedule of inspection by the Building Inspector of a
special permit use to determine continued compliance with this Zoning
Law.
D. Any change in use or reduction in lot size requires amendment to the
special permit, following the application and review requirements of
this section.
162. Editor's Note: See Ch. 228, Site Plan Regulations.
163. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 266-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-33
1:555
§ 266-33. Individual standards and requirements for special permit
uses.
The following individual standards and requirements are hereby established
for special permit uses. They must, if applicable, be met before issuance of
a special permit.
A. Automobile washing establishment.
(1) Each establishment shall provide a queuing area equal in length to
10 times the maximum capacity. Four times the maximum capacity
shall be provided for automobiles beyond the exit of the equipment
so situated as to be usable for the hand finishing of the washing
process. This finishing area shall be no closer than 50 feet to any
street right-of-way line. The maximum capacity shall be determined
by dividing the equipment line by 20 feet.
(2) The Planning Board shall determine that the proposed water supply
and disposal system is adequate for the proposed use. The Planning
Board may require water conservation measures to minimize water
consumption. The proposed use shall also comply with Chapter
220, Sewers, of the Code of the Village of Suffern.
B. Automotive repair.
(1) The site shall have frontage of at least 100 feet on a public road and
shall have a depth of at least 100 feet.
(2) Ingress and egress points shall be defined by the use of poured-inplace
concrete curb sections and radii and shall be designed to
provide for safe and convenient travel without the potential for
traffic backing onto the public travel way.
(3) No outside display of products shall be permitted, including
vehicles for sale.
(4) Landscaped areas.
(a) A ten-foot-wide landscaped area shall be provided along all
property lines, excluding points of ingress and egress, and
property lines adjacent to existing commercial uses. The
Planning Board may require that the landscaped area be
densely planted with a mixture of shrubs, trees and/or a fence
to create an opaque screen.
(b) All landscaped areas along property lines which are crossed by
access drives may be planted with low shrubs no greater than
three feet high and trees with a branching habit not less than
eight feet high. No planting shall cause a hazardous condition
by interfering with the line of sight needed for safe entering
and exiting maneuvers by motor vehicles.
§ 266-33 SUFFERN CODE § 266-33
1:556
(5) Due to the extent of land use impacts resulting from exterior
operations, the following requirements shall apply and shall be
noted upon the site plan:
(a) At no time shall any unregistered or dismantled automobiles,
trucks, tractors, trailers or accessories thereof be outside of a
building or a totally enclosed and fully screened outdoor
adjunct thereto. No car and truck rentals shall be permitted.
No vehicles may be sold or advertised for sale on the premises.
(b) There shall not be outside storage or display of accessories or
portable signs.
(c) Rubbish, oil cans, tires, discarded motor vehicle parts and
components and any other waste materials shall be stored in a
totally enclosed concrete block dumpster adjacent to the
building in which repairs occur. The area of such enclosure
shall not exceed 200 square feet. There shall be no storage at
any time of any of the above-mentioned items outside of or
above the height of such enclosure. The dumpsters shall be
emptied in a timely manner.
(d) No repair work may be performed out-of-doors.
(e) Wrecks or damaged vehicles brought in for repairs shall
remain visible from off premises for no more than 30 minutes.
(f) All landscaped areas designated on the site plan and
landscaping plan shall be maintained in a neat and healthy
condition.
(6) Automotive repair establishments existing as legal nonconforming
uses on the effective date of this Zoning Law may continue
indefinitely only upon submission of a site plan and special use
permit application and subsequent approval of the plan and
application by the Planning Board. Approvals must be obtained
within one year of the date a notice of said requirement is sent from
the Building Inspector or such other person as may be designated
by the Board of Trustees. Notice shall be sent by certified mail to
the owner of said establishment.
(7) The right to continue the nonconforming use of a property as an
automotive repair establishment that does not receive site plan and
special use permit approval in accordance with the provisions of
this section shall expire five years from the date of the notice given
pursuant to the preceding subsection.
C. Betting parlors.
(1) Only betting parlors authorized by the State of New York shall be
authorized.
§ 266-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-33
1:557
(2) No such use shall be located within 200 feet of a public or private
school, public recreation area, religious use or hospital. This
distance shall be measured in a straight line from the closest lot
line of same to the closest lot line of a lot containing a public or
private school recreation area, religious use or hospital.
(3) Each such facility shall contain at least 800 square feet and shall
contain rest room facilities adequate for its anticipated patronage.
(4) Outdoor trash receptacles shall be provided and maintained around
the betting parlor.
(5) Either a salaried employee or a contract service shall be required
to restore the exterior cleanliness of the premises daily upon the
close of business.
D. Bulk storage of fuel oil; bottled gas.
(1) Such use shall comply with all federal, state or local regulations
regarding use, storage and handling.
(2) The Planning Board shall request written recommendations from
the Suffern Fire Department regarding such use.
E. Bus terminal.
(1) The Planning Board shall determine whether anticipated traffic
may be accommodated by the surrounding street system.
(2) The Planning Board shall consider the use of the facility and
require design elements to minimize disturbance to nearby
properties from noise, light, odor and exhaust fumes.
(3) Sufficient parking shall be provided on the property to serve the
needs of employees and patrons.
F. Dormitories. Dormitories are permitted only as accessory uses to
schools of general or religious instruction, subject to the following
supplemental requirements:
(1) There shall be a minimum lot area of 3,600 square feet provided
per dormitory bed, exclusive of the lot area allocated and devoted
to the principal and other accessory buildings on any site, including
the required yards and/or setbacks, buffers and parking facilities
for said buildings.
(2) No more than 20% of the contiguous lot shall be allocated and
devoted to such use, including the required yards, setbacks and
parking facilities for said use.
(3) The Planning Board, in its approval of the site plan, may permit up
to 1/3 of the parking requirement to be provided in overflow
parking areas to be graded and seeded and conveniently situated
on the approved site plan so that they will be accessible if needed.
§ 266-33 SUFFERN CODE § 266-33
1:558
(4) The minimum distance between the dormitory and any other
building on the lot shall be 50 feet.
(5) The minimum distance between any dormitory and any interior
driveway shall be 25 feet.
(6) The minimum distance of any such building from any property line
of any lot shall be 100 feet.
(7) The maximum height of any dormitory shall be 2 1/2 stories or 28
feet, whichever is less.
(8) No dormitory room or dwelling unit shall be permitted in any cellar.
(9) All dormitories shall be equipped with sprinkler and fire alarm
systems approved by the Fire Inspector.
G. Excavation of mineral resources.
(1) The following applies to special permit applicants who propose to
mine over 1,000 tons or 750 cubic yards, whichever is less, of
minerals from the earth within 12 successive calendar months or
who mine or propose to mine over 100 cubic yards of minerals from
or adjacent to any body of water not subject to the jurisdiction of
Article 15 of the Environmental Conservation (DEC) Law or to the
Public Lands Law:
(a) The applicant shall submit a copy of the mining permit issued
by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation and all supporting documentation.
(b) The Planning Board, in issuing a special permit, shall consider
and, if necessary, impose limitations on the following:
[1] Ingress and egress to public thoroughfares controlled by
the Village.
[2] Routing of mineral transport vehicles on roads controlled
by the Village.
[3] Requirements and conditions as specified in the permit
issued by the Department of Environmental Conservation
including, but not limited to: setback from property
boundaries and public thoroughfare rights-of-way, natural
or man-made barriers to restrict access, dust control and
hours of operation.
(2) The Planning Board shall consider the following for applicants
proposing to mine less than 1,000 tons or 750 cubic yards,
whichever is less, of minerals from the earth within 12 successive
calendar months or who mine or propose to mine less than 100
cubic yards of minerals from or adjacent to any body of water not
§ 266-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-33
1:559
subject to the jurisdiction of Article 15 of the Environmental
Conservation Law or to the Public Lands Law:
(a) The proposed operation shall not contribute to soil erosion by
water and/or wind, nor shall it adversely affect soil fertility,
drainage and lateral support of abutting land or other
properties. Noise, smoke, dust, odor and other potential
hazards shall be controlled.
(b) Within 1,000 feet of residence districts, there shall be no
operations between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., nor on Saturdays,
Sundays or legal holidays.
(c) When any open excavation will have a depth of 10 feet or more
and create a slope of more than 30° there shall be a substantial
fence, at least six feet high with suitable gates, where
necessary, effectively blocking access to the area in which such
excavation is located. Such fence shall be located at least 50
feet from the edge of the excavation.
(d) The slope of material in any excavation shall not exceed the
normal angle of repose or 45°, whichever is less.
(e) That portion of access roads within the area of the permit and
located within 500 feet of a lot line shall be provided with a
dustless surface.
(f) Existing topography shall remain undisturbed within 50 feet of
any property line. Any mechanical equipment shall not be less
than 50 feet from any lot line.
(g) Before a special permit is granted, a plan for rehabilitation,
showing both existing and proposed final contours, cross
sections which illustrate the final physical state of the
reclaimed land and a schedule showing the order in which the
areas of the site are to be worked, shall be submitted and
approved. Prior to submitting the plan, the applicant shall
submit the plan for a review by the local office of the United
States Soil Conservation Service for its report, which shall be
submitted with the plan. Where topsoil is removed, sufficient
arable soil shall be set aside and shall be respread after the
operation with a layer of earth two feet deep or the original
thickness, whichever is less and capable of supporting
vegetation. Fill shall be of a suitable material approved by the
Planning Board.
(h) Before the issuance of a special permit, the owner shall
execute a surety sufficient, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, to secure the aforesaid rehabilitation of the site in
accordance with the plan specified in Subsection G(2)(g)
above. Such surety shall also be approved by the Board of
Trustees and Village Attorney as to form, sufficiency and
§ 266-33 SUFFERN CODE § 266-33
1:560
manner of execution and shall run for the same term as the
term of the special permit, plus nine months. The surety
company shall be licensed to do business in the State of New
York.
H. Helipads in nonresidential districts.
(1) Helipads shall be set back at least 500 feet from any street,
property line or occupied building. Helipads are not permitted in
residential districts.
(2) If a helipad is to be located within 1,000 feet of any residence
building in a residence district, the applicant shall be required to
submit noise tests conducted on the property by an independent
acoustical consultant utilizing approved sound detection
equipment and relating his findings to the Farnborough
Intrusiveness Scale or other similarly recognized standard.
(3) All landings and takeoffs shall be during the daylight hours only
and shall be carried out in accordance with Visual Flight Rules
weather conditions.
(4) The use of a helipad shall be limited to persons occupying or
employed on the premises and their visitors and guests.
(5) The landing surface shall be paved and maintained free from dust,
dirt and other loose material which could be blown onto adjoining
properties by the air wash.
(6) All federal and/or state licenses or approvals which are necessary
for the operation of such a facility shall be obtained by the
applicant and shall be maintained throughout the duration of the
use, and all applicable federal and/or state rules and regulations
shall be strictly complied with.
(7) In connection with its action on a special permit application, the
Planning Board may require submission of any additional studies
and/or other information which it determines appropriate and may
impose any additional standards and requirements as it deems
necessary to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
community, including, but not limited to, limitations on the number
and/or frequency of flights and the location of ingress and egress
routes under various wind conditions.
I. Home occupations.
(1) The use shall be conducted solely within the dwelling unit and not
in a detached accessory building, and the use shall be clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for living
purposes.
(2) There shall be no external display or advertising of services or
other external evidence of such use other than one internally
§ 266-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-33
1:561
illuminated identification sign. Such sign shall not be more than
two square feet in area for each face and may show only the name,
address and occupation of the occupant. Internally illuminated
signs shall be turned off at 10:00 p.m.
(3) The establishment of such occupation shall not require internal or
external alterations or involve construction features not
customarily found in dwelling units.
(4) The occupation shall not utilize an area exceeding 300 square feet
or an area exceeding 25% of the interior floor area of the residence,
whichever is less.
(5) The appliances and equipment required for such use shall be
operated in such a manner that they do not produce and emit,
beyond the boundaries of the premises on which the use is located,
dust, glare, heat, light, noise, nuisance, odor, radiation, radio or
television interference, smoke or vibration, and are in no other
manner obnoxious, offensive or detrimental to the immediate
neighborhood.
(6) The use itself shall be conducted in such a manner and during such
hours that it is in no way obnoxious, offensive or detrimental to the
immediate neighborhood. As a condition of the special permit, the
Planning Board may establish permitted hours of operation based
upon the type of home occupation proposed and the frequency of
client visitations so as to ensure that the proposed use is not
disruptive to the residential neighborhood in which it is to be
located.
(7) No more than one additional employee, exclusive of family
members residing in the dwelling unit, shall be employed.
(8) No service involving the repair of devices powered by electricity,
gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene or other fuels shall be permitted.
(9) The use shall not result in the parking of more than three client
vehicles at one time on the property. Existing driveways shall not
be expanded to accommodate client vehicular parking without the
approval of the Planning Board. To discourage excessive paving,
client parking is encouraged in existing driveways or on-street
unless otherwise prohibited.
(10) Not more than five clients shall be permitted on the property at one
time.
(11) Parking shall be provided on the property as determined by the
Planning Board. The Planning Board may require additional
landscaping or screening to buffer parking areas from adjoining
dwellings.
(12) Sounds shall not be heard emanating from a home occupation.
§ 266-33 SUFFERN CODE § 266-33
1:562
(13) Notice of the home occupation use shall be given to the local fire
department.
(14) A site plan shall be submitted and shall include, but not be limited
to the following:
(a) The lot, existing structures and a delineation and description of
the location of the home occupation within the proposed
structure.
(b) Distances to adjacent residences.
(c) Existing driveways and proposed paved areas submitted as a
part of the application.
(15) Upon review of the special permit application, a site plan may be
waived by the Planning Board, so long as proof of § 266-33I(4) and
(14)(a) through (c) is provided in the form of a scaled drawing
identifying all applicable dimensions.
J. Kennel; veterinary office; animal hospital.
(1) Where the subject property abuts a residence district, buildings,
structures and outdoor animal runs shall be located at least 50 feet
from such district boundary.
(2) The Planning Board may require fencing or other suitable
enclosures for any facilities located outside of a building and, in
addition, may require buffer landscaping for screening purposes.
(3) In issuing the special permit for animal kennels, the Planning
Board shall stipulate the maximum number and type of animals to
be boarded or trained.
K. Live entertainment.
(1) Accessory to a permitted use, live entertainment conducted within
a wholly enclosed structure and subject to occupancy limitations
established by the Village Building Inspector or Fire Inspector may
be allowed as a special permit use.
(2) In reviewing a special permit application for live entertainment, the
Planning Board shall consider the following:
(a) The type of entertainment proposed, so that it is not
detrimental to the health and safety of other occupants within
the structure.
(b) The effect of the proposed live entertainment on residential
dwelling units on the site or adjacent lots.
(c) There are no residential districts within 250 feet of the
proposed use.
§ 266-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-33
1:563
(d) Sound generated by such entertainment must be inaudible
beyond the premises. Live entertainment must take place
within a fully enclosed, sound-resistant building with closed
windows.
(e) Adequate parking is available to accommodate patrons of the
establishment.
(3) Upon reviewing the special permit application, a site plan may be
waived by the Planning Board.
L. Microwave, radio, television, cellular phone and other electromagnetic
antennas.
(1) The term "antenna," as used herein, means any system of wires,
poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the
transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves, which system
is external to or attached to the exterior of any building. Antennas
shall include devices having active elements extending in any
direction and directional beam-arrays having elements carried by
and disposed from a generally horizontal boom that may be
mounted upon and rotated through a vertical mast or tower
interconnecting the boom and antenna support, all of which
elements are deemed to be a part of the antenna. The height of an
antenna shall be the total maximum to which it is capable of being
raised and shall be measured from the highest point of the finished
grade adjacent to the structure if ground-mounted or from the peak
of the roof if roof-mounted.
(2) All antennas shall be located, designed, constructed and
maintained in accordance with the following standards.
(a) Antennas shall be installed and maintained in compliance with
the Building Code.
(b) Antennas that are roof-mounted shall not extend higher than
15 feet above the peak of the roof; except that a single-vertical
pole antenna may extend to 20 feet above the peak of the roof.
Disc antennas exceeding 24 inches in diameter shall not be
permitted on the roof.
(c) Not more than one ground-mounted antenna meeting the
height requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
shall be permitted as a principal use on a lot.
(d) Antennas shall be erected or maintained to the rear of a main
building, except in those instances when the subject property
is a cul-de-sac or a corner lot where the side yard is larger than
the rear yard, in which case the antenna may be located in the
side yard. Antennas shall not be located in any required yard.
No portion of an antenna array shall extend beyond the
property lines or into any required yard area. Guy wires shall
§ 266-33 SUFFERN CODE § 266-33
1:564
not be anchored within any front yard area but may be
attached to the building.
(e) The antenna, including guy wires, supporting structures and
accessory equipment, shall be located and designed so as to
minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties and from
public streets. Antennas should be screened through the
addition of architectural features and/or landscaping that
harmonizes with the elements and characteristics of the
property. The materials used in constructing the antenna shall
not be unnecessarily bright, garish, shiny or reflective.
(f) Antennas shall meet all manufacturer's specifications. The
mast or tower shall be of noncombustible and noncorrosive
hardware. Equipment such as brackets, turnbuckles, clips and
similar type equipment subject to rust or corrosion shall be
protected with a zinc or cadmium coating by either galvanizing
or sherardizing process after forming. These finishes are
selected against corrosion and to protect the elements against
electrolytic action due to the use of dissimilar metals.
(g) Whenever it is necessary to install an antenna near power lines
or where damage would be caused by falling, a separate safety
wire must be attached to the antenna mast or tower and
secured in a direction away from the hazard. Transmission
lines must be kept at least 24 inches clear of telephone or
electric wires.
(h) Every antenna must be adequately grounded with an adequate
ground wire for protection against a direct strike of lightning.
(3) Any application for a special permit required by this section shall
include the following, in addition to all other required contents:
(a) A site plan showing adjacent properties, possible views and all
screening features.
(b) Affected exterior elevations and architectural features and the
texture and color of all materials to be used.
(c) A map and list showing property owners' names and addresses,
as shown on the last assessment roll, within 500 feet from the
boundaries of the subject property.
(d) A statement of proposed measures to mitigate electromagnetic
frequency interference shall be included in case such
interference should result from the operation of the proposed
antenna.
M. Private membership clubs.
(1) In residence districts, such a club shall be located on a lot not less
than twice the area required for the district.
§ 266-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-33
1:565
(2) In residence districts, all buildings, structures and recreational
facilities shall be set back from adjacent residential lot lines at least
twice the minimum yard requirement for residential buildings in
said district, except that the Planning Board may permit a
reduction of this additional setback requirement where, because of
topography, the installation of additional buffer landscaping or
fencing or the particular nature of the use, any potential adverse
external effect of such use will be minimized.
(3) Outdoor public address systems are not permitted.
(4) No club shall be operated so as to create a nuisance to surrounding
properties. The Planning Board shall attach such conditions to the
permit and may require such fencing or equivalent landscaping or
such other facilities as are required to protect neighbors from
excessive light or noise or stray balls or other nuisances and
hazards which would be inherent in the operation of the club. Any
use of a clubhouse or club site which involves the discharge of
firearms, bow and arrow or any other dangerous weapons shall be
permitted only upon compliance with all applicable state and
zoning laws. The Planning Board shall establish such facilities as
are necessary to protect neighboring properties from stray missiles
and excessive noise.
(5) The Planning Board may reduce the parking requirements with
respect to the number of members or family memberships in any
case where the maximum anticipated number of cars at the club,
because of its particular type, location, hours of operation, capacity
of club facilities or other reason, would be less than the
requirements of this Zoning Law, but not less than one space for
each three memberships, provided that the club facilities are so
laid out that there are lawn areas or other spaces of ample size that
could accommodate temporary overflow parking equivalent to the
amount of reduction of the requirements.
(6) The requirements of this Zoning Law shall not be construed to
prevent the occasional utilization or rental of such club or parts
thereof for benefits or performances for a recognized charity or for
meetings of other organizations on a regular or occasional basis.
(7) In issuing a special permit for a private membership club, the
Planning Board shall specify the specific use or purpose of the club
and the maximum number of members, seating capacity or facility
capacity for which the approval is given.
N. Private elementary or secondary schools; nursery school; day-care
center.
(1) Such school shall comply with all licensing, site area and
dimensional requirements established for such schools by New
York State Board of Regents or Department of Social Services.
§ 266-33 SUFFERN CODE § 266-33
1:566
Nursery schools shall be registered with the Education Department
of the State of New York.
(2) If located in a residence district, the minimum lot area and all yard
setbacks shall be equal to twice those required in the district.
(3) A buffer area of at least 25 feet in width, containing evergreen
landscaping and/or fencing as, in the judgment of the Planning
Board, will be adequate to screen the use from the neighboring
residential area, may be required along all adjoining residential
property boundaries or across the street from residential
properties, except where driveway access is required.
O. Professional office or studio.
(1) In the MR-15 and MR-50 Districts, not more than one professional
office or studio shall be permitted for each 16 dwelling units in a
single building.
(2) All professional offices and studios shall be located on the ground
floor of the building.
(3) Not more than 10% of the gross floor area of the building shall be
occupied by professional offices and studios.
(4) Upon reviewing the special permit application, a site plan may be
waived by the Planning Board, so long as proof of § 266-33O(1)
through (3) of this Zoning Law is provided on a scaled drawing
identifying all applicable dimensions.
P. Public and private hospitals and sanatoriums, convalescent and nursing
homes.
(1) A minimum lot area of five acres is required for the development of
a public or private hospital, sanitarium, convalescent or nursing
home.
(2) All bulk requirements of § 266-23 of this Zoning Law shall be met.
(3) A fifty-foot-wide buffer shall be provided between parking or
loading areas and adjoining property in residence districts. No
parking and loading shall be permitted within the buffer. Within the
buffer area, a ten-foot-wide planted screen shall be provided as
follows:
(a) Evergreen planting of such type, height, spacing and
arrangement as, in the judgment of the Planning Board, will
screen the activity involved from an adjacent residence or
residential zoning district. Nonevergreen planting may
seasonally supplement evergreen planting, but not take its
place.
§ 266-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-33
1:567
(b) The plan and specifications for such planting shall be shown on
the site plan.
(c) A wall or fence, of location, height, design and materials
approved by the Planning Board as providing equivalent
screening, may be substituted for part or all of the required
planting.
(d) Required planting shall be properly trimmed, and fencing and
wall materials shall be kept in good condition at all times.
Q. Public utility buildings and substations; utility lines, poles and facilities
serving 25 kilowatts or greater; standpipes and water towers.
(1) When proposed in a residential district, these uses shall be subject
to a finding, in addition to the standards of § 266-28 of this Zoning
Law, that a public necessity exists for such use and that use of the
particular site for which application is made is necessary from the
public standpoint.
(2) The Planning Board may require that such use be enclosed by
protective fencing with a gate which shall be closed and locked
except when necessary to obtain access thereto.
(3) The installation shall be so designed, enclosed, painted and
screened with evergreens that it will be harmonious with the area
in which it is located. The entire property shall be suitably
landscaped and maintained in reasonable conformity with the
standards of property maintenance of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(4) Adequate parking areas shall exist or be provided for maintenance,
service or other vehicles. Parking areas must be off-street.
R. Wholesaling, warehousing distribution in the PO-15 District.
(1) The minimum lot size shall be 35,000 square feet. All other
dimensional requirements shall be those applicable to all other
permitted uses in the PO-15 District.
(2) The lot shall not adjoin, abut or be located across the street from
any residential district.
(3) When proposed adjacent to existing residential uses, screening
shall be provided and shall be designed subject to the approval of
the Planning Board. Generally, evergreen planting shall be
provided of such type, height, spacing and arrangement as, in the
judgment of the Planning Board, will screen the activity involved.
(4) A wall or fence, of location, height, design and materials approved
by the Planning Board as providing equivalent screening, may be
substituted for part or all of the required planting.
§ 266-33 SUFFERN CODE § 266-33
1:568
(5) The applicant shall provide a list of all materials to be stored on the
site. The Planning Board shall consider the potential flammable/
hazardous nature of said materials and may impose controls for
their appropriate storage.
(6) All vehicles associated with said use shall be parked on-site and
shall not rely on any public street for parking.
(7) The Planning Board shall consider the hours of operation of the
use, the potential increases in noise that may result and its
potential effect on adjacent residential uses. The Planning Board
may impose such controls as, in its judgment, are necessary to
protect nearby residences.
(8) The location and hours of operation of all lighting equipment shall
be approved by the Planning Board. Said lighting shall be screened
from adjacent residential uses.
S. Wholesaling of food products in the CB District as an accessory use to a
primary permitted use. [Added 5-22-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
(1) The minimum lot size shall be 35,000 square feet.
(2) The lot shall not abut, adjoin or be located across the street from
any residential district.
(3) The applicant shall provide a list of all materials to be stored on the
site. The Planning Board shall consider the potential flammable/
hazardous nature of said materials and may impose controls for
their appropriate storage.
(4) All vehicles associated with said use shall be parked on-site and
shall not rely on any public street for parking. The Planning Board
shall determine the requirements for adequate loading,
maneuvering and parking spaces for all pickups and deliveries,
including building access for pedestrian pickup and delivery.
(5) The Planning Board shall consider the proposed hours of operation
of the use, the potential increases in noise that may result and its
potential effect on adjacent residential uses. The Planning Board
may impose such controls, restrictions, limitations and conditions
as, in its judgment, are necessary to ameliorate the impact of such
use on nearby residences.
(6) The location and hours of operation of all equipment shall be
approved by the Planning Board. Said lighting shall be screened
from adjacent residential uses.
(7) The area of the building used for wholesaling shall not exceed 20%
of the area to which the principal use is devoted and shall be
located on the same floor as the principal use.
§ 266-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-33
1:569
(8) The Planning Board may establish requirements for the disposal of
waste material.
(9) The Planning Board may require information on employee staffing,
working hours and other information relating to the intensity of the
special permit use.
T. Adult establishments. [Added 11-16-1998 by L.L. No. 12-1998]
(1) Adult establishments are permitted in the GB District subject to the
following requirements:
(a) No more than one adult establishment shall be located on any
lot.
(b) No adult establishment shall be established closer than 500
feet from the lot line of any other adult establishment.
(c) No adult establishment shall be established closer than 1,000
feet from the lot line of any house of worship or school or 400
feet from the lot line of any residence district or day-care
center.
(d) An adult establishment must comply with the parking
requirements for restaurants as set forth in the Zoning Law in
a GB District.
(2) Termination. Any adult establishment in existence at the time of
this amendment164 that fails to conform to the requirements of this
section shall terminate within one year from the date of this
amendment except that such adult establishment may continue for
a limited time period established by the Zoning Board of Appeals
pursuant to Subsection T(3) below.
(3) Amortization of adult establishments.
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals may permit any nonconforming
adult establishment to continue for a limited period of time
beyond the period set forth in Subsection T(2) above, provided
that:
[1] An application is made by the owner of such establishment
to the Zoning Board of Appeals at least 120 days prior to
the date on which such establishment must terminate.
[2] The Board shall find, in connection with such
establishment, that:
[a] The applicant had made, prior to the nonconformity,
substantial financial expenditures related to the
nonconformity; and
164. Editor's Note: This refers to L.L. No. 12-1996, adopted 11-16-1998.
§ 266-33 SUFFERN CODE § 266-33
1:570
[b] The applicant has not recovered substantially all of
the financial expenditures related to the
nonconformity; and
[c] The period for which such establishment or sign may
be permitted to continue is the minimum period
sufficient for the applicant to recover substantially all
of the financial expenditures incurred related to the
nonconformity.
(b) For the purpose of this section, "financial expenditures" shall
mean the capital outlay made by the applicant to establish the
adult establishment or sign, exclusive of the fair market value
of the building in which such use or sign is located and
exclusive of any improvements unrelated to the nonconforming
adult establishment or nonconforming accessory business sign
for the adult establishment.
U. Artists' dwellings. [Added 12-7-1998 by L.L. No. 14-1998]
(1) No building shall be occupied for an artists' dwelling prior to the
issuance of a special permit by the Board of Trustees certifying the
resident as an artist and compliance with other applicable
requirements. In this determination, the Board of Trustees shall
rely upon the opinion of those experts it wishes to consult and upon
the definition of a "artist" contained herein. All applications for a
permit shall include the following information:
(a) The name and address of the applicant and whether the
applicant is the owner or the lessee of the premises; additional
family members must be indicated.
(b) A description of the type of art to be created within the
premises, together with a description of the relevant art work
history of the applicant, together with references.
(2) The issuance of a special permit does not obviate the necessity for
the applicant to obtain all other approvals or permits as may be
required by any other agency.
(3) The Board of Trustees may determine to waive a public hearing on
such a special permit application.
(4) Permits shall be valid for one calendar year and shall terminate on
December 31 of each year or upon the occupant of an artists'
dwelling either vacating such dwelling unit or ceasing to operate a
gallery or studio in the same building. A renewal application for
occupancy of the same dwelling area by the same artist shall
contain a certification by the applicant as to the applicable facts,
including the nature of the artist's activities, the number and
relationship of occupants of the dwelling, the location of the gallery
or studio to which the Artists' Dwelling is accessory, the days and
§ 266-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-33
1:571
hours of operation of said gallery or studio and any other relevant
information or information which may be requested by the Board
of Trustees. A public hearing shall not be required for renewal
applications unless the Board of Trustees deems a public hearing
to be desirable.
(5) No boarders are permitted to reside in an artists' dwelling and the
occupants thereof are restricted to the artist and his "family." No
home occupation may be conducted in an artists' dwelling except
the studio or gallery of the artist residing thereof.
(6) An artist dwelling is subject to the requirements of the Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code and the provisions of Chapter 96
of the Code of the Village of Suffern.
V. Hospital heliports. [Added 7-15-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
(1) The minimum setback from the lot line of any residential use shall
be 250 feet. The Board of Trustees, in reviewing a hospital heliport
special permit application, may increase the setback from the
boundary of any residential use as it deems appropriate for the
purposes of safety, convenience and to minimize disturbances.
(2) All federal and state licenses, approvals and permits shall be
obtained prior to approval of a special permit and shall be
continuously maintained.
(3) The use of the heliport shall be limited to emergency use and
transport.
(4) The landing area shall be a dedicated landing area which will not
be used for parking or any use other than as a heliport landing site.
No vehicular or pedestrian traffic is permitted at the site of a
hospital heliport.
(5) No helicopters may be stored at the site or maintained thereat for
longer than necessary to make a pickup or delivery.
(6) No fuel, parts or material for the servicing of helicopters may be
stored or maintained on the site.
(7) Lighting for the heliport shall not disturb adjoining residential
uses.
(8) An application shall be accompanied by the flight paths for the
approach and take-off of helicopters, which shall not pass over
residential uses.
(9) An applicant shall provide as a part of its application the manner in
which it proposes to ensure that helicopters approaching or leaving
the site shall not pass over residential uses and only helicopters
engaged in emergency activities will land at the heliport.
§ 266-33 SUFFERN CODE § 266-33
1:572
(10) In determining whether to grant a special permit use for a hospital
heliport, the Board of Trustees may consider whatever additional
facts or consideration which it, in its sole discretion, deems to be
appropriate to protect and promote the interests of the residents of
the Village of Suffern and to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare.
(11) A special permit for a hospital heliport may be limited in duration.
A special permit to operate a heliport may be revoked by the Board
of Trustees upon notice for violation of this provision, the terms and
conditions of a special permit or site plan approval or if the use of
the same produces loud or disturbing noises or other disturbing
effects. If Board of Trustees deems it to be desirable to review the
terms, conditions or restrictions upon which a special permit has
been granted, it may do so upon due notice to the holder of a
special permit and the public.
W. Medical office building. [Added 2-12-2004 by L.L. No. 4-2004]
(1) A medical office building shall only be permitted where it is
associated with a public or private hospital. Except as noted below,
the medical office building shall be required to meet all special use
requirements set forth in § 266-33P, which regulates public and
private hospitals.
(2) All bulk requirements of § 266-23 of this Zoning Law shall be met,
except that the maximum permitted height of a medical office
building shall be a maximum of four stories and no higher than 55
feet and the maximum combined development coverage for the
hospital and medical office building shall be 60%. Off-street
parking and loading requirements shall be the same as those in
§ 266-22 for professional offices in the PO-40 District.
(3) Where a medical office building is proposed adjacent to a hospital
building, the Planning Board may provide for a waiver from the
requirements of § 266-15A relative to the minimum distance
between two buildings. In providing such waiver, the Planning
Board shall consider the extent to which separation between the
buildings is necessary to ensure access for public safety purposes.
(4) Where the Planning Board finds that the buffer requirements of this
section are sufficient to protect adjoining residential properties,
the Board may waive the requirement for a side yard for parking
areas and driveways.
§ 266-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-33
1:573

ARTICLE VII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 266-34. Purposes.
All structures and uses shall be provided with a sufficient number of offstreet
parking and loading spaces to meet the needs of employees,
residents, visitors, clients, patrons and other persons at such structures or
uses, but not less than the minimum requirements of this Zoning Law. No
certificate of occupancy or certificate of use shall be issued until such offstreet
parking and loading spaces have been established or provided for in
accordance with the requirements of this Zoning Law.
§ 266-35. Location and access.
A. Required off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot
with the structure or use they serve, except as provided § 266-36 of this
Zoning Law, and may be located within a building or in a side or rear
yard. Double-loaded spaces or stack parking shall not be permitted as a
means of satisfying the parking requirements. No off-street parking
spaces shall be located in a required front yard. In no event shall
parking and loading spaces for a use not permitted in a district be
located in that district. [Amended 6-15-1998 by L.L. No. 9-1998]
B. Unobstructed access to and from a street shall be provided for
nonresidential uses. Such access shall consist of at least one twelve-foot
lane for parking areas with 20 or fewer spaces and at least two twelvefoot
lanes for parking areas with over 20 spaces. Access to roads shall
include an adequate turnaround area to preclude the need for backing
out onto the road right-of-way. To the greatest extent practicable,
residential uses proposed along state roads shall be designed so as to
provide an adequate turnaround area and to preclude the need to back
out onto the road right-of-way.
C. No entrance or exit for any accessory off-street parking area with more
than four parking spaces or for any loading berth shall be located closer
than 75 feet from the intersection of any two designated street lines as
determined by the Official Map. This distance shall be 100 feet for any
signalized intersection or an intersection providing for a designated
left-turn storage lane on the same intersection leg as the proposed
access drive.
D. Off-street loading spaces may be located within any building, within a
side or rear yard or within a required off-street parking area, provided
that such spaces do not block access to such parking area or any
parking space. Unobstructed access, at least 12 feet wide, to and from a
street shall be provided to off-street loading berths. Such access may be
combined with access to parking areas. No off-street loading berth shall
be located between the street line and principal building. A loading
berth shall not be located in any required yard and shall be screened
where visible from any residential boundary.
§ 266-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-36
1:575
§ 266-36. Joint use.
The Planning Board, in approving a site plan, may allow off-street parking
and loading spaces required for structures or uses on the same or adjacent
lots to be provided in a single common facility, on one or more of said lots,
subject to the following:
§ 266-36.1. Commercial vehicles in residential districts. [Amended
2-5-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
§ 266-37. Paving of nonresidential parking areas and driveways.
A. The total capacity of the common facility shall be the sum of the
requirements of each individual use, except that said total capacity may
be reduced by the Planning Board, provided that the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the capacity
of such facility will meet the intent of the requirements by reason of the
provision of nonreserved parking spaces and variation in the probable
time of maximum use by residents, visitors, patrons and employees
among such uses.
B. As a condition of the approval of the joint use, the Planning Board shall
require a legal instrument satisfactory to the Planning Board and
Village Attorney assuring the continued existence and use of said
parking spaces in connection with the uses and structures that they
serve. Such instrument shall also guarantee that, upon termination of
such use, each individual participant will provide off-street parking and
loading spaces for its own use in accordance with all requirements of
this Zoning Law. Such instrument shall be recorded in the office of the
County Clerk of Rockland County.
A. Only one commercial vehicle not exceeding 22 feet in length, or eight
feet in height or seven feet in width, including all accessories and
equipment, may be parked on an occupied lot in any residential district.
Said vehicle may only be parked beyond the front line of the house on a
permitted driveway or parking area constructed and installed in
compliance with applicable laws, or within a private garage.
B. For purposes of this section, "commercial vehicle" shall mean any motor
vehicle used for commercial purposes, including but not limited to a
vehicle used for the transportation of goods, wares and merchandise, or
passengers for hire, or used for repair, service, installation, inspection,
landscaping or snowplowing purposes.
A. The paving of nonresidential parking areas and driveways shall require
site plan approval by the Planning Board. Prior to rendering a decision,
the Planning Board shall refer the site plan to the Superintendent of
Public Works for review and comment. The site plan shall include
specifications for the hardtop surface, subgrade, drainage and
landscaping, if required. The applicant must demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board that the base shall be properly
§ 266-36 SUFFERN CODE § 266-37
1:576
§ 266-38. Special parking requirements in the CB District.
[Amended 4-6-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
drained; that the construction shall be adequate to support the
contemplated traffic load; and that stormwater runoff will not be
directed onto adjoining properties or to a roadway in an uncontrolled
manner, subject to approval by the Superintendent of Public Works.
B. Every owner shall maintain the parking area clear and free from ice,
debris, rubbish and other obstructions. Every owner shall repair and
maintain the surface of said parking areas so that they will be free from
holes, obstructions and other hazards.
C. The Superintendent of Public Works or Code Enforcement Officer shall
administer and secure compliance with this section of the Zoning Law.
D. The Superintendent of Public Works or Code Enforcement Officer shall
order, in writing, the remedying of all conditions found to exist in
violation of this section and shall state in the violation order a
reasonable time for compliance therewith.
E. The Planning Board may waive the requirement of site plan approval for
minor paving projects upon a finding that the paving will not have a
detrimental effect on the property or its surroundings.
A. Except for the following uses, no offstreet parking is required in the CB
District, unless a significant change in the characteristics of the use is
proposed, including but not limited to an increase in square footage of
the use of 50% or more; changes that would increase the number of
patrons or customers by more than 50%; redevelopment or
consolidation of lots with increased usage; any combination of the
foregoing; or new construction, in which case the Planning Board will
determine the appropriate required parking.
(1) Places of worship.
(2) Banks.
(3) Restaurants.
(4) Schools of special instruction.
(5) Plumbing and HVAC supply; wholesaling, warehousing and
distribution.
(6) Funeral parlor.
(7) Public utility buildings.
(8) Live entertainment.
(9) Bus terminals.
(10) Artists' dwellings.
§ 266-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-38
1:577
§ 266-38.1. Parking requirements in TDD District. [Added
5-18-2015 by L.L. No. 6-2015]
B. Fee in lieu. In the CB District, when any change or increase in the
intensity of use or any increase in the amount of gross floor area would
require the provision of additional off-street parking spaces in
accordance with the standards set forth in this section, the applicant for
such change or addition may request permission to make a cash
payment to the Village of Suffern Parking Improvement Fund in lieu of
providing some or all of such parking. The Board of Trustees, in its
discretion, may elect to accept such payment on behalf of the Village.
The amount of the cash payment per parking space required in such
cases shall be established, and may from time to time be amended, by
the Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall submit any
application for a cash payment to the Planning Board for its review and
recommendation.
C. Dedication of land for parking purposes. When, in the CB District, any
change or increase in the intensity of use or any increase in the amount
of gross floor area would require the provision of additional off-street
parking spaces in accordance with the standards set forth in this
section, such standards may be waived or modified by the Planning
Board if the applicant conveys a permanent easement or dedication in
fee for the parking area shown on the adopted Parking Area Map. The
Planning Board may approve and the Board of Trustees may accept a
combination of an easement and a dedication in appropriate
circumstances.
D. Waiver of parking requirements. Upon consideration of the limited
nature of any particular application for increased intensity of use or
expansion, as well as the proximity of existing parking spaces, the
Planning Board may waive some or all of the off-street parking
requirements as set forth in § 266-41 of this chapter.
E. Appeals. The applicant may appeal the Planning Board's decision
regarding the dedication of land or parking requirements to the Board
of Trustees. In considering such an appeal, the Board of Trustees shall
review the Planning Board's recommendations.
A. Parking spaces in the TDD shall have the following minimum
dimensions:
(1) Standard spaces.
(a) Length: 18 feet.
(b) Width: eight feet.
(c) Drive aisle width: 24 feet.
(2) Handicapped space.
§ 266-38 SUFFERN CODE § 266-38.1
1:578
§ 266-39. Existing structures and uses.
Structures and uses in existence or for which building permits have been
issued prior to the effective date of this Zoning Law shall not be subject
to the parking or loading requirements of this Zoning Law, provided that
any parking and loading facilities then existing to serve such structures
or uses shall not be reduced or redesignated to serve other structures or
uses, except to the extent they exceed such requirements. At the time of
any enlargement of such existing structures or uses, required parking and
loading facilities shall be provided as specified in this Zoning Law.
§ 266-40. Design standards.
The size, layout, access and landscaping of parking spaces and loading
spaces and the provision of handicapped parking spaces shall be as
required in the Site Plan Regulations of the Village of Suffern.165
§ 266-41. Parking and loading requirements.
The Schedule of General Use Requirements166 presents the minimum
parking space and loading space requirements of this Zoning Law. Where
a lot contains more than one use, the minimum requirements must be
satisfied for each and every such use. For uses that do not fall within the
categories listed or for which no requirement is listed, the Planning Board
shall set the minimum parking space and loading space requirements,
based on the specific nature of the facility and on expected parking demand.
§ 266-42. Parking Improvement Fund.
(a) Length: 18 feet.
(b) Width: nine feet.
(c) Access aisle width: eight feet.
(d) Drive aisle width: 24 feet.
B. Below-grade parking shall not be included in calculating the gross floor
area of the building.
A. There is created herewith, by the adoption of this Village Zoning Law, a
special fund to be known and designated as the "Village of Suffern
Parking Improvement Fund" (hereinafter "the Fund"). The Fund shall
be established, operated and maintained in conformance with § 6-c of
the General Municipal Law. The Fund shall be initially established with
an appropriation of $2,000, which is hereby transferred from the
unallocated surplus to create the Fund. Upon the effective date of this
165. Editor's Note: See Ch. 228, Site Plan Regulations.
166. Editor's Note: The Schedule of General Use Requirements is located at the end of this
chapter.
§ 266-38.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-42
1:579
Zoning Law, the Village Treasurer shall effect such transfer and thereby
create such Fund without further action of the Village Board.
B. The Fund shall be preserved, invested and reinvested in the same
manner as other Village liquid assets. There shall be no upper limit or
critical amount beyond which the Fund can grow. The money in the
Fund shall be listed as a Village asset but may not be counted as Village
surplus for Village budget purposes. Neither shall the Fund be counted
as an asset in any analysis of Village solvency or for rating purposes,
and its deposits shall not be available to secure Village obligations other
than obligations undertaken in pursuit of the purposes of the Fund.
C. The expenditure of the Fund assets shall be limited exclusively to
capital projects designed to permanently increase the supply of public
parking spaces available to serve properties within the district. Nothing
herein shall be interpreted to mandate that a parking facility must be
constructed within the limits of the CB District.
D. For so long as there shall be a Village of Suffern Parking Authority, no
expenditures from the Fund shall be made by the Village Board, except
by joint agreement of the Village Board and the Board of the Parking
Authority.
E. Projects for the use of the assets of the Fund may be initiated by the
Planning Board of the Village and be proposed to the Village Board, by
the Village Board on its own initiative or by the Parking Authority of the
Village of Suffern. The creation, enlargement, alteration or
rehabilitation of parking facilities, whether privately or publicly
sponsored, shall be subject to site plan review and approval by the
Planning Board. The Village Board shall have the authority to transfer
Fund assets to the credit of the Parking Authority for use on projects of
which the Village Board approves.
F. No use of the assets of the Fund and no withdrawals or assignments
from the Fund shall be effected directly or indirectly, unless there shall
have been a properly advertised public hearing conducted by the
Village Board setting forth in reasonable detail the purposes therefor.
G. The amount to be collected per parking space pursuant to § 266-38A
hereof shall be an amount which shall be specified in the Village of
Suffern Fee Schedule resolution as adopted and amended from time to
time.167
167. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 266-42 SUFFERN CODE § 266-42
1:580
ARTICLE VIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 266-43. Compliance required.
No board, agency, officer or employee of the Village shall issue, grant
or approve any permit, license, certificate or other authorization for any
construction or alteration of any building or structure or for any use of
land, building or structure that would not be in full compliance with the
provisions of this Zoning Law, except as permitted under Article IX of this
Zoning Law. Any permit, license, certificate or other authorization issued,
granted or approved in violation of the provisions of this Zoning Law shall
be null and void and of no effect without the necessity of any proceedings
or revocation or nullification thereof.
§ 266-44. Code Enforcement Officer.
This Zoning Law shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer and one
or more Assistant Code Enforcement Officers as deemed necessary, referred
to herein individually and collectively as the "Code Enforcement Officer,"
as appointed by the Board of Trustees. It shall be the duty of the Code
Enforcement Officer and he is hereby empowered to:
§ 266-45. Building Inspector.
A. Inspect any building, structure or land to determine whether any
violations of this Zoning Law have been committed or exist, whether or
not such building, structure or land is occupied and whether or not a
certificate of occupancy or certificate of use has been issued.
B. Keep the Board of Trustees advised of all matters pertaining to the
enforcement of this Zoning Law; to make and keep all records
necessary and appropriate to the office, including records of written
complaints of violation of this Zoning Law and action taken on same.
C. Keep the Planning Board advised of all matters referred to the Code
Enforcement Officer, including written complaints of violation of this
Zoning Law and action taken on same.
D. Issue and post notices of violations, stop orders, revocation of
certificates of occupancy and use and appearance tickets and shall
order the remedying of any condition or omission that is found to be in
violation of this Zoning Law. In addition, by resolution, the Board of
Trustees, after a public hearing, may direct the Code Enforcement
Officer to revoke such certificates of occupancy or use, issue such stop
orders, make such inspection and reports, initiate and take such court
proceedings and perform all other actions as required by the Board of
Trustees as may be necessary to enforce this Zoning Law or to invoke
penalties for its violation.
§ 266-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-45
1:581
§ 266-46. Compliance; stop-work order.
A. This Zoning Law and the Building Code shall be administered by the
Building Inspector and one or more Assistant Building Inspectors as
deemed necessary, referred to collectively as the "Building Inspector,"
as appointed by the Board of Trustees.
B. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector and he is hereby
empowered to:
(1) Perform the duties listed in § 266-44A through 266-44D of this
Zoning Law.
(2) Receive and review applications for building permits and to issue
building permits.
(3) Receive and review applications for certificates of occupancy and
to issue certificates of occupancy.
(4) Receive and review applications for certificates of use and to issue
certificates of use.
(5) Issue and post notices of building permits and to order the
remedying of any condition or omission that is found to be in
violation of this Zoning Law. In addition, by resolution, the Board of
Trustees, after public hearing, may direct the Building Inspector to
revoke such building permits.
C. The Building Inspector shall attend Planning Board meetings as
requested.
A. No building permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate of use shall
be issued unless the proposed construction or use is in conformity with
all the provisions of this Zoning Law and other applicable laws.
B. Whenever the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer or
authorized agent thereof determines that work on any building,
structure or lot is being or has been conducted in violation of any
provision of the Building Code, state, federal, County or Village laws,
rules or regulations or any requirements of an approved and signed site
plan or subdivision plat, including required drainage, grade, elevation
or road profile plans or any other plans or specifications upon which a
building permit was issued, or that any work has been conducted in a
dangerous or unsafe manner, then the Building Inspector or Code
Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner of the property, the owner's
agent or the person performing the work to suspend and halt work. If
work remains to be performed on such buildings, structure or lot, such
persons shall forthwith stop such work and suspend all building
activities on the affected building or structures until the stop-work
order has been rescinded. Such stop-work order and notice shall be in
writing, shall state the conditions under which the work may be
resumed and may be served upon a person to whom it is directed, either
§ 266-45 SUFFERN CODE § 266-46
1:582
§ 266-47. Issuance of building permits.
by delivering it personally to him or by posting the same upon a
conspicuous portion of the building or structure under construction and
sending a copy of the same by certified mail. Any person aggrieved by
such a stop-work order may appeal to the Board of Appeals within 60
days to review the same, and the Board of Appeals, on such review, may
affirm, modify or reverse the action of the Building Inspector or Code
Enforcement Officer, as the facts may warrant.
C. Where the determination of violation concerns a building or structure
for which a certificate of occupancy or use has already been issued, the
Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer may revoke the
certificate of occupancy or use in accordance with § 266-49D or
§ 266-50D of this Zoning Law. Upon revocation of the certificate of
occupancy or use, the occupants then have a maximum period of 60
days in which to vacate the premises.
A. When required. A building permit is required for the construction,
reconstruction, relocation, demolition and alteration of a building or
structure, including the addition of or change to electric, gas heating
and plumbing facilities, wood stoves and the conversion of previously
uninhabited space to habitable space. The paving of nonresidential
parking areas and associated driveways also requires the issuance of a
building permit. Prior to the Building Inspector issuing a building
permit for paving, the Planning Board shall have approved a site plan
for paving.
B. Application.
(1) Application for a building permit shall be made to the Building
Inspector on forms provided by him and shall contain the following
information:
(a) A description, agreeing with the current Tax Map of the Village
of Suffern, of the lot on which the proposed work is to be done.
(b) A statement of the existing and proposed use or occupancy of
all parts of the lot and of the building or structure.
(c) The valuation of the proposed work.
(d) The full name and address of the owner, applicant and
occupant, including the names and addresses of each officer
and director of any corporation or each member of a
partnership.
(e) A brief description of the nature of the proposed work.
(2) All applications shall be accompanied by two copies of the site plan
bearing the signature of the Planning Board Chairman pursuant to
§ 266-60, if required.
§ 266-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-47
1:583
(3) Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by
plans and specifications, including plot plans as required, drawn to
scale, showing the location and size of all proposed new
construction and all existing structures on the site, the nature and
character of the work to be performed and the materials to be
incorporated, distance from lot lines, widths and grades of
adjoining streets, walks and alleys, details of structural,
mechanical and electrical work, including computations, stress
diagrams and other essential technical data. Such plans and
specifications shall include, on the plot plan or site plan, the
proposed location of all underground facilities, including: gas
service, electric service, sewer lines, drainage lines (including
routing of drainage from roof leaders and footing drains to a
positive outlet), water lines, sprinkler lines, telephone lines, etc.
The building plans shall include plans for mechanical services,
including gas, electric, water, heating and air conditioning. Plans
and specifications shall bear the signature of the person
responsible for the design and drawings, the date and, if required,
the architect's or engineer's signature, seal and New York State
license number.
(4) Applications shall be made by the owner or lessee or agent of either
or by the architect, engineer or builder employed in connection
with the proposed work. Where such application is made by a
person other than the owner, it shall be accompanied by an affidavit
of the owner that the proposed work is authorized by the owner and
that the applicant is authorized to make such application.
(5) Any amendment to the application or to the plans and
specifications accompanying same must be filed and approved by
the Building Inspector prior to the completion of the work, and
such amendments shall comply with the provisions of this Zoning
Law. The granting or refusal of such an amendment by the Building
Inspector shall be in writing and may be reviewed by appeal to the
Board of Appeals within 60 days after such determination is filed by
the Building Inspector.
C. Approval or disapproval.
(1) The Building Inspector shall examine or cause to be examined all
applications for permits and the plans, specifications and
documents filed therewith for compliance with this Zoning Law and
all applicable laws. Within 30 days of receipt of same, he shall
approve or disapprove the permit. An appeal from the approval or
disapproval of any application by the Building Inspector shall be
made to the Board of Appeals within 60 days after the
determination of the Building Inspector has been filed in the office
of the Building Inspector or endorsed on the building plans filed in
said office. Any final determination of disapproval shall be
indicated in writing, together with the copies thereof filed in the
office of the Building Inspector, and mailed to the applicant.
§ 266-47 SUFFERN CODE § 266-47
1:584
(2) Where site plan approval is required pursuant to the requirements
of this Zoning Law, the Building Inspector shall refer the
application to the Planning Board for review under these
regulations, and, in such cases, site plan approval will be required
prior to any issuance of a building permit.
(3) Upon approval of the applications and upon receipt of the fees
therefor, he shall promptly issue a building permit to the applicant
upon the form prescribed by him and shall affix his signature or
cause his signature to be affixed thereto. Upon approval of the
application, both sets of plans and specifications shall be endorsed
with the word "approved."
(4) One set of such approved and signed plans and specifications shall
be retained in the files of the Building Inspector and the other set
shall be returned to the applicant, together with the building
permit, and shall be kept at the building site and open to inspection
by the Building Inspector or his authorized representative at all
reasonable times. If the application, together with plans,
specifications and other documents filed therewith, describes
proposed work which does not conform to all of the requirements of
the applicable building regulations, the Building Inspector shall
disapprove the same and shall return the plans and specifications
to the applicant.
D. Notification of adjoining property owners. The applicant shall notify the
owners of adjoining properties and properties across the street from
the subject property of any decision made by the Building Inspector
regarding approval of the building permit. Such notification shall be
issued within 10 days of the decision and shall be sent by certified mail.
Where a final determination has been made by the Zoning Board of
Appeals on an appeal of an approval or disapproval of a building permit
application, the applicant shall notify, by certified mail, the owners of
adjoining properties and properties across the street from the subject
property of such a determination.
E. Expiration and extension. Every building permit shall expire at the end
of one year from the date issued. If construction is not completed within
said one-year period, the Building Inspector may, for due cause shown,
extend the permit for a period not to exceed one year. A renewal fee is
applicable as provided for in the Schedule of Fees.168
F. Liability insurance. In the event any application for a building permit
provides for construction or other activity involving operation of
equipment, personnel or placement of materials which may hazard a
public street, way, easement or public property, prior to issuing such
building permit, the applicant shall present evidence of liability
insurance naming the Village as the insured and saving the Village
harmless, in an amount to be set on an individual basis by the Building
168. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 266-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-47
1:585
Inspector and dependent on the degree to which the proposed activity
may create a hazard, in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney.
Additionally, property damage insurance or other surety acceptable
to the Village Attorney may be required where such construction or
activity may damage public property, including sidewalks, paving, signs
or landscaping. In reviewing any application hereunder, the Building
Inspector shall determine whether such hazard may exist by virtue of
the nature of activity described in such application. Where, after a
building permit has been issued without such liability insurance, it shall
appear that such hazards are present, the Building Inspector may, on
due notice given, require such insurance and may suspend such activity
pending receipt of the required liability policy.
G. Fees. Every application for a building permit pursuant to this Zoning
Law and/or the Building Code shall be accompanied by a fee in
accordance with the Fee Schedule of the Village of Suffern.169
(1) Upon application by a property owner, the Board of Trustees may
refund a portion of a building permit fee paid if the Building
Department was not required to undertake substantial work or
inspections with respect to the work or construction for which the
permit was issued. In making a determination as to whether to
make such a partial refund and the amount thereof, the Board of
Trustees shall consider:
(a) The amount of work or inspection required to be made by the
Building Department;
(b) Whether all or substantially all of the work was inspected and
certified by a professional engineer or other professional
approved by and acceptable to the Building Inspector, thereby
eliminating the necessity of inspections by the Building
Department;
(c) Whether the fee charged in accordance with the Standard
Schedule of Fees in the particular instance is grossly and
severely unfair and inequitable under the circumstances;
(d) Whether the applicant has acted in good faith and equitably in
all matters relating to the application for a building permit,
construction and compliance with applicable laws, rules and
regulations;
(e) Whether it is in the best interests of the Village of Suffern to
refund a portion of the building permit fee paid.
(2) An application for such a refund shall be filed with the Village Clerk
within 60 days after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and
shall set forth the basis for the request for a refund. No application
may be made for such refund unless the full amount of the building
169. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 266-47 SUFFERN CODE § 266-47
1:586
§ 266-48. Certificates of occupancy and/or use.
No building or structure for which a building permit has been issued shall
be occupied or used in whole or in part until a certificate of occupancy and/
or certificate of use shall have been issued by the Building Inspector. No
certificate of occupancy or certificate of use shall be issued until such offstreet
parking and loading spaces have been provided for in accordance
with the requirements of Article VII of this Zoning Law.
permit fee has been paid and no violations exist with respect to
the property. The Village Clerk shall transmit such application
to the Building Inspector for his review and recommendations.
The Building Inspector shall render a recommendation on the
application to the Board of Trustees within 60 days after referral
to him and shall refer to the foregoing considerations therein and
provide to the Board of Trustees whatever documentation and
records as are relevant in considering the matter. Thereafter, the
Board of Trustees shall determine, based on the foregoing
considerations, whether to provide a refund and the amount
thereof. No refund of a building permit fee shall be made unless
it is determined, as a consequence of the facts and circumstances,
the building fee charged is grossly excessive and that no
substantial inspection or similar work was required to be
undertaken by the Building Department.
A. A certificate of occupancy and certificate of use shall be required for
any new construction where one tenant will occupy the building, lot or
portion thereof.
B. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for the shell of the building
where new construction is proposed and multiple tenants will occupy
the building. A certificate of use shall be required for each individual
tenant.
C. A certificate of occupancy and a certificate of use shall be required for
an existing building, structure, lot or portion thereof, where only one
tenant occupies the building, and where a change of use, as defined
herein or in the Village of Suffern Site Plan Regulations,170 is proposed.
D. A certificate of use shall be required for an existing structure where an
individual or multiple tenants occupy a building and a change of use, as
defined in this Zoning Law, is proposed. A change of use of a building,
structure or lot is interpreted for purposes of this Zoning Law as:
(1) A change that results in a difference in the numerical listing or the
use column (permitted, accessory or special permit) for a use as
specified in § 266-22, Schedule of General Use Requirements.171
170. Editor's Note: See Ch. 228, Site Plan Regulations.
171. Editor's Note: The Schedule of General Use Requirements is located at the end of this
chapter.
§ 266-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-48
1:587
§ 266-49. Issuance of certificates of occupancy.
(2) A change in the off-street parking standards for a use as specified
in § 266-22, Schedule of General Use Requirements.
(3) A change in a building's facade.
A. Application and affidavit. The owner or his agent shall make application
for a certificate of occupancy. Accompanying this application, and
before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, there shall be filed
with the Building Inspector:
(1) A complete set of as-built drawings showing the as-built locations
of all the underground facilities and the interior mechanical
services, as specified in § 266-47B(3) of this Zoning Law. These
plans shall be signed and certified by a New York State registered
architect or licensed professional engineer.
(2) An affidavit of the registered architect or licensed professional
engineer who supervised the construction of the work. This
affidavit shall state that the deponent has examined the approved
plans of the structure for which a certificate of occupancy is
sought, that the structure has been erected in accordance with the
approved plans and, as erected, complies with this Zoning Law and
the law governing building construction, including all subdivision
regulations and the requirements of any approved subdivision plat
or site plan, except insofar as variations therefrom have been
legally authorized. Such variations shall be specified in the
affidavit.
B. Issuance of certificate. Before issuing a certificate of occupancy, the
Building Inspector shall examine or cause to be examined all buildings,
structures and lots for which an application has been filed. There shall
be maintained by the Building Inspector a record of all such
examinations and inspections, together with a record of findings of
violations of the law.
C. Fees. Every application for a certificate of occupancy shall be
accompanied by a fee as set forth in the Fee Schedule of the Village of
Suffern.172
D. Termination. A certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to authorize
and is required for both initial and continued occupancy of the building
or land to which it applies and shall continue in effect so long as such
building or land is used for the use authorized in the certificate. If the
terms of such certificate are violated by the holder thereof, the Building
Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer may, by service of notice of
violation, revoke such certificate, which order of revocation is, however,
subject to review by the Board of Appeals by the holder thereof taking
172. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 266-48 SUFFERN CODE § 266-49
1:588
§ 266-50. Issuance of certificates of use.
an appeal to the Board of Appeals within 30 days of service of said order
of termination.
E. Copies. Copies of every certificate of occupancy issued hereafter shall
be furnished to the Planning Board or Board of Appeals for those
applications they approve and, on the payment of the regular
application fee therefor, to any other person. The fees required from the
general public for copies of public documents shall be in accordance
with the Fee Schedule of the Village of Suffern.173
F. Temporary certificate of occupancy. Upon request, the Building
Inspector may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a period
not to exceed 90 days prior to the completion of any required
landscaping, concrete work or other improvements which may not be
installed due to seasonal constraints, provided that such portion or
portions as have been completed may be occupied safely without
endangering life or the public welfare. The Building Inspector shall
require surety from the owner or holder of the building permit, which
surety shall run to the benefit of the Village for a term not exceeding 90
days. The amount of said surety shall be sufficient to cover the cost to
complete the work and shall be set and held by the Village Board of
Trustees, upon the advice of the Building Inspector and the Department
of Public Works, with the approval of the Planning Board, and in such
form acceptable to the Village Attorney. Every application for a
temporary certificate of occupancy shall be accompanied by a fee in
accordance with the Fee Schedule of the Village of Suffern.
A. Application and affidavit. The owner or his agent shall make application
for a certificate of use.
B. Issuance of certificate. Before issuing a certificate of use, the Building
Inspector shall examine or cause to be examined all buildings,
structures and sites for which an application has been filed for a
building permit to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, demolish or
change the use; and he will conduct such inspections during and upon
completion of the work for which a building permit has been issued.
There shall be maintained by the Building Inspector a record of all such
examinations and inspections, together with a record of findings of
violations of the law. However, any certificate of use for the
establishment of any use of a building or land requiring a special permit
as listed in the Schedule of General Use Regulations,174 and any other
particular use requiring the approval of the Planning Board, shall be
issued only with the authorization of the Planning Board. Every
certificate of use for which a special permit or variance has been
173. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
174. Editor's Note: The Schedule of General Use Requirements is located at the end of this
chapter.
§ 266-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-50
1:589
§ 266-51. Penalties for offenses.
granted shall contain a detailed statement of such special permit or
variance and of the conditions to which the same is subject.
C. Fees. Every application for a certificate of use shall be accompanied by
a fee as set forth in the Fee Schedule of the Village of Suffern.175
D. Termination. A certificate of use shall be deemed to authorize and is
required for both initial and continued use of the building or lot to
which it applies and shall continue in effect so long as such building or
land is used for the use authorized in the certificate of use. If the terms
of such certificate of use are violated by the holder thereof, the Building
Inspector may, by service of notice of violation, terminate such
certificate of use, which order of termination is, however, subject to
review by the Board of Appeals by the holder thereof taking an appeal
to the Board of Appeals within 30 days of service of said order of
termination.
E. Copies. Copies of every certificate of use issued hereafter shall be
furnished to the Planning Board or Board of Appeals for those
applications they approve and, on the payment of the regular
application fee therefor, to any other person. The fees required from the
general public for copies of public documents shall be in accordance
with the Fee Schedule of the Village of Suffern.
F. Temporary certificate of use. The Building Inspector may issue a
temporary certificate of use only when a temporary certificate of
occupancy has been approved in accordance with § 266-49F. The
certificate of use may be granted at any time during the ninety-day
period that the certificate of occupancy is in effect and shall expire at
the terminal date of the temporary certificate of occupancy. Every
application for a temporary certificate of use shall be accompanied by a
fee in accordance with the Fee Schedule of the Village of Suffern.
A. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Zoning Law
or any other regulation made under authority conferred thereby, or who
shall build or alter any structure or use any land in violation of any
statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, or who shall
knowingly assist therein, shall be liable to a fine of not more than
$5,000, or to community service in an amount deemed appropriate to
the court, or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 10 days, or any
combination of the same. Each week's continued violation shall
constitute a separate and additional violation. In addition to the
foregoing provisions, the Village shall have such other remedies for any
violation or threatened violation of this Zoning Law as are now or may
hereafter be provided by law. The application of any above penalty shall
not be held to prevent any action under § 266-51B of this Zoning Law.
[Amended 1-8-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
175. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 266-50 SUFFERN CODE § 266-51
1:590
B. Prevention. In case any lot is used or building or structure is erected,
constructed, altered or maintained in violation of this Zoning Law, any
regulation made pursuant thereto or any detailed statement or plan
submitted and approved thereunder, in addition to other lawful
remedies, any appropriate action or proceedings may be instituted to
prevent such unlawful use, erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the
occupancy or use of such structure or land or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in or about such premises. Whenever the
Building Inspector has reasonable grounds to believe that work on any
building, structure or lot is being performed in violation of the
provisions of this Zoning Law or not in conformity with any regulation
made pursuant thereto or not in compliance with any detailed
statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder or in an unsafe
and dangerous manner, he may issue a stop-work order pursuant to the
provisions of this Zoning Law.
C. Noncompliance with orders. Any person who shall violate any order of
the Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer, issued under this
Zoning Law shall be deemed to have violated this Zoning Law. Any
person failing to comply with an order within the time stated therein
shall be deemed guilty and fined. Each week of continuance of a
violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense hereunder.
§ 266-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-51
1:591

ARTICLE IX
Board of Appeals
§ 266-52. Organization.
The Board of Appeals, containing five members, as heretofore established
by the Village Board pursuant to § 7-712 of the Village Law of the State of
New York, is hereby maintained. The present Chairman and Vice Chairman
shall continue to the end of the period for which they were appointed. The
Chairman shall be appointed by the Mayor, and the Vice Chairman shall be
appointed by the Chairman.
§ 266-52.1. Alternate members. [Added 9-25-1996 by L.L. No.
7-1996; amended 1-15-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004]
The Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Board of Trustees, may appoint
two alternate members to the Zoning Board of Appeals to serve as provided
for in this section. Such alternate members shall be appointed for a twoyear
term of office. The Chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
assign such alternate member(s) as necessary when the absence of regular
members of said Board or the conflict of interest of regular members
of said Board would otherwise prevent five members of said Board from
considering any pending matter. Once designated to serve on a particular
matter before the Board, the alternate member(s) shall have the same
powers and duties as regular members of the Board until the matter is
concluded. Any determination of said Board consisting of an alternate
member shall have the same weight and be entitled to the same authority
as the act or deed of the regular Zoning Board of Appeals, and all laws,
statutes and regulations shall apply and be applied with equal force and
effect. Such alternate members appointed pursuant to this section shall be
paid for his or her respective services as fixed by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
§ 266-53. Meetings and records.
Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times
as the Board of Appeals may determine. The Chairman may appoint a Vice
Chairman. The Board of Appeals may adopt rules and regulations governing
its procedures. The presence of three members of the Board of Appeals shall
be necessary for a quorum. The concurring vote of three members shall be
necessary to grant any variance of this Zoning Law, to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from or to decide in favor
of the applicant any matter before the Board of Appeals. The Board shall
keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on every
question or, if any member is absent or fails to vote, indicating that fact,
and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions.
Every rule, determination, regulation, amendment or appeal thereof and
every order, requirement and decision of the Board of Appeals shall be filed
in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 266-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-54
1:593
§ 266-54. Powers and duties.
A. General. The Board of Appeals shall have all of the powers and duties
prescribed by the Village Law and by this Zoning Law, which powers
and duties are summarized and more particularly specified in the
following, provided that none of the following sections shall be deemed
to limit any of the powers of the Board of Appeals that are conferred by
the Village Law. In passing upon any matter before it, the Board of
Appeals shall take into specific consideration the goals of this Zoning
Law and the recommendations of the Village Comprehensive Plan.
B. Rules and regulations. The Board of Appeals may adopt such rules and
regulations as are necessary or proper to the performance of its powers
and duties hereunder and may amend or repeal the same.
C. Nonconforming uses. The Board of Appeals is authorized to extend the
permitted period for cessation of a nonconforming use in accordance
with the requirements of § 266-14B(5) of this Zoning Law; to review and
approve, approve with modifications or disapprove a plan for
reconstruction of a nonconforming building in accordance with the
requirements of § 266-14D(2) of this Zoning Law; to permit the change
of a nonconforming use to another nonconforming use in accordance
with § 266-14E of this Zoning Law; and to review and approve, approve
with modifications or disapprove a plan for the improvement of a
nonconforming use in accordance with § 266-14F of this Zoning Law.
D. Variances.
(1) On appeal from an order, requirement, decision or determination
made by an administrative official charged with the enforcement of
this Zoning Law or on referral of an applicant to the Board of
Appeals by an approving agency acting pursuant to this Zoning
Law, the Board of Appeals is authorized to vary or modify the strict
letter of this Zoning Law where its literal interpretation would
cause practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in such
manner as to observe the spirit of the law, secure public safety and
welfare and do substantial justice.
(2) In adopting the provision of § 266-54D(3) which provides that the
Board of Appeals shall have the power to grant use variances
authorizing the use of land which would otherwise not be allowed
or would be prohibited by the terms of this Zoning Law except for
any prohibited use listed in § 266-14I, the Board of Trustees hereby
exercises its authority pursuant to §§ 10(1)(ii)(e), to amend the
application of the provisions of § 7-712-b, Subdivision 2, of the
Village Law to it in providing that the Zoning Board of Appeals does
not have the jurisdiction or authority to grant a use variance to
permit a use specifically prohibited by § 266-14I of this Zoning Law.
(3) Use variances.
§ 266-54 SUFFERN CODE § 266-54
1:594
(a) The Board of Appeals shall have the power to grant use
variances authorizing the use of land which would otherwise
not be allowed or would be prohibited by the terms of this
Zoning Law except for any prohibited use listed in § 266-14I.
No such use variance shall be granted by the Board of Appeals
without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning
regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary
hardship. In order to prove unnecessary hardship, the
applicant shall demonstrate to the Board of Appeals that:
[1] The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided
that the lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by
competent financial evidence. [Amended 9-25-1996 by
L.L. No. 6-1996]
[2] The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is
unique and does not apply to a substantial portion of the
district or neighborhood in which it is located.
[3] The requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood.
[4] The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(b) The Board of Appeals, in granting of such use variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate to address the unnecessary hardship proved by the
applicant and, at the same time, preserve and protect the
character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
(4) Area variances.
(a) Where, because of practical difficulty, an applicant requests a
variance of the lot area or other bulk requirements of this
Zoning Law, the Board of Appeals may grant a variance in the
application of the provisions of this Zoning Law in the specific
case, provided that as a condition to the grant of any such
variance, the Board of Appeals shall make a specific finding
that the application of the requirements of this Zoning Law to
the land in question creates such practical difficulty. In making
this determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take into
consideration the benefit to the applicant if the variance is
granted, as weighed against the detriment to the health, safety
and public welfare of the neighborhood or community by such
grant. In making such determination, the Board of Appeals
shall consider:
[1] Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area
variance.
§ 266-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-54
1:595
§ 266-55. Procedure.
[2] Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be
achieved by some method, feasible for the applicant to
pursue, other than an area variance.
[3] Whether the requested area variance is substantial.
[4] Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect
or impact on the physical or environmental conditions in
the neighborhood or district.
[5] Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Board
of Appeals, but shall not necessarily preclude the granting
of such variance.
(b) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate and at the same time preserve and protect the
character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
E. Interpretations. On appeal from an order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative official charged with the
enforcement of this Zoning Law or on request from any official, agency
or Board of the Village, the Board of Appeals is authorized to decide any
question involving the interpretation of any provision of this Zoning
Law. Interpretations shall be made in accordance with the intent of the
particular provision being interpreted.
F. Conditions and safeguards. The Board of Appeals may prescribe such
conditions or restrictions applying to the grant of a variance as it may
deem necessary in each specific case, in order to minimize the adverse
effects of such variance upon other property in the neighborhood and to
protect the public health, safety and welfare. Such conditions or
restrictions shall be incorporated in the site or subdivision plan,
building permit, certificate of occupancy and certificate of use. Failure
to comply with such conditions or restrictions shall constitute a
violation of this Zoning Law and may constitute the basis for denial or
revocation of a building permit, certificate of occupancy or certificate of
use and for all other applicable remedies. Where required, the Zoning
Board of Appeals may set a terminal date for such variance.
A. Appeal or application. An appeal shall be taken within 60 days of the
order or decision appealed from. A notice of appeal shall be filed with
the official or agency from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board
of Appeals and shall specify the grounds therefor. The official or agency
from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of
Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from is taken. A referral to the Board of Appeals for a variance
§ 266-54 SUFFERN CODE § 266-55
1:596
or a request for an interpretation may be made at any time. All such
appeals and applications to the Board of Appeals shall be made by
the owner or agent duly authorized, in writing, and shall be on forms
prescribed by the Board of Appeals. Each appeal or application shall
fully set forth the circumstances of the case, shall refer to the specific
provision of the Zoning Law involved and shall exactly set forth, as
the case may be, the interpretation that is claimed, the details of the
adjustment that is applied for and the grounds for which it is claimed
that the same should be granted.
B. Review by other agencies.
(1) Upon receipt of a completed appeal or application, the Board of
Appeals shall forward copies for review and report to such officials
and agencies of the Village as it deems appropriate. All such
agencies shall have 30 days from the date of forwarding to submit a
report. The Board of Appeals shall not decide on the matter until it
has received the report of the agency or 30 days have passed since
such forwarding.
(2) The Board of Appeals shall refer to the Rockland County
Commissioner of Planning for its recommendation all matters
within the provisions of §§ 239-l and 239-m of the General
Municipal Law which includes real property lying within 500 feet
from the boundary of any City, Village or Town; or from the
boundary of any existing or proposed County or state park or other
recreation area; or from the right-of-way of any existing or
proposed County or state parkway, thruway, expressway, road or
highway; or from the existing or proposed right-of-way of any
stream or drainage channel owned by the County or for which the
County has established channel lines; or from the existing or
proposed boundary of any County or state owned land on which a
public building or institution is situated. The Rockland County
Commissioner of Planning shall render a decision within 30 days of
referral or within an extended period if agreed upon. If the
Rockland County Commissioner of Planning fails to report within
such period of 30 days or such longer period as has been agreed
upon, the Board of Appeals may act without such report. If the
Rockland County Commissioner of Planning disapproves the
proposal or recommends modifications thereof, the Board of
Appeals shall not act contrary to such disapproval or
recommendation except by a vote of a majority plus one of all
members thereof and after the adoption of a resolution fully setting
forth the reasons for such contrary action. Within seven days after
adoption of the minutes regarding such action by the Board of
Appeals, a report shall be filed with the Rockland County
Commissioner of Planning.
C. Public hearing. The Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing on
any appeal, application or request made pursuant to this Zoning Law.
§ 266-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-55
1:597
§ 266-56. Expiration of a variance.
D. Notice of hearing.
(1) Notice of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at
least 10 days prior to the date of such hearing. Notice shall also be
sent 10 days prior to the date of such hearing to all property
owners within 500 feet of the perimeter of the property by regular
mail. The applicant shall cause signs to be posted on such property
on each street frontage indicating the date and purpose of such
hearing and in a manner prescribed by the Board of Appeals. The
costs of all such notices shall be paid by the applicant. [Amended
8-15-1994 by L.L. No. 9-1994]
(2) At least five days before such public hearing, the Board of Appeals
shall mail notices thereof to the parties, to the regional state park
commission having jurisdiction over any state park or parkway
within 500 feet of the property affected by such appeal and to the
Rockland County Commissioner of Planning as required in
§ 266-55B(2) of this Zoning Law, which notice shall be accompanied
by a full statement of the matter under consideration.
E. Action. Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution,
shall be recorded and shall fully set forth the facts of the case, the
findings and the conclusions on which the decision was based. The
Board of Appeals shall decide on matters before it within 62 days after
the close of the public hearing and, unless such time limit is extended
by mutual agreement with the applicant, shall file its resolution in the
offices of the Board of Appeals and the Village Clerk within five
business days after the date a decision is rendered and shall thereafter
mail a copy of such resolution to the applicant.
F. Compliance with SEQRA. The Board of Appeals shall comply with the
provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review Act176 and its
implementing regulations.
A. In adopting the provisions of this section, the Board of Trustees hereby
exercises its authority pursuant to §§ 10(1)(ii)(e), to amend the
application of § 7-712-b of the Village Law to it in providing that an area
or use variance shall automatically expire if substantial construction is
not commenced within one year or such other time limit as may be
chosen by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. A variance granted under this Zoning Law shall automatically expire if
substantial construction, in accordance with the plans for which such
variance was granted, has not been completed within one year or such
other time limit as may be chosen by the Board of Appeals in connection
with its decision, from the date of granting such variance by the Board
of Appeals, or, if judicial proceedings to review the Board's decision
176. Editor's Note: See Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 266-55 SUFFERN CODE § 266-56
1:598
§ 266-57. Fees.
Every application or appeal to the Board of Appeals shall be subject to a fee
as set forth in the Fee Schedule of the Village of Suffern.177
§ 266-58. Review of decision.
Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of
the Board of Appeals, may apply to the Supreme Court for a review by
a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Laws and Rules. Such
proceeding shall be instituted within 30 days after the filing of a decision of
the Board in the office of the Village Clerk.
shall be instituted, from the date of entry of the final order in such
proceedings, including all appeals.
177. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 266-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-58
1:599

ARTICLE X
Site Plan Approval
§ 266-59. Authority. [Amended 9-25-1996 by L.L. No. 6-1996]
Pursuant to § 7-725-a of the Village Law, the Board of Trustees hereby
delegates final authority to the Planning Board for approval of any site plan
required by this Zoning Law.
§ 266-60. Site plan approval required.
A. Approval of a site plan by the Planning Board is required for the
development or redevelopment of any property or structure for a new
use, the expansion or relocation of any existing use or a change of use.
A change of use of a building, structure or lot is interpreted for
purposes of this Zoning Law as:
(1) A change that results in a difference in the numerical listing or the
use column (permitted, accessory or special permit) for a use as
specified in § 266-22, Schedule of General Use Requirements.178
(2) A change in the off-street parking standards for a use as specified
in § 266-22, Schedule of General Use Requirements.
(3) A change in a building's facade.
B. Exception for certain nonresidential uses proposed in the CB District.
[Added 3-13-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003179]
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to support the revitalization
of the Village's Central Business (CB) District by encouraging the
continued use and re-use of buildings that are in existence on the
effective date of this subsection. To achieve this objective, the
Village seeks to expedite the development review process by
eliminating site plan review and approval, or limiting the site plan
application submission and review, for certain nonresidential uses,
provided said uses meet the conditions set forth in Subsection B(2)
below.
(2) Site plan approval exception. Upon a determination made by the
Building Inspector, site plan review and approval shall not be
required for proposed nonresidential uses that meet the following
standards:
(a) The use shall be located in a building in existence on the
effective date of this subsection.
178. Editor's Note: The Schedule of General Use Requirements is located at the end of this
chapter.
179. Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former Subsection B as Subsection C.
§ 266-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-60
1:601
(b) The use is permitted as-of-right within the CB District at the
time of application. Site plan review and approval shall be
required for special uses.
(c) The use shall occupy not more than 2,500 square feet of gross
floor area of the building in which it is to be located.
(d) The use shall not result in a required amount of parking that
exceeds the amount of parking required for the prior use.
(e) The use will not result in any exterior change to the building
facade, except for signage. The Planning Board shall review
and approve any sign for the proposed use.
(3) Limited site plan review. Where a proposed application meets the
requirements of § 260-60B(2)(a) through (d) but proposes a
physical alteration to the building's facade, the site plan application
shall be limited to submission of the standard site plan application
form and a building elevation(s), architectural rendering or other
scaled architectural drawing. The Planning Board's review and
approval shall be limited to a determination of the proposal's
conformity to Chapter 228, Article VI, Site Planning Design
Criteria, of the Village of Suffern Site Plan Regulations, and any
design guidelines applicable to the CB district which the Board of
Trustees may adopt from time to time.
(4) Building Inspector determination. The Building Inspector shall
provide, in writing, the reasons supporting the determination and
said determination shall be filed in the office of the Building
Department. A copy of the determination shall be provided to the
Board of Trustees and Planning Board. Any building permit
application that does not meet the conditions listed in § 266-60B(2)
above shall require site plan review and approval by the Planning
Board.
C. The Planning Board shall make the final determination as to whether or
not a change of use requires submission and approval of a site plan.
One-family and two-family dwellings do not require site plan approval
as required in this article. Where site plan approval is required,
applications for the issuance of a building permit, certificate of
occupancy or certificate of use must be accompanied by a copy of the
approved site plan bearing the signature of the Planning Board
Chairman. The continued validity of any certificate of occupancy or
certificate of use shall be subject to continued conformance with such
approved site plan and conditions. Site plans are continuing obligations
for the life of the use for which they are approved. Unapproved
deviations from or neglect in maintenance of an approved site plan are
violations of this Zoning Law and may be prosecuted in the same
manner as any other violation. Revisions made to approved site plans
shall be subject to the same approval procedure as the initial
application.
§ 266-60 SUFFERN CODE § 266-61
1:602
§ 266-61. Site plan regulations.
§ 266-62. Site maintenance.
It shall be the duty of every property owner to maintain his property in
conformity with the approved site plan. Failure to do so shall constitute a
violation of this Zoning Law.
§ 266-62.1. Expiration. [Added 3-16-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998;
amended 8-7-2017 by L.L. No. 5-2017]
A. Approval of any site plan required by this Zoning Law shall conform to
the requirements of the Site Plan Regulations of the Village of
Suffern.180
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals is not permitted to vary the requirements
of the Site Plan Regulations.
A. A site plan approval shall be deemed to authorize only the particular
use specified in the approval resolution of the Planning Board.
B. A Planning Board resolution which grants final site plan approval shall
expire 180 days after the date of Planning Board resolution of approval,
unless the site plan map has been signed by the Planning Board
Chairperson. Said time period may be extended for two periods of not
more than 90 days each upon application to the Planning Board for such
extension(s).
C. The tenure of maps with final approval is limited to a period of three
years from the date of filing, within which time building permits shall be
obtained in accordance with Zoning Ordinance provisions in effect at
the time of application of building permit.
D. Reinstatement of a revoked or lapsed site plan. If a preliminary or final
approval has lapsed, it may be reinstated, in the Board's sole discretion,
after payment of a new fee appropriate in amount to the additional
review required. A new public hearing may be required.
180. Editor's Note: See Ch. 228, Site Plan Regulations.
§ 266-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-62.1
1:603

ARTICLE XI
Amendments
§ 266-63. Authorization.
The Board of Trustees may, from time to time, on its own motion, on petition
or on recommendation of any board, agency or official of the Village,
after public notice and hearing, amend, supplement, repeal or change the
regulations and provisions of this Zoning Law.
§ 266-64. Amendments on petition.
§ 266-65. Amendments on motion.
An amendment on motion or an amendment proposed to the Board of
Trustees by any board, agency or official of the Village shall contain the
information required in § 266-64 of this Zoning Law. The Village Clerk shall
be responsible for complying with the requirements as to notice in § 266-69
of this Zoning Law.
§ 266-66. Initial consideration.
The Board of Trustees may decide not to formally consider any proposed
amendment.
§ 266-67. Referrals for review and report.
If any amendment is to be considered by the Board of Trustees, it shall be
referred for review and report to the Planning Board, the Village Attorney
and any other board, agency or official of the Village which the Board
of Trustees deems appropriate. The Village Attorney shall report to the
Board of Trustees regarding the form of the proposed amendment. The
Planning Board shall report to the Board of Trustees regarding the form
and the advisability of the proposed amendment. Its report shall analyze
the proposed amendment and shall state the Planning Board's reasons
for its recommendation, describing any conditions it believes make the
amendment advisable or not, and specifically stating whether the
A. A petition for an amendment of this Zoning Law shall be made to the
Village Clerk and shall describe the proposed changes. For proposed
amendments to the Zoning Map,181 a copy of the applicable portion of
the Zoning Map shall be included, as kept by the Village Clerk, showing
existing and proposed zoning, as well as a map drawn to an appropriate
scale showing all properties within 500 feet of the periphery of the
subject property and any contiguous property of the petitioner in the
same ownership.
B. The applicant shall be responsible for complying with the requirements
as to notice in § 266-69 of this Zoning Law.
181. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is located in the pocket at the end of this volume.
§ 266-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-67
1:605
amendment would or would not be in accordance with the Comprehensive
Plan and in furtherance of the purposes of this Zoning Law. All such boards,
agencies and officials shall have 60 days from the date of forwarding or from
the date of revision by the petitioner, whichever is later, to submit reports. If
the Planning Board has not reported within 60 days, the Board of Trustees
may take action without such report. In no case shall this section restrict
the right of an applicant to come before the Planning Board for an informal
discussion and review prior to formal submission.
§ 266-68. Public hearing.
On receipt of the requested reports and any revised proposed amendment
from an application or notification by the applicant that no revision will be
made, the Board of Trustees may schedule and hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment.
§ 266-69. Notice of hearing.
Notice of the public hearing shall be published once in the official
newspaper, not less than 10 nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the
hearing. A copy of the notice, with an affidavit of such mailing, together
with proof of notice in the official newspaper shall be filed in the Village
Clerk's office on or before the date of the public hearing. The applicant shall
cause notice, by certified mail, to owners within 500 feet of the periphery
of the subject property to be mailed not less than 10 days prior to the
required hearing. In the event that such amendment changes the district
classification of land, there shall be posted, not later than 10 days prior
to the hearing, a notice of the proposed change upon the property to
which such change applies, said notice to be visible from each public street
abutting such property.
§ 266-70. Records.
The Village Clerk shall keep record copies of all zoning maps and text
sections superseded by any amendment of this Zoning Law. All amendments
to the Zoning Map182 shall be duly recorded on the Zoning Map kept with
the Village Clerk, stating the date and nature of the amendment and a
reference to the parcels, as shown on the latest Village tax maps, affected
by the zone change.
§ 266-71. Referral to adjacent municipalities and other agencies.
A. At least 10 days prior to the date of the public hearing, written notice of
any proposed regulations, restrictions or boundaries, including
amendments thereto, affecting property within 500 feet of the following
shall be served personally or by mail by the Village Clerk in accordance
with Village Law § 7-706, Subdivision 2: [Amended 9-25-1996 by L.L.
No. 6-1996]
182. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is located in the pocket at the end of this volume.
§ 266-67 SUFFERN CODE § 266-71
1:606
§ 266-72. Fees.
All petitions for amendment of this Zoning Law, except those recommended
by the Board of Trustees, by the Planning Board or other municipal board
or agency of the Village shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with
the Fee Schedule of the Village of Suffern.183
(1) The property of the housing authority erecting or owning a housing
project authorized under the Public Housing Law, upon the
executive director of such housing authority and the chief
executive officer of the municipality providing financial assistance
thereto.
(2) The boundary of a City, Village or Town, upon the Clerk thereof.
(3) The boundary of a County, upon the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors or other person performing like duties.
(4) The boundary of a state park or parkway, upon the regional state
park commission having jurisdiction over such state park or
parkway.
B. Proposed amendments shall be referred to the Rockland County
Commissioner of Planning for its recommendation on all matters within
the provisions of §§ 239-l and 239-m of the General Municipal Law
which includes real property lying within 500 feet of the boundary of
any City, Village or Town; or from the boundary of any existing or
proposed County or state parkway, thruway, expressway, road or
highway; or from the existing or proposed right-of-way of any stream or
drainage channel owned by the County or for which the County has
established channel lines; or from the existing or proposed boundary of
any County or state owned land on which a public building or institution
is situated. The Rockland County Commissioner of Planning shall
render a decision within 30 days of referral or within an extended
period if agreed upon. If the Rockland County Commissioner of
Planning fails to report within such period of 30 days or such longer
period as has been agreed upon, the Board of Trustees may act without
such report. If the Rockland County Commissioner of Planning
disapproves the proposal or recommends modifications thereof, the
Board of Trustees shall not act contrary to such disapproval or
recommendation except by a vote of a majority plus one of all members
thereof and after the adoption of a resolution fully setting forth the
reasons for such contrary action. Within seven days after final action by
the Board of Trustees, a report shall be filed with the Rockland County
Commissioner of Planning.
183. Editor's Note: See Ch. A275, Fees.
§ 266-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-72
1:607

ARTICLE XII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 266-73. Severability.
§ 266-74. Short title.
This Zoning Law shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Law of the
Village of Suffern."
§ 266-74.1. Alternate members for the Planning Board. [Added
1-15-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004; amended 6-4-2012 by L.L. No.
9-2012]
The Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Board of Trustees, may appoint
four alternate members to the Planning Board to serve as provided for
in this section. Such alternate members shall be appointed for a twoyear
term of office. The Chairman of the Planning Board shall assign such
alternate member(s) as necessary when the absence of regular members
of said Board or the conflict of interest of regular members of said Board
would otherwise prevent five members of said Board from considering any
pending matter. Once designated to serve on a particular matter before
the Board, the alternate member(s) shall have the same powers and duties
as regular members of the Board until the matter is concluded. Any
determination of said Board consisting of an alternate member shall have
the same weight and be entitled to the same authority as the act or deed
of the regular Planning Board and all laws, statutes and regulations shall
apply and be applied with equal force and effect. Such alternate members
appointed pursuant to this section shall be paid for his or her respective
services as fixed by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 266-75. When effective.
This Zoning Law shall take effect upon filing with the New York State
Secretary of State.
A. Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision
or phrase of this Zoning Law be declared by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not
affect any other portion of this Zoning Law. Should any provision
pertaining to such special permit uses be declared unconstitutional or
invalid, the Village Board declares that such provisions would not be
enacted in whole or in part and that such uses are declared prohibited,
absent such special permit regulation.
B. Should this Zoning Law in its entirety be declared by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the law
adopted by the Village Board of the Village of Suffern on January 27,
1977, entitled "Zoning Law — Village of Suffern, New York, Law No. 1,
1977," and all amendments thereto shall take effective immediately
thereafter.
§ 266-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-76
1:609
§ 266-76. Effect on building permits and building permit
applications.
Except as provided in this section, nothing herein shall require any change
in the plans, construction or designated use of a building or structure for
which a building permit has lawfully been issued prior to the effective
date of this Zoning Law. Nothing herein shall require any change in the
plans, construction or designated use of a building or structure for which a
building permit has lawfully been issued within 60 days after the effective
date of this Zoning Law, provided that the proposed use complies with the
use requirements of this Zoning Law, construction shall begin within six
months of the date of such permit and the entire building or structure shall
be completed within one year of the date of such permit.
§ 266-77. Repeal of existing zoning law.
A law adopted by the Village Board of the Village of Suffern on January
27, 1977, entitled "Zoning Law — Village of Suffern, New York, Law No. 1,
1977," and all amendments thereto are hereby repealed. Such repeal shall
not be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of
said law; or as discontinuing, abating or modifying or altering any penalty
accruing or to accrue; or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or
corporation; or as waiving any right of the Village of Suffern, under any
section or provision existing at the time of passage of this Zoning Law, or as
vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm or corporation
by lawful action of the Village of Suffern.
§ 266-76 SUFFERN CODE § 266-77
1:610
Chapter 267
ZONING AND PLANNING APPLICATION FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Site plan regulations — See Ch. 228.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 239.
Zoning — See Ch. 266.
§ 267-1. Legislative intent.
A. It is the intention of the Board of Trustees in adopting this chapter to
provide a mechanism whereby the Village of Suffern is reimbursed for
the reasonable and customary cost of reasonably required professional
review and consultation services in the review of zoning and planning
applications pending before the Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Appeals and Board of Trustees. It is also the intention of the Board of
Trustees to ensure that such fees charged to an applicant are
reasonable in terms of the nature of the review services, necessity for
such services, the hourly rate charged, the amount of time expended on
such review and the total sum charged for professional review on an
application.
B. It is further intended to assess applicants only for the reasonable fees
for the utilization of outside consultants or professionals. It is not the
intention of the Board of Trustees to charge applicants for the review or
consultation of employees of the Village of Suffern. In particular, this
chapter is not intended to charge applicants for the ordinary review and
services of the Village Attorney or Village Engineer (Superintendent of
Public Works). This chapter is intended to charge applicants for the
reasonable and necessary fees for planning consultants, outside
engineers and other technical professionals.
C. In order to be assured that the fees charged an applicant are
reasonable in terms of the hourly rate charged, the amount of time
expended on review and the total sum charged for professional review
on a particular type of application, the Board of Trustees has caused a
survey of fees charged by various consultants, professionals and
municipalities to be conducted.
D. Lastly, by establishing a mandatory escrow account and other
mechanisms to assure collection of such review fees, the Board of
Trustees intends to guarantee that each applicant pays the reasonable
and fair cost of professional review of an application and that the cost of
such professional review is not borne by the taxpayers of the Village of
Suffern.
E. In adopting this chapter, the Board of Trustees utilizes the authority of
§§ 10, Subdivision 1(i), 10, Subdivision 1(ii)a(9-a) and (14), of the
§ 266-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-1
1:611
§ 267-2. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings set forth below for purposes of
this chapter:
APPLICATIONS — An application for approval of a site plan, subdivision,
special permit, variance, zone change or amendment of the text of the
Zoning Law,184 interpretation of the Zoning Law or appeal of a decision or
determination of the Building Inspector or other administrative official.
BOARD — The Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals or Board of
Trustees of the Village of Suffern.
CHAIRMAN — The Mayor of the Village of Suffern with respect to
applications pending before the Board of Trustees, the Chairman of the
Zoning Board of Appeals with respect to applications pending before the
Zoning Board of Appeals or the Chairman of the Planning Board with
respect to applications pending before the Planning Board.
CONSULTANT — Planning consultant, engineer, environmental consultant
or professional in any other substantive technical area of knowledge or
expertise which is necessary to adequately review an application consistent
with the jurisdiction of a board.
§ 267-3. Consultant fees.
Municipal Home Rule Law to adopt this chapter. In addition, in order to
amend the application of §§ 4-412(1), 7-706, 7-712-a, 7-725-a, 7-725-b,
7-728 and 7-730 of the Village Law, the Board of Trustees hereby
utilizes the provisions of § 10, Subdivision 1(ii)d(3), of the Municipal
Home Rule Law to amend the application of said sections to it.
A. In performing the review of any application, the Board may determine
that it is necessary to refer said application to one or more consultants
in order to adequately review such application, any concerns or issues
relevant to said application or compliance with the applicable
provisions of the Zoning Law,185 Site Plan Regulations,186 Subdivision
Regulations,187 Village Law, New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code, State Environmental Quality Review Act188 or any
other applicable statute, law, rule, regulation or code.
B. Should a Board determine that it is necessary to refer an application to
one or more consultants, as set forth in § 267-3A, the Board shall obtain
a written estimate from one or more consultants who practice in the
relevant area of expertise and, based upon the estimates provided and
consultation with Village staff, determine a reasonable estimate for the
184. Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
185. Editor's Note: See Ch. 266, Zoning.
186. Editor's Note: See Ch. 228, Site Plan Regulations.
187. Editor's Note: See Ch. 239, Subdivision of Land.
188. Editor's Note: See Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 267-1 SUFFERN CODE § 267-3
1:612
reasonable cost of such review and consultation services for each
necessary area of professional services. In determining the reasonable
cost of such necessary review and consultation services, the Board, in
consultation with Village staff, shall determine that the fees charged by
the consultant to be retained for such service are customarily charged
for such services in Rockland County and that the fees to be charged by
such consultant(s) are competitive with the fees charged by comparable
professionals and consultants in Rockland County in terms of an hourly
rate charged and in the fee for review of the entire project. In arriving
at an estimate for review of an application, the Board, to the extent
practicable, shall render an estimate for review of all aspects of the
project, including all reasonably anticipated reviews from inception to
completion of review of the proposal.
C. The Village shall not be confined to retaining consultants doing
business in the Rockland County market and shall not be limited to
retaining consultants whose fees are commensurate with those set
forth in § 267-3B. However, an applicant is only responsible to
reimburse the Village at an hourly rate or on a fee basis commensurate
with those fees determined to be charged for commensurate services by
comparable professionals in Rockland County in accordance with
§ 267-3B herein.
D. Once the Board shall have determined an estimate for fees necessary
for review of a proposal consistent with the provisions of this chapter, it
shall notify the applicant of the amount of such estimate, together with
a detailed analysis of the basis for such estimate. An applicant shall pay
the amount of such estimate to the Village Treasurer prior to further
review of such proposal by the Board. The Village Treasurer shall notify
the Secretary to such Board that the required sum has been paid to the
Village immediately upon receipt of payment. Said sum shall be
deposited and segregated in one or more trust accounts and shall only
be drawn upon in accordance with the provisions of § 267-3E herein.
E. Upon presentment with bills from consultants retained in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, the Village Treasurer shall forward a
copy of such bills or invoices to the Chairman of such Board, who shall
examine the same and certify that the services set forth therein were
necessary for adequate review of an application and that, based upon
studies or reports performed for the Village of Suffern, such fees are
customarily charged for such services in Rockland County and that the
fees to be charged by such consultant(s) are competitive with the fees
charged by comparable professionals and consultants in Rockland
County in terms of an hourly rate charged and in terms of the fee for
review of the entire project. Simultaneously therewith, the Village
Treasurer shall forward a copy of said bill or invoice to the applicant.
F. Upon receipt of certification from the Chairman of such Board, the
Village Treasurer shall make payment of said amount approved by such
Chairman to the consultant from the funds deposited in the
aforementioned trust account by the applicant.
§ 267-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-3
1:613
G. Once an application has been withdrawn, denied or approved, the
Chairman shall so notify all consultants retained in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter that no further review is required and that the
consultant(s) are required to provide to the Village Treasurer a final bill
within 15 days of the date of said letter. Upon receipt of said final bill(s)
or the passage of 15 days, the Village Treasurer shall make final
payment of all outstanding bills to such consultant(s) and shall refund
to the applicant the balance, if any, remaining in such trust fund(s) to
the credit of the applicant.
H. Upon exhaustion of the trust fund paid by an applicant in accordance
with § 267-3B, the Village Treasurer shall immediately so notify the
Chairman of such Board and all consultants retained in accordance with
this chapter in connection with an application that all such funds have
been expended. No further review of such application by consultant(s)
retained in accordance with this chapter shall transpire unless and until
the provisions of this section have been complied with. Once the funds
deposited in accordance with this chapter have been expended, the
Chairman of a Board, upon consultation with previously retained
consultants, Village staff and/or the applicant may certify in writing to
the applicant and Village Treasurer that additional review is required
by the same or additional consultants. Said certification shall,
additionally, set forth an estimate for such services in accordance with
and containing the particulars required by § 276-3B herein, together
with an explanation for the requirement for additional review. Upon
receipt of such certification, the applicant shall forthwith forward the
sum set forth therein to the Village Treasurer, who shall deposit said
sum in a trust account in accordance with the provisions of § 276-3D
and which sums shall be disbursed only in accordance with the
provisions of § 276-3E.
I. If an application requires approval or permits from more than one
Board of the Village of Suffern, the Chairmen of such boards may, in
conformity with the provisions of § 276-3A and B herein, determine an
appropriate sum for review of all applications or, in the alternative,
each Board may separately determine an appropriate review sum. If an
application requires approval from more than one Board, the balance of
funds remaining following approval by a Board shall be retained by the
Village until other reviewing boards determine if review by
consultant(s) is required and the estimated cost thereof in accordance
with § 276-3A and B herein. If such additional consultant fees are
required, the amount of such unexpected trust funds shall be applied
thereto.
J. Final approval of an application shall not be granted, nor shall any map,
plat, decision or local law be signed or released by the Secretary to a
Board, nor shall a building permit or certificate of occupancy be
granted until all fees for consultant services rendered in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter have been fully paid by an applicant.
§ 267-3 SUFFERN CODE § 267-4
1:614
§ 267-4. Limitations.
The provisions of this chapter are intended to supplement the provisions of
6 NYCRR 617.17, and the limitations therein are not construed to represent
a limitation on review fees set in accordance with this chapter which are not
for the preparation or review of environmental impact statements.
Appendix
Chapter A275
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 77.
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 96.
Games of chance — See Ch. 146.
Parades — See Ch. 181.
Peddling and Soliciting — See Ch. 200.
Sewers — See Ch. 220.
Shopping carts — See Ch. 224.
Soil removal — See Ch. 231.
Street openings — See Ch. 235, Art. III.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 239.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 248.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 254.
Water — See Ch. 261.
Zoning — See Ch. 266.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2005 4-11-2005 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse: container
districts amendment
Ch. 150, Art. II
2-2005 4-11-2005 Water service
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
3-2005 4-11-2005 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 220, Art. II
4-2005 6-6-2005 Stormwater
management and
erosion and sediment
control
Ch. 233, Art. I
§ 267-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:615
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-2005 6-6-2005 Illicit discharges and
connections to storm
drainage system
Ch. 233, Art. II
6-2005 8-8-2005 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse: container
districts amendment
Ch. 150, Art. II
7-2005 9-6-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
8-2005 11-10-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 266
9-2005 11-16-2005 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 266 (table
only)
10-2005 12-12-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
1-2006 4-10-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
2-2006 4-10-2006 Water service
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
3-2006 5-8-2006 Sewers: infiltration
inflow management
program
Ch. 220, Art. I
4-2006 6-5-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
5-2006 6-5-2006 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 69
6-2006 7-10-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
7-2006 8-7-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
8-2006 8-7-2006 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 248
9-2006 8-7-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
10-2006 9-13-2006 Streets and sidewalks:
obstructions and
encroachments
amendment
Ch. 235, Art. II
1-2007 1-8-2007 Housing standards
amendment; property
maintenance
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 162, 205, 266
§ DL-1 SUFFERN CODE § DL-1
1:616
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2007 1-8-2007 Site plan regulations
amendment
Ch. 228
3-2007 2-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
4-2007 2-20-2007 Senior citizens tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 244, Art. III
5-2007 2-20-2007 Veterans tax exemption Ch. 244, Art. VII
6-2007 3-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
7-2007 4-9-2007 Water service
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
8-2007 5-7-2007 Water service
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
9-2007 7-9-2007 Littering amendment Ch. 168
10-2007 7-9-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
11-2007 7-9-2007 Dogs amendment Ch. 122
12-2007 10-9-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
13-2007 12-3-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
1-2008 1-7-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
2-2008 3-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
3-2008 5-7-2008 Water service
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
4-2008 5-7-2008 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 220, Art. III
5-2008 5-7-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
6-2008 5-7-2008 Police auxiliary Ch. 43
7-2008 6-2-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
8-2008 7-7-2008 Streets and sidewalks:
obstructions and
encroachments
amendment
Ch. 235, Art. II
9-2008 8-11-2008 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse: collection
amendment
Ch. 150, Art. II
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:617
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-2008 8-11-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
11-2008 8-11-2008 Parks amendment Ch. 193
12-2008 10-6-2008 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse: collection
amendment
Ch. 150, Art. I
13-2008 10-6-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
14-2008 11-3-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
15-2008 11-3-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
16-2008 11-3-2008 Amusement devices
amendment; code
enforcement
amendment
Ch. 77;105
17-2008 11-3-2008 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 162
18-2008 11-3-2008 Building construction
and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 96
19-2008 11-3-2008 Building construction
and fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 96
1-2009 3-25-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
2-2009 4-6-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 266
3-2009 4-6-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 266
4-2009 5-4-2009 Water service
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
5-2009 5-4-2009 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 220, Art. III
6-2009 5-4-2009 Streets and sidewalks:
obstructions and
encroachments
amendment
Ch. 235, Art. II
7-2009 7-6-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
8-2009 7-6-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
1-2010 4-19-2010 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 220, Art. III
§ DL-1 SUFFERN CODE § DL-1
1:618
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2010 4-19-2010 Water service
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
3-2010 7-6-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
4-2010 8-2-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
5-2010 8-2-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
6-2010 10-4-2010 Life and safety fee Ch. 165
7-2010 10-4-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
8-2010 10-4-2010 Sewers: infiltration
inflow management
program amendment;
sewer use amendment;
sewer rents amendment
Ch. 220, Arts. I, II
and III
9-2010 11-29-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 266
1-2011 1-3-2011 Sewers: infiltration
inflow management
program amendment;
sewer use amendment;
sewer rents amendment
Ch. 220, Arts. I, II
and III
2-2011 1-3-2011 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 266 (table
only)
3-2011 3-7-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
4-2011 3-7-2011 Water: cross-connection
controls
Ch. 261, Art. III
5-2011 4-4-2011 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 220, Art. III
6-2011 4-4-2011 Water service
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
7-2011 7-11-2011 Code enforcement
amendment
Ch. 105
8-2011 7-11-2011 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 162
9-2011 7-11-2011 Streets and sidewalks:
obstructions and
encroachments
amendment
Ch. 235, Art. II
10-2011 7-11-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:619
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-2011 7-11-2011 Water service
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
12-2011 7-11-2011 Sewer use amendment Ch. 220, Art. II
13-2011 8-8-2011 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 266 (table
only)
14-2011 9-7-2011 Code enforcement
amendment
Ch. 105
15-2011 9-7-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
16-2011 11-7-2011 Streets and sidewalks:
openings and
excavations amendment
Ch. 235, Art. III
1-2012 1-3-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
2-2012 1-3-2012 Parks amendment Ch. 193
3-2012 2-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
4-2012 3-5-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
5-2012 4-2-2012 Water service
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
6-2012 4-2-2012 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 220, Art. III
7-2012 5-7-2012 Dangerous buildings
amendment
Ch. 100
8-2012 6-4-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
9-2012 6-4-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 266
10-2012 7-9-2012 Planning Board; Zoning
Board of Appeals:
attendance at meetings
Ch. 41, Art. II
11-2012 7-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
12-2012 7-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
13-2012 10-1-2012 Streets and sidewalks:
obstructions and
encroachments
amendment
Ch. 235, Art. II
14-2012 11-5-2012 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 266 (table
only)
§ DL-1 SUFFERN CODE § DL-1
1:620
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2013 3-5-2013 Tree removal
amendment
Ch. 251
2-2013 3-5-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
3-2013 4-1-2013 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 220, Art. III
4-2013 4-1-2013 Water service
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
5-2013 6-10-2013 Sewer use amendment Ch. 220, Art. II
6-2013 6-10-2013 Water service
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
7-2013 7-8-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
8-2013 7-8-2013 Tree Advisory Board Ch. 250
9-2013 9-17-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
10-2013 10-15-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
11-2013 11-12-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
12-2013 12-2-2013 Police officer retirement
incentive program
NCM
13-2013 12-11-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
14-2013 12-11-2013 Flood damage
prevention
Ch. 141
1-2014 1-13-2014 Code enforcement
amendment
Ch. 105
2-2014 2-4-2014 Police officer retirement
incentive program
amendment
NCM
3-2014 3-5-2014 Streets and sidewalks:
obstructions and
encroachments
amendment
Ch. 235, Art. II
4-2014 4-7-2014 Water service
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
5-2014 4-7-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 266
6-2014 6-3-2014 Vacant buildings Ch. 101
7-2014 7-14-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:621
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-2014 9-8-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
9-2014 11-10-2014 Noise amendment Ch. 175
1-2015 1-5-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
2-2015 4-27-2015 Tax levy limit override NCM
3-2015 4-27-2015 Water service
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
4-2015 4-27-2015 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 220, Art. III
5-2015 5-4-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
6-2015 5-18-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 266
7-2015 8-24-2015 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 162
8-2015 8-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
9-2015 9-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
10-2015 10-5-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
11-2015 10-5-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
12-2015 11-9-2015 Rental properties Ch. 215
1-2016 2-1-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
2-2016 2-1-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 254
3-2016 4-11-2016 Water service
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
4-2016 4-11-2016 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 220, Art. III
5-2016 4-11-2016 Tax levy limit override NCM
6-2016 4-11-2016 Code of Ethics Ch. 22
7-2016 6-6-2016 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 266 (table
only)
8-2016 9-12-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 266
9-2016 9-12-2016 Filming Ch. 135
10-2016 10-9-2016 Fees: Reimbursement of
Professional Fees
Ch. 132, Art. 1
§ DL-1 SUFFERN CODE § DL-1
1:622
Local Law
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2017 1-9-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 254
2-2017 1-9-2017 Amendment of non-Code
section of L.L. No.
6-2015
NCM
3-2017 4-27-2017 Tax Levy Limit Override NCM
4-2017 7-10-2017 Filming Amendment Ch. 135
5-2017 8-7-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 266
6-2017 11-8-2017 Peddling and Soliciting
Amendment
Ch. 200
7-2017 11-8-2017 Streets and Sidewalks:
Obstructions and
Encroachments
Amendment
Ch. 235, Art. II
8-2017 12-4-2017 General Provisions:
Adoption of Code
Amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I
1-2018 2-5-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 266
2-2018 2-5-2018 Tree Advisory Board
Amendment
Ch. 250
3-2018 2-20-2018 Taxation: Veterans
Alternative Exemption
Amendment
Ch. 244, Art. VII
4-2018 2-20-2018 Taxation: Real Property
Exemptions for Cold
War Veterans
Ch. 244, Art. VIII
5-2018 3-5-2018 Water: Water Service
Amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
6-2018 4-9-2018 Tax Levy Limit Override NCM
7-2018 5-7-2018 Tax Levy Limit Override
Repealer
NCM
8-2018 6-4-2018 Taxation: Utilities Tax
Amendment
Ch. 244, Art. I
9-2018 6-4-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 266
10-2018 9-4-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 254
1-2019 1-7-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 266
2-2019 4-30-2019 Tax Levy Limit Override NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:623