Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 1-6-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of Walton,
as codified by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 260,
shall be known collectively as the "Code of the Village of Walton," hereafter
termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions contained in the "Code of the Village of Walton"
to any other local law, ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such
reference shall be changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number,
article number or section number appearing in the Code as if such local law,
ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Walton, and it is the
intention of said Board of Trustees that each such provision contained
within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this
Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3
below.
§ 1-3. Repealer.
A. Repeal of inconsistent enactments. Except as provided in § 1-4,
Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected, below, all local
laws and ordinances, or parts of such local laws or ordinances,
inconsistent with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this
local law are hereby repealed as of the adoption and filing of this local
law as set forth in § 1-13; provided, however, that such repeal shall only
be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the
Village of Walton which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code
shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect.
B. Repeal of specific enactments. The Board of Trustees of the Village of
Walton has determined that the following local laws and/or ordinances
are no longer in effect and hereby specifically repeals the following
legislation:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
(1) Local Law No. 1-2006, Control of Dogs, adopted 2-6-2006.
(2) Local Law No. 2-2006, Dangerous Dogs, adopted 2-6-2006.
(3) Chapter 35, Local Laws, Adoption of, adopted 2-1-1971 by L.L. No.
3-1971.
(4) Chapter 124, Environmental Quality Review, adopted 8-4-1977 by
L.L. No. 2-1977.
(5) Chapter 137, Explosives, adopted 1-12-1905.
(6) Chapter 213, Streets and Sidewalks, Article II, Signs and Awnings ,
9-24-1892.
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Walton prior to the effective date
of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of Walton
or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Village of Walton.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Village of Walton.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Walton providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Village of Walton or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Walton appropriating money
or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Village of
Walton or other instruments or evidence of the Village’s indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
§ 1-3 WALTON CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Walton and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and,
if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Village
Clerk of the Village of Walton by impressing thereon the Seal of the Village
of Walton, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said
Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication
of this local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of
the Village of Walton" or any new local laws or resolutions, when enacted
or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Village to be
a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so
that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for Village employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the Village.
N. Any local law or ordinance adopted subsequent to June 3, 2019.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Village of Walton required to be filed
in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of Trustees
subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to indicate
the intention of said Board of Trustees to be a part of said Code shall, when
finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of
copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local
laws or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Village Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of
a fee to be set by resolution of the Board of Trustees. The Clerk may also
arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who alters or tampers with the Code of the Village of Walton
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of
Walton to be misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other provision of
this local law, shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not
more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Village of Walton, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have
been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition,
certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes
were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention
of the Board of Trustees that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule
A1 attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to
1. Editor’s Note: In accordance with § 1-11B, the chapters, articles and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or repealed by this local law are indicated throughout the Code
§ 1-7 WALTON CODE § 1-11
1:6
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Village of Walton, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
become effective upon the effective date of this local law. (Chapter
and section number references are to the local laws, ordinances and
resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
C. Nomenclature changes.
(1) References to "ordinance" are hereby revised to "local law."
(2) All references to "Street Commissioner" are hereby revised to
"Highway Superintendent."
(3) All references to "Village Clerk" or "Village Treasurer" are hereby
revised to "Village Clerk-Treasurer."
(4) All references to "Village President" are hereby revised to "Village
Mayor."
(5) In Chapter 52, Records, Article I, Public Access to Records, all
references to "Committee on Public Access to Records" are hereby
revised to "Committee on Open Government."
(6) In Chapter 158, Games of Chance, all references to "New York
State Racing and Wagering Board" are hereby revised to "New York
State Gaming Commission."
(7) In Chapter 192, Sewers, all references to "Water Pollution Control
Federation (WPCF)" are hereby revised to "Water Environment
Federation (WEF)."
(8) In Chapter 192, Sewers, all references to "Superintendent of Water
Pollution Control" are hereby revised to "Superintendent of Public
Works."
(9) In Chapter 252, Water, Article II, Cross-Connections and Backflow
Protection, all references to "Superintendent of Water" are hereby
revised to "Superintendent of Public Works."
by a history referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, histories indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced
with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 1-6-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020."
Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the Village
offices.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
Chapter 15
ASSESSMENT
§ 1-13 WALTON CODE § 1-13
1:8
ARTICLE I
Termination of Assessing Unit
[Adopted 3-5-1984 by L.L. No. 4-1984 (Ch. 7 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 15-1. Legislative intent.
The intent of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Walton is to implement
§ 1402, Subdivision 3, of the Real Property Tax Law providing for the
voluntary termination of the Village's status as an assessing unit, as now
provided in the Village Law and the Real Property Tax Law. It is also
the intent of this chapter to abolish the position of Assessor (or Board of
Assessors) and to terminate any and all responsibility as provided by law for
the review of the assessments of real property located within the Village of
Walton.
§ 15-2. Cessation as assessing unit.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, the Village of Walton shall
cease to be an assessing unit.
§ 15-3. Position of Assessor abolished.
The position of Assessor in the Village of Walton is hereby abolished.
§ 15-4. Board of Assessment Review abolished.
The Board of Assessment Review in the Village of Walton is hereby
abolished.
§ 15-5. Acceptance of town's assessment roll.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, taxes in the Village of Walton
shall be levied on a copy of the applicable part of the assessment roll of the
Town of Walton, with the taxable status date of such town controlling for
Village purposes.
§ 15-6. Filing of copy.
Within five days of the effective date of this chapter, the Board of Trustees
of the Village of Walton shall file a copy of such chapter with the Clerk-
Treasurer and Assessor of the Town of Walton and with the State Board of
Equalization and Assessment.
§ 15-7. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary
of State; provided, however, that such local law is subject to a permissive
referendum, and the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall forthwith proceed to
notice such fact and conduct such referendum if required by petition.2
§ 15-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-7
1:9
2. Editor's Note: Since no valid petition requesting such referendum was filed, this chapter
was deemed duly adopted 3-5-1984.
§ 15-7 WALTON CODE § 15-7
1:10
Chapter 24
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 24-1. Legislative intent.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the Village
Board of the Village of Walton recognizes that there are rules of ethical
conduct for public officers and employees which must be observed if a high
degree of moral conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence is to be
maintained in our unit of local government. It is the purpose of this chapter
to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct for the officers and employees
of the Village of Walton. These rules shall serve as a guide for official
conduct of the officers and employees of the Village of Walton. The rules of
ethical conduct of this chapter, as adopted, shall not conflict with, but shall
be in addition to, any prohibition of Article 18 of the General Municipal Law
or any other general or special law relating to ethical conduct and interest
in contracts or municipal officers and employees.
§ 24-2. Definitions. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTEREST — A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing
to a municipal officer or employee as the result of a contract with the
municipality which such officer or employee serves. For the purposes of this
article, a municipal officer or employee shall be deemed to have an interest
in the contract of:
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
Village of Walton, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any
administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall
be deemed to be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of being
a volunteer firefighter or civil defense volunteer, except a fire chief or
assistant fire chief.
His spouse, minor children and dependents, except a contract of
employment with the municipality which such officer or employee
serves;
A.
A firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is
a member or employee;
B.
A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director
or employee; and
C.
A corporation, any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by such officer or employee.
D.
§ 15-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-3
1:11
§ 24-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the Village of Walton shall be subject to and
abide by the following standards of conduct:
A. Gifts. He shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit any gifts; or accept or
receive any gift having a value of $75 or more, whether in the form of
money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or
promise, or any other form, under circumstances in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him, or
could reasonably be expected to influence him, in the performance of
his official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on
his part. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. Confidential information. He shall not disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his official duties or use such
information to further his personal interest.
C. Representation before one's own agency. He shall not receive, or enter
into any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for services
to be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal agency
over which he has jurisdiction, or to which he has the power to appoint
any member, officer or employee.
D. Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He shall not
receive, or enter into any agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any agency of his municipality whereby his compensation is to
be dependent or contingent upon any action by such agency with
respect to such matter, provided that this paragraph shall not prohibit
the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable value of the
services rendered.
E. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he knows thereof,
a member of the Village Board and any officer or employee of the
Village of Walton, whether paid or unpaid, who participates in the
discussion or gives official opinion to the Village Board on any
legislation before the Village Board shall publicly disclose on the official
record the nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial or other
private interest he has in such legislation.
F. Investments in conflict with official duties. He shall not invest or hold
any investment directly or indirectly in any financial, business,
commercial or other private transaction which creates a conflict with
his official duties.
G. Private employment. He shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or
promise to accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his official duties.
§ 24-3 WALTON CODE § 24-3
1:12
§ 24-4. Exception for certain claims.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand or suit against the Village of Walton, or any agency thereof, on
behalf of himself or any member of his family arising out of any personal
injury or property damage or for any lawful benefit authorized or permitted
by law.
§ 24-5. Distribution of Code of Ethics. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Mayor of the Village of Walton shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics
to be distributed to every officer and employee of the Village of Walton
within 10 days after the effective date of this chapter. Each officer and
employee elected or appointed thereafter shall be furnished a copy before
entering upon the duties of his office or employment. Failure to distribute
any such copy or failure of any officer or employee to receive such copy
shall have no effect on the duty of compliance with such code nor the
enforcement of provisions thereof.
§ 24-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of
this Code may be fined, suspended or removed from office or employment,
as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 52
RECORDS
H. Future employment. He shall not, after termination of service or
employment with such municipality, appear before any board or agency
of the Village of Walton in relation to any case, proceeding or
application in which he personally participated during the period of his
service or employment or which was under his active consideration.
§ 24-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-6
1:13

ARTICLE I
Public Access to Records
[Adopted 6-19-1968 (Ch. 40 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 52-1. Purpose and scope.
§ 52-2. Designation of records access officer; duties.
A. The people's right to know the process of government decision-making
and the documents and statistics leading to determinations is basic to
our society. Access to such information should not be thwarted by
shrouding it with the cloak of secrecy or confidentiality.
B. These rules provide information concerning the procedures by which
records may be obtained from an agency as defined by Subdivision 3 of
§ 86 of the Public Officers Law of the State of New York.
C. Agency personnel shall furnish to the public the information and
records required by the Freedom of Information Law, as well as records
otherwise available by law.
D. Any conflicts among laws governing public access to records shall be
construed in favor of the widest possible availability of public records.
A. The Board of Trustees shall be responsible for ensuring compliance
with the regulations herein and hereby designates the Village Clerk-
Treasurer, as records access officer. The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall
have the duty of coordinating agency response to public requests for
access to records. [Amended 2-2-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
B. The records access officer is responsible for ensuring that agency
personnel:
(1) Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
(2) Assist the requester in identifying requested records, if necessary.
(3) Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions:
(a) Make records available for inspection.
(b) Deny access to the records in whole or in part and explain in
writing the reasons therefor.
(4) Upon request for copies of records, take one of the following
actions:
(a) Make a copy available upon payment or offer to pay
established fees, if any.
(b) Permit the requester to copy those records.
(5) Upon request, certify that a record is a true copy.
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-2
1:15
§ 52-3. Location of records.
Each agency shall designate the locations where records shall be available
for public inspection and copying.
§ 52-4. Hours for public inspection.
§ 52-5. Requests for public access to records.
§ 52-6. Subject matter list.
(6) Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
(a) The agency is not the custodian for such records; or
(b) The records of which the agency is a custodian cannot be found
after diligent search.
A. Each agency shall accept requests for public access to records and
produce records during all hours they are regularly open for business.
B. In agencies which do not have daily regular business hours, a written
procedure shall be established by which a person may arrange an
appointment to inspect and copy records. Such procedure shall include
the name, position, address and phone number of the party to be
contacted for the purpose of making an appointment.
A. An agency may require that a request be made in writing or may make
records available upon oral request.
B. An agency shall respond to any request reasonably describing the
record or records sought within five business days of receipt of the
request.
C. A request shall reasonably describe the record or records sought.
Whenever possible, a person requesting records should supply
information regarding dates, file designations or other information that
may help to describe the records sought.
D. If the agency does not provide or deny access to the record sought
within five business days of receipt of a request, the agency shall
furnish a written acknowledgment of receipt of the request and a
statement of the approximate date when the request will be granted or
denied. If access to records is neither granted nor denied within 10
business days after the date of acknowledgment of receipt of a request,
the request may be construed as a denial of access that may be
appealed.
A. Each agency shall maintain a reasonably detailed current list by subject
matter of all records in its possession, whether or not records are
available pursuant to Subdivision 2 of § 87 of the Public Officers Law.
§ 52-2 WALTON CODE § 52-6
1:16
§ 52-7. Denial of access to records; appeal.
B. The subject matter list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit
identification of the category of the record sought.
C. The subject matter list shall be updated not less than twice per year.
The most recent update shall appear on the first page of the subject
matter list.
A. The Board of Trustees shall hear appeals or shall designate a person or
body to hear appeals regarding denial of access to records under the
Freedom of Information Law.
B. Denial of access shall be in writing stating the reason therefor and
advising the person denied access of his or her right to appeal to the
person or body established to hear appeals, and that person or body
shall be identified by name, title, business address and business
telephone number. The records access officer shall not be the appeals
officer.
C. If an agency fails to respond to a request within five business days of
receipt of a request as required in § 52-5D of this article, such failure
shall be deemed a denial of access by the agency.
D. Any person denied access to records may appeal within 30 days of
denial.
E. The time for deciding an appeal by the individual or body designated to
hear appeals shall commence upon receipt of written appeal
identifying:
(1) The date and location of a request for records.
(2) The records that were denied.
(3) The name and return address of the appellant.
F. The agency shall transmit to the Committee on Open Government
copies of all appeals upon receipt of an appeal. Such copies shall be
addressed to: Committee on Open Government, Department of State,
162 Washington Avenue, Albany, New York 12231.
G. The person or body designated to hear appeals shall inform the
appellant and the Committee on Open Government of its determination,
in writing, within seven business days of receipt of an appeal. The
determination shall be transmitted to the Committee on Open
Government in the same manner as set forth in Subsection F of this
section.
H. A final denial of access to a requested record, as provided for in
Subsection G of this section, shall be subject to court review as
provided for in Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
§ 52-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-8
1:17
§ 52-8. Fees.
Except when a different fee is otherwise prescribed by law:
§ 52-9. Public notice.
Each agency shall publicize by posting in a conspicuous location and/or by
publication in a local newspaper of general circulation:
§ 52-10. Severability.
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
judgment shall not affect or impair the validity of the other provisions of this
article or the application thereof to other persons and circumstances.
A. There shall be no fee charged for the following:
(1) Inspection of records.
(2) Search for records.
(3) Any certification pursuant to this rule.
B. An agency may provide copies of records without charging a fee.
C. An agency may charge a fee for copies of records, provided that:
(1) The fee for copying records shall not exceed $0.25 per page for
photocopies not exceeding nine inches by 14 inches. This section
shall not be construed to mandate the raising of fees where
agencies in the past have charged less than $0.25 for such copies.
(2) In agencies which do not have photocopying equipment, a
transcript of the requested records shall be made upon request.
Such transcripts may either be typed or handwritten. In such cases,
the person requesting records may be charged for the clerical time
involved in making the transcript.
(3) The fee for copies of records not covered by Subsection C(1) and
(2) of this section shall not exceed the actual reproduction cost,
which is the average unit cost for copying a record, excluding fixed
costs of the agency, such as operator salaries.
A. The location where records shall be made available for inspection and
copying.
B. The name, title, business address and business telephone number of the
designated records access officer.
C. The right to appeal by any person denied access to a record and the
name and business address of the person or body to whom an appeal is
to be directed.
§ 52-8 WALTON CODE § 52-10
1:18
ARTICLE II
Records Management
[Adopted 1-23-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989 (Ch. 40A of the 1973 Code)]
§ 52-11. Intent.
Records are essential to the administration of local government. They
contain the information that keeps government programs functioning. It is
our intent that a Records Management Program be established which will
assist officials in making decisions, administering programs and providing
administrative continuity with past operations. The program would be
intended to document delivery of services, show the legal responsibilities
of government and protect the legal rights of citizens. It will contain
information on taxation and on the management and expenditure of funds.
These records will also document the historical development of government
itself, the community and the people of the Village of Walton.
§ 52-12. Program established; designation of Records Management
Officer.
There shall be a Records Management Program established under the aegis
of the Mayor and headed by a Records Management Officer (RMO). The
officer will be responsible for administering the noncurrent and archival
public records and storage areas for the Village of Walton in accordance
with local, state and federal laws and guidelines.
§ 52-13. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARCHIVES — Those official records which have been determined by the
officer and Advisory Committee to have sufficient historical or other value
to warrant their continued preservation by the local government.
RECORDS — Any documents, books, papers, photographs, sound
recordings, microforms or any other materials, regardless of physical form
of characteristics, made or received pursuant to law or in connection with
the transaction of official Village of Walton business.
RECORDS CENTER — An establishment maintained by the Village of
Walton primarily for the storage, servicing, security and processing of
records which must be preserved for varying periods of time and need not
be retained in office equipment or space.
RECORDS DISPOSITION —
The removal by the Village of Walton, in accordance with approved
records control schedules, of records no longer necessary for the
conduct of business by such agency through removal methods, which
may include the disposal of temporary records by destruction or
donation or the transfer of records to the record center/archives for
A.
§ 52-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-13
1:19
RECORDS MANAGEMENT — The planning, controlling, directing,
organizing, training, promotion and other managerial use and records
disposition, including records preservation, records disposal and records
centers or other storage facilities.
SERVICING — Making information in records available to any Village of
Walton agency for official use or to the public.
§ 52-14. Powers and duties of officer.
The officer shall have all the necessary powers to carry out the efficient
administration, determination of value, use, preservation, storage and
disposition of the noncurrent and archival public records kept, filed or
received by the offices and departments of the Village of Walton.
temporary storage of inactive records and permanent storage of
records determined to have historical or other sufficient value
warranting continued preservation.
The transfer of records from one Village of Walton agency to any other
Village of Walton agency.
B.
A. The Records Management Officer shall continually survey and examine
public records to recommend their classification so as to determine the
most suitable methods to be used for the maintaining, storing and
servicing of archival material:
(1) Obsolete and unnecessary records according to New York State
Records Retention and Disposition Schedules thereby subject to
disposition.
(2) Information containing administrative, legal, fiscal, research,
historical or educational value which warrant their permanent
retention.
(3) Records not subject to disposition according to state law.
B. The officer shall establish guidelines for proper records management in
any department or agency of the Village of Walton in accordance with
local, state and federal laws and guidelines.
C. The officer shall report annually to the chief executive official and the
governing body on the powers and duties herein mentioned, including,
but not limited to, the cost-benefit ratio of programs effectuated by the
department.
D. The officer shall operate a records management center for the storage,
processing and servicing of all noncurrent and archival records for all
Village of Walton departments and agencies.
E. The officer shall establish a Village of Walton archives and perform the
following functions:
§ 52-13 WALTON CODE § 52-14
1:20
§ 52-15. Records Advisory Board; duties.
There shall be a Records Advisory Board designated to work closely with
and provide advice to the Records Management Officer. The Board shall
consist of the Mayor, the Village historian, a Trustee of the Village of Walton
selected by the Mayor, the Village Clerk-Treasurer and a department head
as the Mayor may designate from time to time. The Board shall meet
periodically and have the following duties:
§ 52-16. Custody and control.
(1) Advise and assist Village of Walton departments in reviewing and
selecting material to be transferred to the Village of Walton
archives for preservation.
(2) Continually survey and examine public records to determine the
most suitable methods to be used for the creating, maintaining,
storing and servicing of archival materials.
(3) Establish and maintain an adequate repository for the proper
storage, conservation, processing and servicing of archival records.
(4) Promulgate rules governing public access to and use of records in
the archives, subject to the approval of the Records Advisory
Board.
(5) Develop a confidentiality policy for archival records designated
confidential, provided that such policy does not conflict with any
federal or state statutes.
(6) Provide information services to other Village of Walton offices.
(7) Collect archival materials which are not official Village of Walton
records but which have associational value to the Village of Walton
or a close relationship to the existing archival collection. Such
collecting shall be subject to archive space, staff and cost
limitations and to the potential endangerment of such materials if
they are not collected by the archives.
(8) Develop a procedure whereby historically important records are to
be identified at the point of generation.
A. Provide advice to the Records Management Officer on the development
of the Records Management Program.
B. Review the performance of the program on an ongoing basis and
propose changes and improvements.
C. Review retention periods proposed by the Records Management Officer
for records not covered by state archives' schedules.
D. Provide advice on the appraisal of records for archival value and to be
the final sign-off entity as to what is or is not archival.
§ 52-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-16
1:21
§ 52-17. Recovery.
The Village Attorney may take steps to recover local government records
which have been alienated from proper custody and may, when necessary,
institute actions of replevin.
§ 52-18. Disposal.
No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by a department of
the Village of Walton unless approval has been obtained from the Records
Management Officer. No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed
of by the Records Management Officer without the express written consent
of the department head having authority.
A. Each Village of Walton department is the legal custodian of its records
and shall retain custody of records deposited in the records center.
Records transferred to or acquired by the archives shall be under the
custody and control of the archives rather than the department which
created or held them immediately prior to being transferred to the
archives.
B. Records shall be transferred to the archives upon the recommendation
of the RMO, with the approval of the head of the department which has
custody of the records and the approval of the Records Advisory Board.
C. Records may be permanently removed from the archives at the request
of the RMO or the head of the department which had custody of the
records immediately prior to the transfer of those records to the
archives, subject to the approval of the Records Advisory Board.
§ 52-16 WALTON CODE § 52-18
1:22
Chapter 59
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
§ 52-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-18
1:23

ARTICLE I
Deputy Clerk
[Adopted 8-5-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013 (Ch. 18A, Art. I, of the 1973
Code)]
§ 59-1. Purpose.
This is an article to establish the residency requirement for the appointed
office of Deputy Clerk in the Village.
§ 59-2. Legislative authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to Municipal Home Rule Law § 10,
Subdivision 1(ii)a(1), which grants to local governments the authority to
enact local laws regarding the qualifications of local officers, and the
provisions of Municipal Home Rule Law § 10, Subdivision 1(ii)e(3), which
grants to villages the power to enact local laws which may override the
provisions of the Village Law with regard to governance matters.
§ 59-3. Residency of Deputy Clerk.
The position of Deputy Clerk shall not be required to be filled by a resident
of the Village of Walton, but such person may also reside in the Town of
Walton, Delaware County.
§ 59-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-3
1:25
Chapter 61
TERMS OF OFFICE
§ 59-3 WALTON CODE § 59-3
1:26
ARTICLE I
Clerk-Treasurer and Deputy Clerk
[Adopted 9-4-2018 by L.L. No. 3-2018]
§ 61-1. Positions established.
This article establishes the term for the appointed offices of Clerk-Treasurer
and Deputy Clerk in the Village.
§ 61-2. Authority. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
This article is adopted pursuant to Municipal Home Rule Law § 10,
Subdivision 1(ii)a(1), that grants to local governments the authority to enact
local laws regarding the qualifications of local officers, and the provisions of
Municipal Home Rule Law § 10, Subdivision 1(ii)e(3) that grants to Villages
the power to enact local laws which may override the provisions of Village
Law with regard to governance matters.
§ 61-3. Clerk-Treasurer term.
The position of Village Clerk-Treasurer, when vacant, shall be filled by the
appointment of the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees.
The Village Clerk-Treasurer shall hold office for an indefinite term and may
be removed for just cause upon recommendation of the Mayor and by a
majority vote of the Board of Trustees.
§ 61-4. Deputy Clerk term.
The position of Deputy Clerk, when vacant, shall be filled by the
appointment of the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees.
The Deputy Clerk shall hold office for an indefinite term and may be
removed for just cause upon recommendation of the Mayor and by a
majority vote of the Board of Trustees.
§ 61-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, word, section or part of this article shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional,
illegal or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder, thereof, but shall be confined in its operation of the clause,
sentence, paragraph, worked section or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 61-6. Effective date.
This article shall take effect upon filing in the office of the Secretary of
State.
§ 61-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-6
1:27
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 73
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 61-6 WALTON CODE § 61-6
1:28
ARTICLE I
Public Consumption; Open Containers
[Adopted 7-11-1983 by L.L. No. 2-1983 (Ch. 5, Art. I, of the 1973
Code)]
§ 73-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the Village of Walton, as an exercise of its police power,
to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents and
inhabitants of the Village by enacting this article, since it is the findings of
the Board of Trustees that the possession of open containers of alcoholic
beverages by persons on certain public lands, except under controlled
conditions, is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents
of the Village of Walton in that such possession contributes to the
development of unsanitary conditions and the creation of nuisances,
including, but not limited to, littering and raucous or other disorderly
behavior. It is further the intent of the Board of Trustees that this article not
be considered as a traffic regulation insofar as it relates to motor vehicles
or the operation thereof.
§ 73-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following shall have the meanings
ascribed to them. All other words shall have the meanings normally
ascribed to them in regular usage.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer,
cider and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits,
wine or beer and capable of being consumed by a human being.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle suitable for or
used to hold any liquid.
INTENT TO CONSUME — Includes any of the following: drinking from
the container; possession with movement of the container to the mouth;
and any circumstances evidencing an intent to ultimately consume in any
public place.[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
OPEN CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle suitable
for or used to hold any liquid, which has been uncapped, uncorked, the tab
removed or the top sliced, cut or broken, or its original condition altered in
such a way that the liquid can flow out of it.[Added at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
PUBLIC LANDS — Any highway, street, sidewalk, park or playground.
VILLAGE — The Village of Walton.
§ 73-3. Prohibition.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to:
§ 73-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-3
1:29
§ 73-4. Exceptions.
§ 73-5. Applicability. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
This article shall apply to all persons on public lands in the Village of Walton
except as provided in § 73-4 above and shall not apply to any person in
violation of § 1227 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
§ 73-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Each violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$250, imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both, for each offense.
§ 73-7. Severability.
Should any provisions of this article be judicially determined to be invalid,
the remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 73-8. When effective.
This article shall take effect in accordance with Local Law No. 3-1971,
adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Walton on February 1,
1971.
A. Consume any alcoholic beverage on any public land within the Village
of Walton.3
B. Have within his possession for the purposes of consumption or with the
intent to consume on public lands by either himself or another person
any open container containing an alcoholic beverage on any public
lands within the Village of Walton. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply in the event of a fair, picnic or
other community gathering for which special permission has been
granted by the Village of Walton.
B. The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply to the transportation of an
unsealed but not open container across public lands of the Village of
Walton from one point to another, with no intent to consume the
contents of such open container while upon public lands.
3. Editor's Note: Original § 5-3B of the 1973 Code, concerning the prohibition of open
containers, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 73-3 WALTON CODE § 73-8
1:30
Chapter 80
ANIMALS
§ 73-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-8
1:31

ARTICLE I
Animals at Large
[Adopted 1-12-1905 (Ch. 6 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 80-1. Running at large prohibited; exception.
No person being the owner or in possession of any animal shall permit the
same to run at large upon any street, highway or park of the Village, except
for the purpose of passing along said street while in the care of some person
or persons who shall prevent them from straying or running upon any of the
public or private grounds in the Village.
§ 80-2. Definitions. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner, not secured by a leash or lead
or under the control of a responsible person and obedient to that person's
commands.
§ 80-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this article shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-3
1:33

ARTICLE II
Domesticated Fowl
[Adopted 7-1-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013 (Ch. 18 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 80-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide standards for the keeping of
domesticated fowl. For the purpose of this article, "domesticated fowl" is
defined as chickens, geese, ducks and turkeys. It is intended to enable
residents to keep a small number of fowl on a noncommercial basis while
limiting the potential adverse impacts on the surrounding neighborhood.
The Village recognizes that adverse neighborhood impacts may result from
the keeping of domesticated fowl as a result of noise, odor, unsanitary
animal living conditions, unsanitary waste storage and removal, the
attraction of predators, rodents, insects, or parasites, and nonconfined
animals leaving the owner's property. This article is intended to create
licensing standards and requirements that ensure that domesticated fowl do
not adversely impact the neighborhood surrounding the property on which
the fowl are kept.
§ 80-5. Permit required.
An annual permit is required for the keeping of any domesticated fowl in
the Village of Walton.
§ 80-6. Fees.
The fee for an annual permit to keep domesticated fowl is $25.
§ 80-7. Number and type allowed.
§ 80-8. Commercial use prohibited.
Domesticated fowl shall be kept as pets and for personal use only; no
person shall sell eggs or engage in fowl breeding or fertilizer production for
commercial purposes. The slaughtering of domesticated fowl is prohibited.
A. The annual permit to keep domesticated fowl is personal to the
permittee and may not be assigned. In the event that the permittee is
absent from the property for longer than 60 days, the permit shall
automatically terminate and become void.
B. The permit year shall be January 1 through December 31.
A. The maximum number of chickens allowed is six, ducks is four, geese is
two and turkeys is two per lot, regardless of how many dwelling units
are on the lot.
B. Only female domesticated fowl are allowed. There is no restriction on
species.
§ 80-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-9
1:35
§ 80-9. Enclosures and pens.
A. Domesticated fowl must be kept in an enclosure or fenced area at all
times.
B. The area occupied by enclosures and pens may not exceed 200 square
feet.
C. Enclosures must be clean, dry, and odor-free, and kept in a neat and
sanitary condition at all times, in a manner that will not disturb the use
or enjoyment of neighboring lots due to noise, odor or other adverse
impact.
D. The enclosure and pen must provide adequate ventilation and adequate
sun and shade and must be impermeable to rodents, wild birds, and
predators, including dogs and cats.
E. Standards for enclosures.
(1) An enclosure shall be provided and shall be designed to provide
safe and healthy living conditions for the domesticated fowl while
minimizing adverse impacts to other residents in the neighborhood.
(a) The structures shall be enclosed on all sides and shall have a
roof and doors. Access doors must be able to be shut and
locked at night. Opening windows and vents must be covered
with predator- and bird-proof wire of less than one-inch
openings.
(b) The materials used in making the structure shall be uniform for
each element of the structure such that the walls are made of
the same material, the roof has the same shingles or other
covering, and any windows or openings are constructed using
the same materials. The use of scrap, waste board, sheet metal,
or similar materials is prohibited. The enclosure shall be well
maintained.
(c) The structure shall be painted; the color shall be uniform
around the structure and shall be in harmony with the
surrounding area.
(2) Enclosures and pens shall only be located in rear yards, as defined
in § 260-7. For a corner lot or other property where no rear yard
exists, a side yard may be used as long as the setbacks generally
applicable in the zoning district are met. In no case may an
enclosure or pen be placed in the front yard.
(3) If an enclosure or pen is proposed to be located less than 20 feet
from any side or rear property line, the permittee shall submit
written approval from abutting property owners, signed and dated
by the same, approving the location of the enclosure closer than 20
feet to the lot line.
§ 80-9 WALTON CODE § 80-9
1:36
§ 80-10. Odor and noise.
§ 80-11. Lighting.
Only motion-activated lighting may be used to light the exterior of the
enclosure.
§ 80-12. Predators, rodents, insects, and parasites.
The property owner shall take necessary action to reduce the attraction of
predators and rodents and the potential infestation of insects and parasites.
Domesticated fowl found to be infested with insects and parasites that may
result in unhealthy conditions to human habitation, as determined by the
Village Health Officer, shall be ordered removed within seven days of such
finding.
§ 80-13. Feed and water.
Domesticated fowl must be provided with access to feed and clean water
at all times; such feed and water shall be unavailable to rodents, wild birds
and predators.
§ 80-14. Waste storage and removal.
Provision must be made for the storage and removal of manure. All stored
manure shall be covered by a fully enclosed structure with a roof or lid
over the entire structure. No more than three cubic feet of manure shall
be stored. All other manure not used for composting or fertilizing shall be
removed. In addition, the enclosure, pen and surrounding area must be kept
free from trash and accumulated droppings. Uneaten feed shall be removed
in a timely manner.
§ 80-15. Application for permit.
Every applicant for a permit to keep domesticated fowl shall:
(4) Failure to provide approval from an abutting property owner when
the proposed enclosure is located closer than 20 feet to a lot line
will result in a denial of the permit application.
F. Standards for pens. An enclosed pen must be provided, consisting of
sturdy wire fencing buried at least 12 inches in the ground. The pen
must be covered with wire, aviary netting, or solid roofing. The use of
chicken wire is not permitted.
A. Odors from domesticated fowl, manure, or other fowl-related
substances shall not be perceptible at the property boundaries.
B. Perceptible noise from domesticated fowl shall not be loud enough at
the property boundaries to disturb persons of reasonable sensitivity.
§ 80-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-15
1:37
§ 80-16. Approval of permit.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit if the applicant has
demonstrated compliance with the criteria and standards in this article.
§ 80-17. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall deny a permit if the applicant has not
demonstrated compliance with all provisions of this article. A permit to keep
domesticated fowl may be suspended or revoked by the Code Enforcement
Officer where there is a risk to public health or safety or for any violation
of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article or with the
provisions of any other applicable law. Any denial, revocation or suspension
of a permit shall be in writing and shall include notification of the right to
and procedure for appeal.
§ 80-18. Penalties for offenses. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this article shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 80-19. Removal of domesticated fowl.
In addition to the penalty stated in § 80-18, any violation of the provisions
of this article or of the permit shall be grounds for an order from the
Code Enforcement Officer to remove the domesticated fowl and the related
structures. The Health Officer may also order the removal of the
domesticated fowl upon a determination that the domesticated fowl pose a
health risk. If an animal dies, it must be disposed of promptly in a sanitary
manner.
§ 80-20. Severability.
In the event that any section, subsection or portion of this article shall be
declared by any competent court to be invalid for any reason, such decision
shall not be deemed to affect the validity of any other section, subsection or
portion of this article.
A. Complete and file an application on a form prescribed by the Code
Enforcement Officer;
B. Provide any other documentation required by this article or requested
by the Code Enforcement Officer;
C. Deposit the prescribed permit fee with the Code Enforcement office at
the time the application is filed. Any material misstatement or omission
shall be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of the permit.
§ 80-15 WALTON CODE § 80-20
1:38
Chapter 94
BINGO
§ 94-1. Conduct authorized.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, as defined in § 476 of the
General Municipal Law, upon obtaining the required license, to conduct the
game of bingo within the territorial limits of the Village of Walton, subject
to the provisions of this chapter, Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law
and Article 19-B of the Executive Law.
Chapter 103
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
§ 103-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DANGEROUS OR UNSAFE STRUCTURE — A structure is dangerous or
unsafe to the public when:
STRUCTURE — Includes a building or other structure or part thereof
used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The
term "structure" shall specifically include mobile homes and manufactured
homes.
§ 103-2. Applicability of state provisions. [Added at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to, and in furtherance of,
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, including,
but not limited to, provisions regulating unsafe structures and equipment
The walls are in poor structural condition, the floors are overloaded, or
there are other major structural defects; or
A.
Buildings and structures become unsafe by reason of damage by fire,
the elements, age or general deterioration; or
B.
Vacant buildings are not properly secured at doorways and windows
such that they also serve as an attractive nuisance for young children
who may be injured therein; or
C.
There are substantial and significant violations of the New York State
Fire Prevention and Building Code, which violations constitute an
endangerment of health, safety and public welfare; or
D.
There exist other conditions whereby the health, safety or welfare of
the public is endangered.
E.
§ 80-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-2
1:39
in the Fire Code and the Property Maintenance Code of New York State, as
supplemented.
§ 103-3. Declaration of nuisance.
All unsafe buildings and structures as defined in this chapter are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and shall be secured, repaired, vacated or
demolished as herein provided.
§ 103-4. Duties of Village Code Enforcement Officer; order to abate.
The Village Code Enforcement Officer shall:
A. Inspect any structure, within the Village, which he has reason to believe
exists in violation of this chapter. Such inspection may arise from said
officer's own observation or from complaints from any source, whether
written or oral.
B. If any structure is found by said officer to be an unsafe structure within
the standards set forth in this chapter, said officer shall prepare and
give notice of such unsafe condition, in writing, to the owner or some
one of the owner's executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees or
another person having a vested or contingent interest in the property,
by registered mail, addressed to the last known address, if any, of the
owner or some one of the owner's executors, legal representatives,
agents, lessees or other person having a vested or contingent interest in
the same, as shown by the records of the Assessor or in the office of the
County Clerk, and order that the unsafe condition be removed.
(1) Such order shall:
(a) Contain a description of the premises.
(b) Contain a statement of the particulars in which the structure is
unsafe or dangerous.
(c) Require that the structure be repaired, removed, or otherwise
cured of the dangerous or unsafe condition.
(d) State the time within which the owner shall commence and
complete repair, removal or other curative action.
(e) State a time, place and date for a hearing to be held by the
Village Board on all matters raised by the order, which shall
not be less than 10 days from the date of the order.
(f) Require that the owner, or said owner's representative, attend
the hearing.
(g) Inform all persons served that in the event that the owner fails
or refuses after hearing to repair, remove or otherwise cure the
dangerous or unsafe structure, as required, or if the owner
fails or refuses to attend the hearing, then the Village Board
§ 103-2 WALTON CODE § 103-4
1:40
shall cause the structure to be repaired, removed or otherwise
cured of the unsafe or dangerous structure, and assess the
costs and expenses of the Village against the land and
otherwise collect such costs and expenses as allowed by this
statute and the laws of the State of New York.
(2) Any person served with an order may, prior to the time of hearing,
certify assent to the order. A certificate of assent shall be filed with
the Village Clerk, in writing, and shall:
(a) Contain a detailed statement of all work to be done to comply
with the order.
(b) Contain a time table for completion of all phases and aspects of
the work.
(c) Contain a request for reinspection.
(d) Be signed under oath by the person served and be notarized.
(3) Upon filing a certificate of assent with the Village Clerk, the
hearing shall be postponed if the Code Enforcement Officer
approves the detailed statement of work to be done and the time
table for its completion. The person filing an approved certificate of
assent shall timely and properly complete the work called for in the
certificate of assent.
(4) The hearing shall be rescheduled if the work is not properly and
timely completed, if reinspection is refused or if, after reinspection,
the conditions set forth in the order have not been properly
remedied as required in the order or the certificate of assent.
(5) If, after reinspection, all work required in the order and certificate
of assent has been properly and completely performed, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall consent to vacation of the order.
C. Report to the Mayor and Village Board any noncompliance with the
notice and order provided for herein.
D. Appear at all hearings conducted by the Village Board and testify as to
the condition of unsafe structures.
E. Place a notice on any unsafe structure reading as follows: "This
structure has been found to be an unsafe structure by the Village of
Walton Code Enforcement Officer. This notice is to remain on this
structure until it is repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with
a notice issued by my office to the last known owner of record. It is
unlawful to remove this notice until repaired or secured in compliance
with that order. Removal of this notice may subject you to a fine or
imprisonment."
§ 103-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-5
1:41
§ 103-5. Duties of Village Board.
The Village Board shall:
§ 103-6. Failure to comply; work completed by Village.
If such person or persons fail to attend the scheduled hearing as ordered
or, after a hearing, fail to comply with the order within 10 days after the
hearing, or within the time directed by the Village Board for compliance,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall report such fact to the Village Board,
which shall cause such structure to be repaired, vacated or demolished as
the facts may warrant, under the standards hereinbefore provided for in
§ 103-3 of this chapter, and shall cause the costs of such securing, repair,
vacation or demolition, together with an additional charge of 50% thereof
for administration and supervision, to be charged against the land on which
the structure existed as a municipal lien, or cause such costs to be added to
the tax rolls as an assessment, or to be levied as a special tax against the
land upon which the structure stands or did stand, or to be recovered in a
suit at law against the owner as hereinafter set forth. In addition thereto,
all costs, expenses, and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Village in
the enforcement of this chapter through any action at law shall be charged
against the land on which the structure exists or existed, as a municipal lien,
or such costs shall be added to the tax rolls as an assessment, or be levied as
a special tax against the land upon which the structure stands or did stand,
and shall be entered as a judgment against the owner of said property.
§ 103-7. Access to structure; legal action to enforce compliance.
If for any reason the Code Enforcement Officer is denied access to any
structure for inspection, securing, repairing, vacating or demolishing of
A. Accept the report of the Village Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Hold a hearing if required and hear such testimony as the Village Code
Enforcement Officer or the owner, or owner's representative, agents,
lessees or any other person having a vested or contingent interest in the
property as shown by the records of the Assessor or in the Office of the
County Clerk shall offer relative to the unsafe structure.
C. Make findings of fact from the documents and testimony offered at that
hearing.
D. Issue an order based upon findings of fact made pursuant to Subsection
C of this section, either dismissing the order that the structure is
unsafe, or commanding the owner, or some one of the owner's
executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees or any other person
having a vested or contingent interest in the property as shown by the
records of the Assessor or in the office of the County Clerk, to repair,
vacate or demolish any structure found to be an unsafe structure within
the terms of this chapter, at their own risk to prevent the acquiring of a
lien against the land upon which said unsafe structure stands.
§ 103-5 WALTON CODE § 103-7
1:42
the same under any provision of this chapter, or should deem it in the
best interest of the Village to obtain a court order prior to going upon the
premises where any structure is located, said officer may report that fact to
the Board of Trustees, and the Board, at its discretion, may authorize the
Village Attorney to take legal action to allow access to any such structure,
or to compel the structure owner or agent to comply with the provisions
of this chapter. In like manner, and at its discretion, the Board of Trustees
may at any time direct the Village Attorney to commence an action at law
in any court of competent jurisdiction against a structure owner or agent,
to enforce any provision of this chapter; where such procedure is desirable
and any delay thereby caused will not be dangerous to the health, morals,
safety or general welfare of the people of this Village, the Village Board
shall authorize the Village Attorney to take legal action to force the owner
to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 103-8. Emergency cases.
§ 103-9. Administrative liability.
No officer, agent or employee of the Village of Walton shall render himself
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property
as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties
under this chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee
of the Village of Walton as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his duties under this chapter shall be defended by the Village
until the final determination of the proceeding therein.
§ 103-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter may, in addition to any
other enforcement provision in this chapter, be punished with a fine no
greater than $250, or by imprisonment for no more than 15 days.
Chapter 110
CLAIMS AGAINST VILLAGE
A. In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to
the life or safety of any person unless an unsafe structure, as defined
herein, is immediately repaired, vacated or demolished, the Village
Code Enforcement Officer shall report such facts to the Village Board,
and the Village Board shall cause the immediate securing, repairing,
vacating, or demolition of such unsafe structure.
B. The costs of such emergency actions upon such unsafe structure shall
be collected in the same manner as provided in this chapter.
§ 103-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-1
1:43
§ 110-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intention of the Village to require written notice of certain defects
within the Village prior to the commencement of an action against the
Village.
§ 110-2. Notice required.
§ 110-3. Other claims; notice requirements; limitations; venue of
actions.
All claims against the Village for damages or injuries to persons or property,
invasion of personal or property rights of every name and nature
whatsoever shall be governed by the provisions of Article 4 of the General
Municipal Law. The place of trial of all actions or proceedings against the
Village or its boards or officers shall be in the County of Delaware.
§ 110-4. Compromise of claims.
The Board of Trustees shall have the power to pay, compromise or settle any
such claim which may be made against the Village for damages, provided
such claim is presented within the time and in the manner hereinbefore
prescribed, and the sum or sums so expended shall be included in the
amount to be raised by tax for general purposes as herein provided.
Chapter 115
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION PROGRAM
A. Dangerous or defective conditions. No civil action shall be maintained
against the Village for damages or injury to person or property
sustained in consequence of any street, highway, bridge, culvert,
sidewalk, crosswalk or public building being defective, out of repair,
unsafe, dangerous or obstructive unless it appears that written notice
of the defective, dangerous, unsafe or obstructive condition of such
street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk or public building
was actually given to the Village Clerk, and there was a failure or
neglect within a reasonable time after the giving of such notice to
remedy, repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction complained
of.
B. Snow or ice. No civil action shall be maintained against the Village for
damages or injury to person or property sustained in consequence of
the existence of snow or ice upon any sidewalk, crosswalk or street,
unless written notice thereof relating to the particular complaint was
actually given to the Mayor or the Board of Trustees, and there was a
failure or neglect to cause such snow or ice to be removed, or the place
otherwise made reasonably safe, within a reasonable time after the
receipt of such notice.
§ 110-1 WALTON CODE § 115-1
1:44
§ 115-1. Legislative findings; intent and purpose; authority.
§ 115-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, and unless otherwise expressly stated or
unless the context otherwise requires, the terms in this chapter shall have
the meanings employed in the State of New York Public Service
Commission's Uniform Business Practices or, if not so defined there, as
indicated below:
A. It is the policy of both the Village of Walton and the State of New York to
seek to reduce the cost of natural gas and electricity to its residents and
provide cost certainty for the purpose of economic development, to
promote deeper penetration of energy efficiency and renewable energy
resources such as wind and solar, and wider development of distributed
energy resources as well as to examine the retail energy markets and
increase participation of and benefits for eligible consumers in those
markets. Among the policies and models that may offer benefits in New
York is community choice aggregation (CCA), which allows local
governments to determine the default supplier of electricity and natural
gas on behalf of eligible consumers.
B. The purpose of this CCA Program is to allow participating local
governments including the Village of Walton to procure electricity or
natural gas supply service on behalf of their residential and commercial
customers while maintaining transmission and distribution service from
the existing distribution utility. Residential and commercial customers
will have the opportunity to opt out of any approved CCA Program. This
chapter establishes a program that will allow the Village of Walton or its
designated agent or Administrator for that purpose to put out for bid
the total amount of natural gas and/or electricity being purchased by
residential and commercial customers participating in the CCA
Program. Eligible consumers will have the opportunity to have more
control to lower their overall energy costs, to spur clean energy
innovation and investment, to improve customer choice and value, and
to protect the environment, thereby fulfilling the purposes of this
chapter and fulfilling an important public purpose.
C. The Village of Walton is hereby authorized to participate in a
Community Choice Aggregation Program pursuant to § 10(1)(ii)(a)(12)
of the New York Municipal Home Rule Law; and State of New York
Public Service Commission Case No. 14-M-0224, Proceeding on Motion
of the Commission to Enable Community Choice Aggregation Programs
(issued April 21, 2016), as may be amended, including subsequent
orders of the Public Service Commission (PSC) issued in connection
with or related to Case No. 14-M-0224, to the extent that orders related
to Case No. 14-M-0224 enable actions by the Village.
D. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Community
Choice Aggregation Program Law" of the Village of Walton.
§ 115-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-2
1:45
AGGREGATED DATA — Aggregated and anonymized information, including
the number of consumers by service class, the aggregated peak demand
(kW) (for electricity) by month for the past 12 to 24 months, by service class
to the extent possible, and the aggregated energy (kWh) for electricity or
volumetric consumption for gas by month for the past 12 to 24 months by
service class.
CCA ADMINISTRATOR — Good Energy, L.P., the entity selected by the
Village of Walton duly authorized to put out the bid for the total amount of
electricity and/or natural gas being purchased by participating consumers.
The CCA Administrator is responsible for program organization,
administration, procurement, and communications, unless otherwise
specified.
CCA ORDER — The PSC's Order Authorizing Framework for Community
Choice Aggregation Opt-Out Program, issued on April 21, 2016, in Case
14-M-0224, "Proceeding on Motion of the Commission to Enable Community
Choice Aggregation Programs."
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION PROGRAM or CCA PROGRAM —
A municipal energy procurement program, which replaces the incumbent
utility as the default supplier of energy for all residential and commercial
customers within the Village of Walton who have not opted out of the CCA
Program. Notwithstanding the above, the incumbent utility will continue to
distribute energy as the distribution utility to all residential and commercial
customers within the CCA Program.
CUSTOMER-SPECIFIC DATA — Customer-specific information, personal
data and utility data for all consumers in the Village of Walton eligible
for opt-out treatment based on the terms of the CCA order and the CCA
Program design, including the customer of record's name, mailing address,
telephone number, account number, and primary language, if available, and
any customer-specific alternate billing name, address, and phone number.
DATA SECURITY AGREEMENT — An agreement between the distribution
utility and the Village of Walton that obligates each party to meet,
collectively:
DEFAULT SERVICE — Supply service provided by the distribution utility to
consumers who are not currently receiving service from an energy service
All national, state and local laws, regulations or other government
standards relating to the protection of information that identifies or can
be used to identify an individual eligible consumer with respect to the
CCA Administrator's or its representative's processing of confidential
utility information;
A.
The distribution utility's internal requirements and procedures relating
to the protection of information that identifies or can be used to identify
individual eligible consumer with respect to the CCA Administrator's or
its representative's processing of confidential utility information; and
B.
The CCA order and PSC rules, regulations, and guidelines relating to
confidential data.
C.
§ 115-2 WALTON CODE § 115-2
1:46
company (ESCO). Eligible consumers within the Village of Walton that
receive default service, and have not opted out, will be enrolled in the CCA
Program.
DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCES (DER) — Local renewable energy
projects, shared renewables like community solar, energy efficiency,
demand response, energy management, energy storage, microgrid projects
and other innovative Reforming the Energy Vision (REV) initiatives that
optimize system benefits, target and address load pockets/profile within the
CCA's zone, and reduce cost of service for participating consumers.
DISTRIBUTION UTILITY — The local incumbent utility owning and
controlling the means of distribution of the natural gas or electricity that is
regulated by the PSC.
ELIGIBLE CONSUMERS — Eligible consumers of electricity and/or natural
gas who receive default service from the distribution utility as of the
effective date, or new consumers that subsequently become eligible to
participate in the CCA Program, at one or more locations within the
geographic boundaries of the Village of Walton, except those consumers
who receive default service and have requested not to have their account
information shared by the distribution utility. For the avoidance of doubt, all
eligible consumers must reside or be otherwise Village of Walton as such
boundaries exist on the effective date of the energy services agreement
(ESA) between the Village of Walton and the supplier.
NEW CONSUMERS — Consumers of electricity that become eligible
consumers after the effective date of the ESA between the Village of Walton
and the supplier, including those that opt in or move into the Village of
Walton.
PARTICIPATING CONSUMERS — Eligible consumers enrolled in the CCA
Program, either because they are consumers who receive default service
from the distribution utility as of the effective date of the ESA and have not
opted out, or are new consumers.
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION or PSC — New York State Public Service
Commission.
SUPPLIERS — An energy service company (ESCO) duly authorized to
conduct business in the State of New York as an ESCO and that produces
electric power and natural gas for eligible consumers in connection with
this chapter or, alternatively, generators of electricity and natural gas or
other entities who procure and resell electricity or natural gas.
§ 115-3. Establishment of Community Choice Aggregation Program.
A. A Community Choice Aggregation Program is hereby established by the
Village of Walton whereby the Village of Walton may implement a CCA
Program to the full extent permitted by the CCA order, and any
subsequent orders, as set forth more fully herein.
B. The Village of Walton may act as aggreggator or broker for the sale of
electric supply, gas supply, or both to eligible consumers and may enter
§ 115-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-3
1:47
§ 115-4. Customer eligibility.
§ 115-5. Supplier selection; supplier contracts.
into contracts with one or more suppliers, through the CCA
Administrator, for energy supply and other services on behalf of eligible
consumers.
C. The CCA Administrator and the Village of Walton may enter into
agreements and contracts with other municipalities to develop offers of
opt-in distributed energy resources (DER) products and services to
participating consumers, including opportunities to participate in local
renewable energy projects, solar, energy efficiency, benchmarking,
microgrids, storage, demand response, energy management, and other
innovative Reforming the Energy (REV) initiatives and objectives
designed to optimize system benefits, target and address load pockets/
profile within the CCA zone, and reduce costs for CCA customers.
D. Under the CCA Program, the operation and ownership of distribution
service shall remain with the distribution utility. The Village of Walton's
procurement of energy supply through a CCA Program constitutes
neither the purchase of a public utility system, nor the furnishing of
utility service. The Village of Walton will not take over any part of the
electric or gas transmission or distribution system and will not furnish
any type of utility service, but will instead negotiate with suppliers
through the CCA Administrator on behalf of participating consumers.
A. All consumers within the Village of Walton, including residential and
nonresidential, regardless of size, shall be eligible to participate in the
CCA Program in accordance with the CCA order.
B. All consumers that are members of (Identify eligible service classes
listed, by utility, in Appendix C of the CCA order.) shall be enrolled on an
opt-out basis except for consumers that are already taking service from
an ESCO, that have placed a freeze or block on their account, or for
whom inclusion in the CCA Program will interfere with a choice the
consumer has already made to take service pursuant to a special rate.
Those consumers may be enrolled on an opt-in basis.
C. New consumers shall be enrolled on an opt-out basis. Those consumers
will be mailed an opt-out letter consistent with the requirements in the
CCA order.
A. The CCA Administrator, on behalf of the Village of Walton shall issue
one or more requests for proposals to suppliers to provide energy to
participants and may then award a contract in accordance with the CCA
Program.
B. The terms of the supplier contracts ("CCA contract") shall comply with
applicable laws and state programs and policies.
§ 115-3 WALTON CODE § 115-6
1:48
§ 115-6. Opt-out process.
An opt-out letter, printed on municipal letterhead, shall be mailed to eligible
consumers at least 30 days prior to customer enrollment. The opt-out letter
shall include information on the CCA Program and the contract signed with
the selected ESCO, including specific details on rates, services, contract
term, cancellation fee, and methods of opting out of the CCA Program.
The letter shall explain that consumers that do not opt out will be enrolled
in ESCO service under the contract terms and that information on those
consumers, including energy usage data and APP status, will be provided to
the ESCO.
§ 115-7. Customer service.
Participating consumers shall be provided customer service, including a
toll-free telephone number available during normal business hours (9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Eastern time, Monday through Friday) to resolve
concerns, answer questions, and transact business with respect to the
service received from the supplier.
§ 115-8. Data protection requirements.
§ 115-9. Administration fee.
The Village of Walton may collect, or cause to be collected, funds from
customer payments to pay for administrative costs associated with running
the CCA Program.
A. The CCA Administrator may request the distribution utility's
aggregated customer information on all participating consumers in the
Village of Walton.
B. Customer-specific data shall be protected in a manner compliant with,
collectively:
(1) All national, state and local laws, regulations or other government
standards relating to the protection of information that identifies or
can be used to identify an individual that apply with respect to the
Village of Walton or its representative's processing of confidential
utility information;
(2) The utility's internal requirements and procedures relating to the
protection of information that identifies or can be used to identify
an individual that apply with respect to the Village of Walton or its
representative's processing of confidential utility information; and
(3) The CCA order and PSC rules, regulations and guidelines relating
to confidential data.
C. The Village of Walton must enter into a data security agreement with
the distribution utility for the purpose of protecting customer data.
§ 115-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-10
1:49
§ 115-10. Reporting.
§ 115-11. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective immediately upon passage.
§ 115-12. Severability.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any section, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause, provision or phrase of the aforementioned sections, as
declared by the valid judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction to
be unconstitutional, shall not affect the validity or unenforceability of any
other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision, or phrase,
which shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 117
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
§ 117-1. Purpose.
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code)
and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code) in
this Village. This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home
Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Code, other state
law, or other section of this chapter, all buildings, structures, and premises,
regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 117-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 117-4 of this chapter.
The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A
certificate issued pursuant to § 117-7B of this chapter.
A. Annual reports shall be filed with the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Walton by March 31 of each year and cover the previous calendar year.
B. Annual reports shall include, at a minimum: number of consumers
served; number of consumers cancelling during the year; number of
complaints received; commodity prices paid; value-added services
provided during the year (e.g., installation of DER or other clean energy
services); and administrative costs collected. The first report shall also
include the number of consumers who opted out in response to the
initial opt-out letter or letters.
§ 115-10 WALTON CODE § 117-2
1:50
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer
appointed pursuant to § 117-3B of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — The Code Enforcement Officer and
all inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to § 117-16A of this chapter.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR — An inspector appointed pursuant to § 117-3D of this chapter.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 117-10 of this
chapter. The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating permit
which is renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this
chapter.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association,
or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 117-6 of this chapter.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 117-7D of
this chapter.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
VILLAGE — The Village of Walton.
§ 117-3. Code Enforcement Officer; inspectors.
A. The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits, and the
plans, specifications and construction documents submitted with
such applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates and operating permits, and to include in building
permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance,
temporary certificates and operating permits such terms and
conditions as the Code Enforcement Officer may determine to be
appropriate;
§ 117-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-3
1:51
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates and operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, inspections
incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all other
inspections required or permitted under any provision of this
chapter;
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
(6) To issue orders pursuant to § 117-16A, Compliance orders, of this
chapter;
(7) To maintain records;
(8) To collect fees as set by the Village Board of this Village;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(10) In consultation with this Village's attorney, to pursue such legal
actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter, or to abate or
correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this chapter; and
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Walton Village
Board. The Code Enforcement Officer shall possess background
experience related to building construction or fire prevention and shall,
within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service
training, advanced in-service training and other training as the State of
New York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and the Code
Enforcement Officer shall obtain certification from the State Fire
Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
C. In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to serve as
such for any reason, an individual shall be appointed by the Walton
Village Board to serve as Acting Code Enforcement Officer. The Acting
Code Enforcement Officer shall, during the term of his or her
appointment, exercise all powers and fulfill all duties conferred upon
the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
D. One or more inspectors may be appointed by the Walton Village Board
to act under the supervision and direction of the Code Enforcement
Officer and to assist the Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise of the
powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this chapter. Each inspector shall, within the
time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
§ 117-3 WALTON CODE § 117-3
1:52
§ 117-4. Building permits.
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and each inspector
shall obtain certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to
the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Code Enforcement Officer and inspectors
shall be fixed from time to time by the Board of this Village.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection
B of this section, a building permit shall be required for any work which
must conform to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code, including,
but not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration,
improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building or
structure or any portion thereof, and the installation of a solid-fuelburning
heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No
person shall commence any work for which a building permit is
required without first having obtained a building permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
(1) Construction or installation of one-story detached structures
associated with one- or two-family dwellings or multiple singlefamily
dwellings (townhouses) which are used for tool and storage
sheds, playhouses or similar uses, provided the gross floor area is
less than 144 square feet (13.38 square meters);
(2) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
(3) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches
and are installed entirely above ground;
(4) Installation of fences which are not part of an enclosure
surrounding a swimming pool;
(5) Construction of retaining walls, unless such walls support a
surcharge or impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids;
(6) Construction of temporary motion-picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery;
(7) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses);
§ 117-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-4
1:53
(8) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine
inches in height;
(9) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work;
(10) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances;
(11) Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does not
alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications; or
(12) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
(a) The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component.
(b) The removal or change of any required means of egress; or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
(c) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or
(d) The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection
system for any period of time.
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code or the Energy Code.
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be signed by the
owner of the property where the work is to be performed or by an
authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such
information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit
a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended
work complies with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code. The application shall include or be accompanied
by the following information and documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
(2) The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
§ 117-4 WALTON CODE § 117-4
1:54
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
(b) Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or
licensed professional engineer where so required by the
Education Law;
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed;
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location
of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings
and structures and the lot lines.
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in Subsection D(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the
accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to
be kept at the work site so as to be available for use by the Code
Enforcement personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted
construction documents to the applicant shall not be construed as
authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a building
permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
building permit is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Code and Energy Code.
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
H. Work to be performed in accordance with construction documents. All
work shall be performed in accordance with the construction
§ 117-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-4
1:55
§ 117-5. Construction inspections.
documents which were submitted with and accepted as part of the
application for the building permit. The building permit shall contain
such a directive. The permit holder shall immediately notify the Code
Enforcement Officer of any change occurring during the course of the
work. The building permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that such change warrants a new or
amended building permit, such change shall not be made until and
unless a new or amended building permit reflecting such change is
issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this subsection may be renewed upon application by the
permit holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of the
application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code or the
Energy Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building
permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that all work then completed is in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code and
all work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
K. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 117-17, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a building permit, for an
amended building permit, or for renewal of a building permit.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by an inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for
inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
§ 117-4 WALTON CODE § 117-5
1:56
§ 117-6. Stop-work orders.
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work
shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions
of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected, and found
satisfactory as completed.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 117-17, Fees, of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy
Code, without regard to whether such work is or is not work for
which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether
a building permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not been issued for such work; or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall be in writing, be
dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer, state the reason or
§ 117-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-6
1:57
§ 117-7. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance.
reasons for issuance, and if applicable, state the conditions which must
be satisfied before work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by certified mail. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the stop-work
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents,
or any other person taking part or assisting in work affected by the
stop-work order, personally or by certified mail; provided, however, that
failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect
the efficacy of the stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty under § 117-16, Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this
chapter or under any other applicable local law or state law. Any such
other remedy or penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
at the time of, or after the issuance of a stop-work order.
A. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance required. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall be required for
any work which is the subject of a building permit and for all structures,
buildings, or portions thereof, which are converted from one use or
occupancy classification or subclassification to another. Permission to
use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof, for which a
building permit was previously issued shall be granted only by issuance
of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
B. Issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance if the work which was the subject of the
building permit was completed in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code and, if applicable, the
structure, building or portion thereof that was converted from one use
or occupancy classification or subclassification to another complies
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code.
The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building, structure or work prior
§ 117-6 WALTON CODE § 117-7
1:58
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
In addition, where applicable, the following documents, prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code by such person
or persons as may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the
Code Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the applicant for the
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance, shall be provided to
the Code Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections; and
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. A
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance shall contain the
following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
(4) If the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance is not
applicable to an entire structure, a description of that portion of the
structure for which the certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance and the date of
issuance.
D. Temporary certificate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted to issue a temporary certificate allowing the temporary
occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to
completion of the work which is the subject of a building permit.
However, in no event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a
temporary certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines
that the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the
temporary certificate, may be occupied safely, that any fire- and smokedetecting
or fire protection equipment which has been installed is
§ 117-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-7
1:59
§ 117-8. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The chief of any fire department providing firefighting services for a
property within this Village shall promptly notify the Code Enforcement
Officer of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage, fuelburning
appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 117-9. Unsafe buildings and structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in this Village shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the procedures established by Chapter 103,
Buildings, Unsafe, as now in effect or as hereafter amended from time to
time.
§ 117-10. Operating permits.
operational, and that all required means of egress from the building
or structure have been provided. The Code Enforcement Officer may
include in a temporary certificate such terms and conditions as he or
she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure safety or to further the
purposes and intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary certificate shall
be effective for a period of time, not to exceed six months, which shall
be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer and specified in the
temporary certificate. During the specified period of effectiveness of
the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall undertake to bring
the building or structure into full compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance or a temporary certificate was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, and if the relevant
deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Officer within such period of time as shall be specified by
the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
revoke or suspend such certificate.
F. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 117-17, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance or for a temporary certificate.
A. Operating permits required.
(1) Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or
using the categories of buildings listed below:
(a) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Table 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication
§ 117-7 WALTON CODE § 117-10
1:60
entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by
reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1;
(b) Hazardous processes and activities, including, but not limited
to, commercial and industrial operations which produce
combustible dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop ripening, and
waste handling;
(c) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(d) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with
an occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(e) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the Board of this Village.
(2) Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate
any type of building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to
obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such activity or
operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements of
the Uniform Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or
reports shall be performed or provided by such person or persons as
may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement
Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized
by the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises
prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate operating permit for
each such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall be issued for
such period of time, not to exceed one year in the case of any operating
permit issued for an area of public assembly and not to exceed three
years in any other case, as shall be determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer to be consistent with local conditions. The effective
period of each operating permit shall be specified in the operating
permit. An operating permit may be reissued or renewed upon
§ 117-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-10
1:61
§ 117-11. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
application to the Code Enforcement Officer, payment of the applicable
fee, and approval of such application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or building for which
an operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked
or suspended.
G. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 117-17, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for an operating permit, for an
amended operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating
permit.
A. Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or an inspector designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer at the following intervals:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) and (2), and all
nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) shall be performed at least once
every 12 months.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a firesafety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer
or an inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at any time
upon: the request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an
authorized agent of such owner; receipt by the Code Enforcement
Officer of a written statement alleging that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or
receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other information,
reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be reliable,
giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist;
provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as
permitting an inspection under any circumstances under which a court
§ 117-10 WALTON CODE § 117-11
1:62
§ 117-12. Grass, brush and weeds. [Added 6-1-2009 by L.L. No.
3-2009]
order or warrant permitting such inspection is required, unless such
court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
C. OFPC inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of
this chapter shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and
Control ("OFPC") and the New York State Fire Administrator under
Executive Law § 156-e and Education Law § 807-b. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section to the contrary:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure which
contains an area of public assembly if OFPC performs firesafety
and property maintenance inspections of such building or structure
at least once every 12 months;
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure
occupied as a dormitory if OFPC performs firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of such building or structure at least once
every 12 months;
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a multiple dwelling not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) of this section if OFPC performs
firesafety and property maintenance inspections of such multiple
dwelling at intervals not exceeding the interval specified in
Subsection A(3) of this section; and
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform firesafety and
property maintenance inspections of a nonresidential building,
structure, use or occupancy not included in Subsection A(1) or (2)
of this section if OFPC performs firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of such nonresidential building, structure,
use or occupancy at intervals not exceeding the interval specified
in Subsection A(3) of this section.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 117-17, Fees, of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time each inspection is performed pursuant to this section.
This subsection shall not apply to inspections performed by OFPC.
A. Growth restricted. It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or
person in control of any lots or lands located within the Village to allow
on any such lot or land any growth of grass, brush or weeds to a height
of eight inches or more within the Village. [Amended 6-4-2018 by
L.L. No. 1-2018]
§ 117-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-12
1:63
§ 117-13. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any
other local law or regulation adopted for administration and enforcement
B. Responsibility for maintenance. Property owners, occupants or persons
in control of any lot or land located in the Village shall maintain their
respective property, as well as curbs, gutters and sidewalks bordering
their parcels of land, in such condition as to be clear of all growth of
grass and weeds within the curbs, gutters and sidewalks.
C. Notice to abate violation. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby
authorized and empowered to give written notice to the owner,
occupant or person in control of any lot or parcel of land who has
permitted the excessive growth of grass, weeds or brush upon the
property or in the curb, gutter or sidewalk to cut, destroy and remove
the same within 10 days from the date of such notice. Such notice may
be served personally upon such owner or his agent by any member of
the Police Department of the Village or, at the election of the Code
Enforcement Officer, may be given by certified mail addressed to said
owner or his agent at the last known address as the same appears upon
the parcel's tax records. In the event that an owner, occupant or person
in control of any lot or parcel of land has received a prior notice under
this section in the same calendar year and the same owner, occupant or
person in control again permits excessive growth in violation of this
chapter, then the notice set forth above shall be reduced from 10 days
to seven days.
D. Failure to comply; removal by Village. Upon the failure, neglect or
refusal of any owner, occupant or person so notified to cut, destroy and
remove such excessive growth of grass, weeds and brush on the
property and any growth on the curb, gutter or sidewalk, either or both,
within 10 days or seven days, as the case may be, after the date of
written notice provided for in Subsection C, as aforesaid, the Code
Enforcement Officer may have the noncompliant growth cut and
removed therefrom without further notice to such owner or occupant,
and the cost of such removal, together with an additional charge of 50%
thereof for supervision and administration, shall be assessed against
such property, and the same shall be levied, corrected, enforced and
collected in the same manner, by the same proceedings, at the same
time, under the same penalties, and having the same lien upon the
property so assessed as the general Village tax and as a part thereof.
E. Enforcement costs. In the event that the Village deems it necessary, or
it is required by the actions of any owner, agent of the owner, or tenant,
to bring any civil action to enforce any of the terms of this chapter, the
violator shall be responsible for all court costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the Village arising from such action. [Added
6-4-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
§ 117-12 WALTON CODE § 117-13
1:64
of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for responding to a
complaint shall include such of the following steps as the Code Enforcement
Officer may deem to be appropriate:
§ 117-14. Recordkeeping.
§ 117-15. Program review and reporting.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 117-16,
Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this chapter;
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by all Code Enforcement
personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of
compliance, temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and
operating permits issued;
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by
§§ 117-4 through 117-13, inclusive, of this chapter; and
(9) All fees charged and collected.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
§ 117-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-15
1:65
§ 117-16. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Board of this
Village a written report and summary of all business conducted by the
Code Enforcement Officer and the inspectors, including a report and
summary of all transactions and activities described in § 117-14,
Recordkeeping, of this chapter and a report and summary of all appeals
or litigation pending or concluded.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary of
State, on behalf of this Village, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of
State, a report of the activities of this Village relative to administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York
State Department of State, provide to the New York State Department
of State, from the records and related materials this Village is required
to maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of this Village in connection
with administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
A. Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
order, in writing, the remedying of any condition or activity found to
exist in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter. Upon finding that
any such condition or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a compliance order. The compliance order shall be in writing; be
dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer; specify the
condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code, the Energy Code,
or this chapter; specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform Code,
the Energy Code, or this chapter which is/are violated by the specified
condition or activity; specify the period of time which the Code
Enforcement Officer deems to be reasonably necessary for achieving
compliance; direct that compliance be achieved within the specified
period of time; and state that an action or proceeding to compel
compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved within the
specified period of time. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the
compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property personally or by certified mail. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the compliance
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents,
or any other person taking part or assisting in work being performed at
the affected property personally or by certified mail; provided, however,
that failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not
affect the efficacy of the compliance order.
B. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer and each inspector
are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of the
Uniform Code.
§ 117-15 WALTON CODE § 117-16
1:66
C. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this chapter, or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance, temporary
certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or other notice or order
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of
this chapter, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $200 for
each day or part thereof during which such violation continues. The
civil penalties provided by this subsection shall be recoverable in an
action instituted in the name of this Village.
D. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of this Village, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any term or
condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit,
compliance order, or other notice or order issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this chapter. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, where the construction or use of
a building or structure is in violation of any provision of the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any stop-work order,
compliance order or other order obtained under the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this chapter, an action or proceeding may be
commenced in the name of this Village, in the Supreme Court or in any
other court having the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order
directing the removal of the building or structure or an abatement of
the condition in violation of such provisions. No action or proceeding
described in this subsection shall be commenced without the
appropriate authorization from the Board of this Village.
E. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 117-6, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in any other section of this
chapter, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified
in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this section, in § 117-6, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in
any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision 2 of § 382 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or
after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision 2 of § 382 of the
Executive Law.
§ 117-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-17
1:67
§ 117-17. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Board of this Village.
Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from time to time by like
resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with, such
fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be charged and collected for
the submission of applications, the issuance of building permits, amended
building permits, renewed building permits, certificates of occupancy/
certificates of compliance, temporary certificates, operating permits,
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, and other actions of the
Code Enforcement Officer described in or contemplated by this chapter.
§ 117-18. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Board of this Village may, by resolution, authorize the Code
Enforcement Officer of this Village to enter into an agreement, in the
name of this Village, with other governments to carry out the terms of this
chapter, provided that such agreement does not violate any provision of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, Part 1203 of Title 19 of the NYCRR, or any
other applicable law.
§ 117-19. Severability.
If any section of this chapter shall be held unconstitutional, invalid, or
ineffective, in whole or in part, such determination shall not be deemed to
affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder of this chapter.
Chapter 131
EXCAVATIONS
§ 131-1. License required.
No person, persons or corporation shall dig or excavate in the streets or
public places without first obtaining a license as herein provided.
§ 131-2. Application for license; fee. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Whenever it is necessary to excavate or dig in public streets or public
places for the purpose of repairing, replacing or installing mains, pipes,
water laterals, drains and sewer laterals, or for any other purpose, the
person, persons or corporation shall make a written application to the
Clerk-Treasurer of the Village, for license or permit, which application shall
describe the place or places to be dug or excavated, and such person,
persons, or corporation shall deposit with the Village Clerk-Treasurer the
sum of $1,000, to be retained as herein provided, and the Village Clerk-
Treasurer is authorized to issue a license or permit to such applicant on
complying with the conditions of this chapter.
§ 117-17 WALTON CODE § 131-3
1:68
§ 131-3. Refilling and repaving; refund; excess cost.
Any person, persons or corporation excavating and digging in said streets
shall replace the street in the same condition as before, the earth to be
thoroughly tamped in place and in such manner as to leave no depression in
the street, and the surface of the road to be replaced in as good condition as
before and repaired with the same kind of material and in such manner as
to leave no depressions or elevations in the road at the place of excavation,
and said licensee shall notify the Street Commissioner when said repairs are
completed, and it shall be the duty of the Street Commissioner to inspect
said work and notify the Village Clerk-Treasurer of the fact, and after said
street is replaced in as good condition as before the excavation, then the
said Village Clerk-Treasurer shall return to the licensee the deposit made on
granting the license. In the event said license does not repair and replace
said street in as good condition as before the excavation, then it shall be
the duty of said Street Commissioner to make the necessary repairs, and
the labor and material used shall be a charge against the deposit made by
the licensee, and such costs shall be deducted from such deposit and the
balance returned to the licensee, but in the event said sum is not sufficient
to pay for such labor and material, the balance of such cost shall be paid by
the licensee.
§ 131-4. Barriers, signs and lights.
Any person, persons or corporation excavating and digging the streets or
public places shall erect barriers, signs and lights necessary to protect
the public and persons lawfully on said streets or public places while
excavations are being made, filled and road replaced.
§ 131-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more than
15 days, or both.
Chapter 144
FIREWORKS AND FIREARMS
§ 144-1. Permit required; application.
No person shall fire, discharge, set off or cause or procure to be fired,
discharged or set off, any cannon, gun, pistol, sky-rocket, Roman candle,
blank cartridge, squib, chaser, torpedo or any other explosive article
generally known as fireworks, in any of the streets or public places in the
Village of Walton, without first having secured from the Mayor a permit so
to do, which permit shall state the time when and the place or places where
the discharge or firing of such fireworks is to be permitted. Application for
such permit shall be addressed to the Mayor of the Village of Walton, New
§ 131-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-1
1:69
York, stating the time and place where the discharge of such fireworks is
desired.
§ 144-2. Penalties for offenses. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any violation of the foregoing section shall be punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
Chapter 151
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 144-1 WALTON CODE § 144-2
1:70
ARTICLE I
Findings; Purpose; Objectives
§ 151-1. Findings.
The Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Walton finds that the
potential and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a
problem to the residents of the Village of Walton and that such damages
may include destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to
public facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of
human life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve
the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 151-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 151-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
§ 151-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-3
1:71
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 151-3 WALTON CODE § 151-3
1:72
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 151-4. Word usage; definitions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percentor-
greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one
to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A,
AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly
referred to as the base floodplain or one-hundred-year floodplain. For
purposes of this chapter, the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is
synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor,
18 inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside
of the lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed
area, which may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must
be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed
crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the equalization
of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of
flooding.
CRITICAL FACILITIES[Added 5-2-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016] —
Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile,
flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials;
(1)
§ 151-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-4
1:73
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD or FLOODING —
Hospitals, nursing homes, and housing likely to contain occupants
who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during
a flood;
(2)
Police stations, fire stations, vehicle and equipment storage
facilities; and emergency operations centers that are needed for
flood response activities before, during, and after a flood; and
(3)
Public and private utility facilities that are vital to maintaining or
restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during, and after
a flood.
(4)
A nonbasement building:
Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99,
AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to have the top of the elevated floor,
or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the
elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of
pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the
flow of the water; and
(a)
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude
of the base flood.
(b)
(1)
In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D,
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of
fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
(2)
In the case of Zones V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated
building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls that meet the federal standards.
(3)
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
§ 151-4 WALTON CODE § 151-4
1:74
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An Official Map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An Official Map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An Official Map of a
community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible
to being inundated by water from any source. (See definition of
"flooding.")
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair
facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing,
sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body
of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated
force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in
flooding as defined in Subsection (1) above.
(2)
§ 151-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-4
1:75
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community
to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is
often the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of
an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a
building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum, to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map are referenced.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 151-4 WALTON CODE § 151-4
1:76
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same
meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE THE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash
value of the structure, excluding land value, is above the ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 151-14B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within 180
days after the date of issuance. The actual start of construction means
the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including
a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or
footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing,
excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or
walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations,
or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory
buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
(3)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 151-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-4
1:77
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above the ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also
means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate
occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the
time of such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.[Amended
5-2-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure."
(2)
§ 151-4 WALTON CODE § 151-4
1:78
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 151-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Walton, Delaware County.
§ 151-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 5-2-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
§ 151-7. Interpretation; conflict with other provisions.
§ 151-8. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 151-9. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Village of Walton, Community
Number 360216, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Nos. 36025C0517E,
36025C0519E, 36025C0536E, and 36025C0538E whose effective
date is June 16, 2016, and any subsequent revisions to these map
panels that do not affect areas under our community's jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Delaware County, New York, All Jurisdictions" dated June 16, 2016.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the
Village Hall, 21 North Street, Walton, New York 13856.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules or regulations, the most restrictive, or that imposing the
higher standards, shall govern.
§ 151-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-9
1:79
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village
of Walton from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent
or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under Article VI will
be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 151-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Village of Walton, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 151-9 WALTON CODE § 151-10
1:80
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 151-11. Designation of local administrator.
The Code Enforcement Officer or Building Inspector is hereby appointed
local administrator to administer and implement this chapter by granting or
denying floodplain development permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 151-12. Floodplain development permit.
§ 151-13. Application for permit.
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate.
Additional information may be required on the permit application form.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and insuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 151-6, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures,
fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the
foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee to be determined by the Village
Board. In addition, the applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing
the Village of Walton for any additional costs necessary for review,
inspection and approval of this project. The local administrator may
require a deposit of no more than $500 to cover these additional costs.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permitee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permitee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
§ 151-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-13
1:81
§ 151-14. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
C. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 151-16C, Utilities.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 151-18, Nonresidential structures.
E. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 151-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
F. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
G. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 151-13, Application for permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of Article V, Construction Standards, and, in
particular, § 151-15A, Subdivision proposals.
§ 151-13 WALTON CODE § 151-14
1:82
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
Article V, Construction Standards, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (These areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM.) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 151-13G, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
C. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notification to adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submittal of evidence
of such notification to the Regional Administrator, Region II,
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
§ 151-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-14
1:83
structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the asbuilt
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in
relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by
or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by the same. For manufactured
homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of
elevation must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it
remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is
fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The Local Administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 151-9 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 151-9 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 151-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
§ 151-14 WALTON CODE § 151-14
1:84
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 151-14E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain, and
make available for inspection, copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to Subsection D(1) and (2), and whether or not
the structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to Subsection D(1),
and whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to Article VI, Variance Procedures; and
(5) Notices required under Subsection C, Alteration of watercourses.
§ 151-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-14
1:85

ARTICLE V
Construction Standards
§ 151-15. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 151-6.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Village of Walton agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and
reimburses the Village of Walton for all fees and other costs in
relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all
data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Village of
Walton for all costs related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 151-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
§ 151-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-15
1:87
§ 151-16. Standards for all structures.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 151-6.
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Village of Walton agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and
the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the Village of Walton for all fees and
other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must
also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the
Village of Walton for all costs related to the final map revisions.
C. Critical facilities. In order to prevent potential flood damage to certain
facilities that would result in serious danger to life and health, or
widespread social or economic dislocation, no new critical facility shall
be located within any area of special flood hazard, or within any fivehundred-
year flood zone shown as a B zone or a shaded X zone on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Maps. [Added 5-2-2016 by L.L.
No. 1-2016]
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Enclosed areas.
(a) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding, designed to automatically equalize
§ 151-15 WALTON CODE § 151-16
1:88
§ 151-17. Elevation of residential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved residential
structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the
requirements in § 151-15A, Subdivision proposals, and § 151-15B,
Encroachments, and § 151-16, Standards for all structures.
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding; and
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all
sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at least two feet above the base flood
elevation or be designed to prevent water from entering and
accumulating within the components during a flood and to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring
and outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels shall also be
elevated or designed to prevent water from entering and
accumulating within the components unless they conform to the
appropriate provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of
New York State or the Residential Code of New York State for
location of such items in wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
§ 151-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-17
1:89
§ 151-18. Nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in § 151-15A,
Subdivision proposals, and § 151-15B, Encroachments, and § 151-16,
Standards for all structures.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, new construction and substantial improvements
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
two feet above the base flood elevation.
B. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
C. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 151-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood elevation, including attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. All structural components located below the base
flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified); or
§ 151-17 WALTON CODE § 151-18
1:90
§ 151-19. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards, in addition to the standards in § 151-15, General
standards, and § 151-16, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated,
in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in Subsection A(2).
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
§ 151-18A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and
AH shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Subsections
B, C and D.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnecttype
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor is elevated to or above two feet above the base
flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
C. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such
§ 151-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-19
1:91
that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 151-6 (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified).
§ 151-19 WALTON CODE § 151-19
1:92
ARTICLE VI
Variance Procedures
§ 151-20. Appeals Board. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Village of Walton
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
§ 151-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-20
1:93
§ 151-21. Conditions for variances.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 151-20D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that Subsection D(1)
through (12) in § 151-20 have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a "historic structure"; and
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met;
and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
§ 151-20 WALTON CODE § 151-21
1:94
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws.
G. Notice.
(1) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
(2) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required in § 151-14H of this chapter.
§ 151-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-21
1:95
Chapter 158
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 158-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GAMES OF CHANCE — Any and all games of chance as defined in Article
9-A, § 186, Subdivision 3, of the General Municipal Law.
ORGANIZATION — An authorized organization as defined in Article 9-A,
§ 186, Subdivision 4 of the General Municipal Law.
§ 158-2. Games of chance authorized; license required.
Authorized organizations may, upon the obtaining of a license from the
Village Clerk-Treasurer of the Village of Walton, New York, conduct games
of chance within the territorial limits of the Village of Walton as provided in
Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law, as the same may be amended from
time to time, and as provided further in this chapter. Such games of chance
shall be conducted in accordance with the general state law and with the
rules and regulations of the New York State Gaming Commission and this
chapter, as the same may be amended from time to time.
§ 158-3. Restrictions.
The conduct of games of chance authorized by this chapter shall be subject
to those restrictions contained in § 189 of the General Municipal Law and
other applicable statutory and case law and the rules and regulations of the
New York State Gaming Commission.
§ 158-4. Sunday games.
Games of chance on the first day of the week, commonly known as "Sunday,"
may be conducted pursuant to this chapter and appropriate statutes and
regulations.
§ 158-5. Electoral approval required.
A. This chapter shall become operative and effective if approved by a
majority of the electors of the Village of Walton voting on a proposition
submitted at the general election of the 21st day of March 2006, at
which general election all qualified voters within the Village may vote
upon the proposition.4
B. The method and manner of submission, balloting by voting machine and
conducting the election, canvassing the result and making and filing the
4. Editor's Note: Said proposition was approved by the voters at the general election
3-21-2006.
§ 151-21 WALTON CODE § 158-5
1:96
§ 158-6. Filings.
This chapter shall be filed within five days after its approval by the electors,
and one certified original shall be filed in the Village Clerk's office and
one original in the office of the Secretary of State or, in the alternative, in
accordance with any procedure as may be authorized by the Secretary of
State at the time of approval.
Chapter 165
HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND AUCTIONEERS
§ 165-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUCTIONEER — One with intent to sell goods, either his own or property
of others, by means of competitive bid or fixed price at an advertised public
sale at a specific location.
FOOD VENDOR — A person, either principal or agent, who from any public
street or public place or by going from house to house on foot or on or
from any vehicle, sells or barters, offers for sale or barter, or carries or
exposes for sale any food or drink meant for immediate consumption, either
prepared on-site or packaged.
HAWKER, VENDOR or PEDDLER — A person, except as hereinafter
expressly provided, either principal or agent, who from any public street
or public place, or by going from house to house, on foot or on or from
any vehicle, sells or barters, offers for sale or barter or carries or exposes
for sale or barter any goods, wares or merchandise, books, magazines,
periodicals or any other item or items of value, except milk, newspapers,
food and drink meant for immediate consumption and food distributed on
regular customer routes.
§ 165-2. License required.
No person, whether acting for himself or another, shall engage in the
pursuit or exercise of the occupation of auctioneering, hawking, vending,
peddling, soliciting orders and the crying of goods, wares and merchandise,
food for immediate consumption or other commodities in the streets and
public places and by going from house to house in the Village of Walton,
returns and all other procedure with reference to the submission of and
action upon the proposition submitted for approval under this chapter
shall be the same as in the case of any other proposition submitted to
the electors of the Village of Walton at a general election and shall be
governed by the Charter of the Village of Walton, the Election Law of
the State of New York and the rules and regulations of the Delaware
County Board of Elections.
§ 158-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-2
1:97
without first having obtained a license from the Mayor of the Village of
Walton, New York, countersigned by the Village Clerk, and the receipt of the
Village Clerk-Treasurer endorsed thereon, and paying a license fee to be set
by resolution of the Village Board.
§ 165-3. Fee exceptions.
Fee exceptions shall be as follows:
§ 165-4. Requirements for issuance of licenses.
A. Farmers and persons peddling fruit and farm produce who have
produced such commodities.
B. Hawking or peddling by an honorably discharged veteran of any war, or
who has served overseas in the armed services of the United States,
and who, under Article 4, § 32, of the General Business Law, has been
licensed by the Delaware County Clerk.
C. Nonprofit organizations, e.g., fire department, service clubs, public
school or organized church-sponsored fairs, exhibitions or sales,
including concessions of not more than three days' duration, conducted
on private property, and provided that all revenues after expenses go to
the benefit of such nonprofit organization. It will be the responsibility of
such organization to obtain a permit from the Village Clerk-Treasurer
and to control the operation of the event or concession. The use of
public parks, public parking lots and public lawn areas by nonprofit
organizations may be granted by the Board of Trustees on a case-bycase
basis following review by the designated Village committee with
responsibility for the site.
D. Yard, porch or garage sales of used personal/household goods
conducted wholly on the owner's property and at least three feet from
the property line for not more than three days per event and not
exceeding three events per year. A permit is required from the Village
Clerk-Treasurer for each event.
E. Vending conducted from booths, carts, tables, tents or other temporary
structures in the business district on either public streets or sidewalks
during Village-Board-defined community/special events. Community
events are Village-wide celebrations proclaimed by the Village Board of
Trustees. A special event is an event sponsored by a nonprofit
organization and approved by the Village Board.
A. Individual permits are issued to applicants who submit permit
applications under this chapter. A blanket permit is issued to a
nonprofit sponsoring organization for vending during a Village-Boardapproved
special event. Registration of all individual vendors will be
handled by the sponsoring agency.
B. Separate permits are required for the selling of merchandise and food.
Food permits require the additional submission of proof that a Health
§ 165-2 WALTON CODE § 165-4
1:98
§ 165-5. Restrictions.
Department permit has been obtained. In either category
(merchandise/food), only one permit will be issued to each applying
individual, firm, corporation or affiliate for the use of public or private
property.
C. A certificate of insurance naming the Village as an added insured and in
an amount stipulated by the Village Board must be supplied to the
Village Clerk-Treasurer at least 14 days before the event, if conducted
on Village property, by each applicant or by the sponsoring agency in
the case of a blanket permit.
D. Applications for permits other than blanket permits must be filed at
least 15 days before the period for which the permit is requested.
Blanket permit applications must be submitted by the sponsoring
agency at least 30 days before the special event.
E. A sponsoring organization applying for a blanket permit for a defined
special event will be responsible for screening applicants, assigning
spaces (in areas established by Code Enforcement Official) and, at least
seven days prior to the event, will provide to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer a list of vendors/nonprofit organizations and assigned
spaces, as well as proof of liability insurance covering all participants if
the event is conducted on Village property. If the blanket permit covers
the sale of food, applicable Health Department clearances must also be
included. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. Licenses issued under this order are only valid during normal business
hours, typically 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., at which time business must be
suspended, and vehicles containing merchandise, goods or wares
related to the business activity for which the person is licensed must be
removed from the area. This removal must be partaken at least once in
every twenty-four-hour period.
B. No person shall be permitted to operate, maintain or otherwise
establish a temporary facility, stand or booth for display of wares or
sales of merchandise on the property of another, unless the individual
has:
(1) Established that property is in a commercial zone.
(2) Obtained written permission of the property owner.
C. Individuals not operating from a permanent address who are, in effect,
operating a causal sale must also have evidence of compliance with
state and local sales tax laws or regulations.
D. No vendor will be allowed to alter, deface or damage Village property
by actions such as but not limited to placing nails into sidewalks/trees
§ 165-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-5
1:99
§ 165-6. Exemptions.
Exemptions shall be as follows:
§ 165-7. Enforcement.
The enforcement of all rules and regulations specified or implied in this
vending law will be carried out by the Village Police and the Village Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 165-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more than
15 days, or both.
Chapter 176
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
or hanging signs, banners or other items from trees, streetlights or
public signs.
A. Private auctions are exempt from the hour limitations and the
commercial zone restrictions.
B. Lemonade stands, nightwalker sales, cookie sales or other similar
ventures conducted by minors on a sporadic basis.
C. Any person or individual that is merely proselytizing for either religious
or political purposes, distributing religious or political handbills at no
cost, or exercising the right to anonymous religious or political speech
without soliciting any funds and without selling any goods or soliciting
for contributions. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 165-5 WALTON CODE § 165-8
1:100
ARTICLE I
Disturbing Meetings; Congregating; Profane Language
[Adopted 1-12-1905 (Ch. 39, Art. I, of the 1973 Code)]
§ 176-1. Disturbing meetings.
§ 176-2. Unnecessarily congregating.
§ 176-3. Loud or profane language.
A. No person shall in any manner break up or disturb any meeting or
assemblage of persons lawfully held or assembled for any purpose in
the Village of Walton, and any loud, boisterous or improper noise,
language, whistling or hissing, and any other act or thing done in such
assemblage or outside of such assemblage intending or tending in any
manner to disturb the orderly and proper conduct or progress of such
meeting or assemblage, or the actors or persons managing or
conducting the same, shall be deemed a violation of this section.
B. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or both. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. Persons shall not unnecessarily congregate upon the street or street
corners, or in front of churches or public places in the Village.
B. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or both. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. No person shall use or utter any profane, vulgar or obscene language;
nor shall any person be engaged in any loud or boisterous conversation
or monologue in which cursing or swearing or vulgar or obscene
language is used, in or upon any of the streets, lanes, parks or public
places of the Village.
B. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or both. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 176-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-3
1:101

ARTICLE II
Public Intoxication and Vagrancy
[Adopted 9-24-1892 (Ch. 39, Art. II, of the 1973 Code)]
§ 176-4. Public intoxication and vagrancy.
A. No intoxicated person shall be or appear upon any of the streets, lanes,
alleys, parks or public places of the Village.5
B. Nor shall any person commit any act of vagrancy, or be guilty of any
disorderly conduct or do or commit any disorderly act therein.
C. The following persons shall be considered vagrants and disorderly
under this section:
(1) A person who, not having visible means to maintain himself, lives
without employment;
(2) A person who, being an habitual drunkard, abandons, neglects or
refuses to aid in the support of his family;
(3) A person who has contracted an infectious or other disease in the
practice of drunkenness or debauchery, requiring charitable aid to
restore him to health;
(4) A common prostitute who has no lawful employment whereby to
maintain herself;
(5) A person wandering abroad and begging, or who goes about from
door to door or places himself in the streets, highways, passages or
other public places, to beg or receive alms;
(6) A person wandering abroad and lodging in taverns, groceries,
alehouses, watch or station houses, outhouses, marketplaces,
sheds, stables, barns or uninhabited buildings, or in the open air,
and not giving a good account of himself;
(7) A person who, having his face painted, discolored, covered or
concealed, or being otherwise disguised, in a manner calculated to
prevent his being identified, appears in a road or public highway, or
in a field, lot, wood or enclosure;
(8) Any child between the age of five and 14, having sufficient bodily
health and mental capacity to attend the public school, found
wandering in the streets or lanes of any city or incorporated
Village, a truant, without any lawful occupation.
D. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more
5. Editor's Note: Original § 39-4B of the 1973 Code, concerning prohibition of prostitution,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 176-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-4
1:103
than 15 days, or both. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 176-4 WALTON CODE § 176-4
1:104
ARTICLE III
Nudity
[Adopted 9-24-1892 (Ch. 39, Art. III, of the 1973 Code)]
§ 176-5. Nudity.6
A. No person in a nude condition or who is not decently clothed shall bathe
in the river or in any brook or pond within the corporate limits of the
Village, nor shall any person appear in a nude or indecent condition in
any street, lane, park or other public place in the Village, nor within
sight of any street, lane or other public place in the Village.
B. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or both.7 [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
6. Editor's Note: The following original sections of the 1973 Code, which immediately
preceded this section, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I): § 39-5, Keeping house of ill fame, and § 39-6, Visiting house of ill fame;
soliciting.
7. Editor's Note: Original § 39-8 of the 1973 Code, Keeping gambling house, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 176-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-5
1:105

ARTICLE IV
Disorderly Conduct
[Adopted 9-24-1892 (Ch. 39, Art. IV, of the 1973 Code)]
§ 176-6. Disorderly conduct, generally.
§ 176-7. Injuring poles, wires, etc. [Added 1-12-1905]
A. No person shall willfully give a false alarm of fire, nor use any vulgar or
obscene language or conduct, in any street, lane or public place in the
Village, nor shall any person or persons willfully or maliciously break,
mar, injure, remove or deface any building, fence, awning, sign,
signboard, tree, shrubbery or other ornamental thing, or any thing
placed or put up for ornament in the Village. No person shall remove
from its place or pile up before any door or gate or on any sidewalk or
street, boxes, casks or any other thing for the purpose of annoyance or
mischief; nor shall any person willfully tear down, destroy or mutilate
any notice or handbill lawfully posted up in the Village. No person shall
fight or quarrel in any of the streets, lanes or public places of the
Village, nor shall any person incite or induce dogs to fight in any such
place.
B. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or both. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. No person shall injure, break or destroy, or in any manner interfere
with, the poles, wires, pipes, fixtures or anything appurtenant to the
plant or property of any electric light, telephone, telegraph, gas or
water company doing business in the Village of Walton by the authority
of said Village.
B. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or both.8 [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
8. Editor's Note: Original Art. V, Unnecessary Noise, of the 1973 Code, adopted 9-24-1892,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 2-2-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009.
§ 176-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-7
1:107
Chapter 185
RENTAL PROPERTY
§ 176-7 WALTON CODE § 176-7
1:108
ARTICLE I
Registration of Rental Property
[Adopted 3-3-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014 (Ch. 40B of the 1973 Code)]
§ 185-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CORPORATION — Any fictitious legal entity authorized by the laws of the
State of New York to own real property, including, but not limited to, a
foreign or domestic corporation of any type, a limited liability company or a
limited partnership.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Includes a dwelling which is either rented,
leased, let or hired out to be occupied or is occupied as the temporary or
permanent residence or home of three or more families living independently
of each other.
OWNER — The owner or owners of a freehold of the premises or lesser
estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other person, firm,
partnership, corporation or entity directly or indirectly in control of a
dwelling.
§ 185-2. Identification.
The owner of any rental property located within the Village, whether a
one- or two-family residence or a multiple dwelling, shall post and maintain
in a conspicuous place in such dwelling a legible notice identifying the
owner and managing agent of such dwelling, together with the residence
and business addresses and telephone numbers of the owner and managing
agent. Where the owner is a corporation, the sign shall contain the names,
addresses and telephone numbers of the officers thereof, together with the
residence and business addresses and telephone numbers of the officers
and of the corporation as well as the information regarding the managing
agent.
§ 185-3. Registration statement of ownership and managing agent.
The owner of any rental property located within the Village, whether a oneor
two-family residence or a multiple dwelling, shall file with the Village
Clerk, within 60 days after the adoption of this chapter or within 30 days
of the acquisition of ownership therein, a written registration statement
on forms to be supplied by the Village Clerk, containing the following
information.
A. A description of the premises by street number or block and lot number.
B. The name and residence and business address of such owner, together
with his residence and business telephone number or, if such owner is a
corporation, the name and address of such corporation and the name
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-3
1:109
§ 185-4. Provisions related to managing agents.
and residence and business address of all officers thereof, together with
the residence and business telephone numbers of the corporation and
all officers.
C. Designated managing agent or agents. The name, residence, business
address and residence and business telephone number of at least one
natural person, 21 years of age or over, who either actually resides or
has a regular place of business located within 10 miles of the Village of
Walton who is designated by such owner as the managing agent in
control of and responsible for the maintenance and operation of such
dwelling, and who shall be designated as the person upon whom
process may be served on behalf of the owner. There shall be endorsed
upon such statement a written consent to such designation signed by
such managing agent.
A. An owner who is a natural person and who meets the requirements of
this subsection as to the location of the residence or place of
transacting business of a managing agent may designate himself as
such managing agent. Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed as preventing a corporation which is an owner of a multiple
dwelling from designating as its managing agent with respect thereto
any officer of such corporation who meets the requirements of this
subsection as to the location of the residence or place of transacting
business of a managing agent.
B. The managing agent shall keep a current record of all the tenants and
their names and addresses, who are renting, leasing or living on the
premises.
C. Any designation as managing agent made pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall remain in full force and effect until changed or
terminated as hereinafter provided.
D. Any registration statement or designation of a managing agent filed and
maintained by the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall be deemed prima facie
proof of the statements therein contained in any civil action or criminal
prosecution instituted by the Village against the owner or managing
agent of a multiple dwelling.
E. Any owner may terminate such designation by filing with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer a written designation of a new managing agent made
in conformity with the provisions hereinabove cited. Any managing
agent may terminate his or her designation by the filing with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer and signed statement of the termination of the agency
relationship with the owner.
F. Any designation of a managing agent made pursuant to the applicable
provisions of this section shall cease to be effective if such agent shall
die or be judicially declared incompetent.
§ 185-3 WALTON CODE § 185-5
1:110
§ 185-5. Transfer of ownership interest.
Where, after the filing of any registration statement in relation to any
rental property under the applicable provisions of this section, the owner of
such dwelling shall have granted or transferred his right, title or interest
therein or in any part thereof, such owner shall file with the Village Clerk,
within 10 days after such grant or transfer, a written statement which shall
contain the name and residence and business addresses of the grantee,
transferee or other successor of such right, title or interest, or if such
grantee, transferee or successor is a corporation, the name and address of
such corporation.
§ 185-6. Failure to comply.
Any owner who shall fail to initially file or thereafter accurately amend the
registration of any rental property as to its ownership, or to maintain a
managing agent for any rental property to file the same with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer in conformance with the provisions of this section within
15 days of any change in the managing agent of any rental property in the
Village, shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
§ 185-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $250 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both. Each
week a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 185-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:111
Chapter 192
SEWERS
§ 185-7 WALTON CODE § 185-7
1:112
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 192-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BOARD — The duly elected Board of Trustees of the Village of Walton
or its authorized deputy, agent or representative.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal, also called "house connection."
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer designed to receive both wastewater
and stormwater or surface water.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A combination of individual samples of
wastewater taken at selected intervals, generally hourly, for a specified
period.
CONTAMINATION — An impairment of the quality of the waters of the
state by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health
through poisoning or through the spread of disease.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any system of
condensation, air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other sources.
It shall contain no polluting substances which would produce BOD or
suspended solids, each in excess of 10 milligrams per liter.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land
owned by others.
EFFLUENT — Treated wastewater flowing from any treatment device
of a facility.
FEDERAL ACT or ACT — The 1972 Federal Water Pollution Control
Act Amendments, Public Law 92-500, 1977 Clean Water Act, Public
Law 95-217 and any amendments thereof, as well as any guidelines,
limitations and standards promulgated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable
§ 192-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-1
1:113
fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere
with the collection system.
FLOW RATE — The quantity of waste or liquid that flows in a certain
period of time.
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable wastes from the preparation,
cooking and disposing of food and from the handling, processing,
storage and sale of food products and produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — A single sample of wastewater taken at neither a set
time nor flow rate.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any sanitary waste from holding tanks, such
as marine vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and
vacuum pump tank trucks.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any nonresidential user served by the POTW,
which user is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and
supplemented, under one of the following divisions:
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any discarded matter, including any liquid,
gaseous or solid substance or a combination thereof, resulting from
any process of industry or manufacturing, trade or business or from
development or recovery of natural resources. The term shall not
include garbage.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — Wastewater in which industrial wastes
are carried.
INFLUENT — Wastewater, raw or partly treated, flowing into any
sewage treatment device of sewage treatment facilities.
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal. The
term includes any action which contributes to a violation of any
requirement of the Village of Walton SPDES permit or which results in
the prevention of sewage sludge reuse, reclamation or disposal by the
POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or
any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or any
more stringent state criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use
employed by the POTW.
(1) Division A: Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.
(2) Division B: Mining.
(3) Division D: Manufacturing.
Division E: Transportation, Communications, Electrical, Gas and
Sanitary Services.
(4)
(5) Division I: Services.
§ 192-1 WALTON CODE § 192-1
1:114
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY — All significant industrial users
and any other industries having a wet process discharge to the sewer
system.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface or ground water.
NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
CONSERVATION or NYSDEC — The New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation or other duly authorized official of said
Department.
NORMAL SEWAGE — Sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes having
pollutant concentrations which do not exceed 200 mg/l of BODs, 200
mg/l of TSS or 50 mg/l of oil and grease and which are otherwise
acceptable for discharge into the POTW under the terms of these rules
and regulations. The numbers and values of characteristics are subject
to revision by the Village Board when, in the opinion of the Board,
a revision is necessary in order to maintain the physical integrity of
the POTW or to maintain the treatment works capability of providing
treatment in compliance with federal, state or local
standards.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
OWNERS — The Village of Walton, New York.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water.
POTW or PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS — The Village of
Walton sewage treatment plant. This term also includes any devices or
systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of
municipal sewage or industrial wastes of liquid nature by the Village of
Walton Consolidated Sewer District. This includes intercepting sewers,
outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping power and other
equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements,
remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to
provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units
and clear well facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of
the land, that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is
used for ultimate disposal or residues resulting from such treatment; or
any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing,
treating, separating or disposing of municipal waste, including
stormwater runoff or industrial waste, including waste in combined
stormwater and sanitary sewer systems.
§ 192-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-1
1:115
PREMISES — Any parcel of real property, including land,
improvements, appurtenance or buildings, grounds, etc.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to discharge to the POTW.
PRIVATE SEWER — A sewer which is not owned or controlled by a
public agency.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than onehalf
inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer which is owned or controlled by a
governmental agency. This term includes any devices or systems used
by the governmental agency in the storage, transmission, treatment or
reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes.
RCRA — The Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended (RCRA), P.L.
95-580, as amended by P.L. 95-609 and by P.L. 96-482; 42 U.S.C. § 6091.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer intended to carry only sanitary or
sanitary and industrial wastewater from residences, commercial
buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
SANITARY WASTE — Wash water, culinary wastes, the liquid waste
containing only human excreta and similar matter flowing in or from a
building drainage system or sewer originating in a dwelling, business
building, factory or institution.
SEWAGE — The spent water of a community. The preferred term is
"wastewater."
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SEWER SYSTEM — All sewers, laterals, pump stations, treatment plant
or other conveyances which connect with or pertain to a connection
with the sewers, plant or public works.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS — Those industries meeting one or
more of the following criteria:
All industrial facilities subject to promulgated federal categorical
pretreatment standards.
(1)
Industrial facilities having a substantial impact, either singly or in
combination with other industrial facilities, on the operation of the
treatment works.
(2)
A single industrial facility using, on an annual basis, more than
10,000 pounds or 1,000 gallons of substance constituting a priority
pollutant (designated pursuant to the Act) and discharging a
(3)
§ 192-1 WALTON CODE § 192-1
1:116
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during normal operation and
shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the
wastewater treatment works.
SPDES — The State Pollution Discharge Elimination System established
by Article 17 of the Environmental Conservation Law of the State of
New York for issuance of permits authorizing discharges to the waters
of the state.
STORM DRAIN — A drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater,
subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source. Sometimes
referred to as a "storm sewer."
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Public Works of the
Village of Walton or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter in water or
wastewater, as determined by the Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Any substances, whether gaseous, liquid or
solid, which, when discharged to the sewer system in sufficient
amounts, may tend to interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to the receiving waters of the effluent from the
sewage treatment plant, pose a hazard to animal life or inhibit aquatic
life. This definition includes, but is not limited to, EPA priority
pollutants.
UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or USEPA
— The United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where
appropriate, a designation for the administrator or other duly
authorized official of said Agency.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water to which no constituent has been
added, either intentionally or accidentally, which would render such
water unacceptable to the agency having jurisdiction thereof for
disposal to storm or natural drainages or directly to surface waters.
measurable amount of that substance to the sewer system from the
process using that substance.
Those industries discharging more than 1% of the average daily
flow or more than 1% of the load of conventional pollutants
tributary to the treatment plant receiving the waste.
(4)
All industries discharging heavy metals in any quantity or priority
pollutants in any amount where the Board determines that the
discharge of such materials into the sewer system may have a
significant impact on or may interfere with the POTW.
(5)
§ 192-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-1
1:117
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the POTW, including the Walton sewer
and sewage treatment plant.
VILLAGE — The Village of Walton, New York.
WASTEWATER — The water-carried domestic, human or animal waste
from residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places,
together with such ground infiltration and industrial and commercial
wastes as may be present.
WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS — The
individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological
parameters, including volume, flow rate and such other parameters,
that serve to define, classify and measure the contents, quality, quantity
and strength of wastewater.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of
water either continuously or intermittently.
B. Word usage.
(1) Unless otherwise defined herein, technical terms shall be as
defined in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American
Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the
Water Environment Federation.
(2) "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 192-1 WALTON CODE § 192-1
1:118
ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 192-2. Depositing wastes on public and private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
Village of Walton or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Village any
human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste.
§ 192-3. Discharge to natural outlet.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Village of
Walton or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Village any wastewater
or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been provided
in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 192-4. Restrictions on private disposal systems.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of wastewater.
§ 192-5. Connection required.
The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the
Village and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is not
located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer
of the Village, are hereby required at the expense of the owner(s) to install
suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with
the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said
public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.
§ 192-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-5
1:119

ARTICLE III
Private Wastewater Disposal
§ 192-6. Connection to private system.
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of Article II, § 192-5, the building sewer shall be connected to
a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this
article.
§ 192-7. Construction permit required; fee. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the Village, which the applicant shall supplement by any
plans, specifications or other information as are deemed necessary by the
Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of $50 shall be paid to the
Village at the time the application is filed.
§ 192-8. Inspection during construction.
A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent. The Superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work
at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit
shall notify the Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection
and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be
made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent.
§ 192-9. Compliance with other requirements.
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal
system shall comply with all requirements of the Department of Public
Health of the State of New York or any other municipal, state or federal
government having jurisdiction. No permit shall be issued for any private
wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities
where the area of the lot is less than 20,000 square feet. No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
§ 192-10. Abandonment of private system.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by
a private wastewater disposal system, direct connection shall be made to
the public sewer within 90 days. In compliance with this chapter any septic
tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be
cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material.
§ 192-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-11
1:121
§ 192-11. Operation and maintenance of private system.
The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Village.
§ 192-12. Additional requirements by Health Officer.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
§ 192-11 WALTON CODE § 192-12
1:122
ARTICLE IV
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 192-13. Permit required.
No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
§ 192-14. Classes of permits; application; fee; conditions.
A. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential and
commercial service and for service to establishments producing
industrial wastes. In either case, the owner(s) or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the Village. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Superintendent or in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by
the Board of Trustees. A permit and inspection fee of $25 for a
residential building sewer permit or $100 for a commercial building
sewer permit and $200 for an industrial building sewer permit shall be
paid to the Village at the time the application is filed. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. Permits generally.
(1) Maximum time period for the permit to discharge industrial wastes
shall be for three years. In the judgment of the Superintendent, this
period can be extended upon receipt of the proper application form
and upon all other specifications and conditions being met for twoyear
periods.
(2) The permit's terms and conditions may be subject to modification
and change by the Village after sufficient time and notice have been
given.
(3) An industrial waste discharge permit shall not be reassigned,
transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or
for a new or changed operation.
(4) The owner or agent of an industrial waste discharge permit shall
apply for a permit modification if production or process is changed
so that the wastewater characteristics or flow is altered.
(5) Any violation not corrected after sufficient notice is given of such
violation shall result in the revocation of the permit.
(6) All permit applications shall include information concerning
volume, constituents and characteristics of wastewater, flow rates,
each product produced by type, amount and rate of production and
description of activities, facilities and plant process on the
§ 192-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-14
1:123
§ 192-15. Costs and expenses; indemnification of Village.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify
the Village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 192-16. Separate sewer required for each building; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except that where one building stands at the rear of another on
an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the Village does not
and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by
or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned.
§ 192-17. Use of old sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.
§ 192-18. Material and procedure specifications.
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of
the Building and Plumbing Code or other rules and regulations applicable
in the Village. In the absence of Code provisions or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of
the American Society for Testing Materials and the Water Environment
Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. Each building sewer
premises, including all materials processed and types of materials
which are or could be discharged.
(7) Conditions of industrial waste discharge permits shall be uniformly
enforced by the Village in accordance with this chapter and
applicable state and federal regulations. Also, the permits shall be
expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other
regulations, user charges and fees established by the Village and
applicable state and federal regulations.
(8) Permits shall contain specifications for monitoring programs,
which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling,
number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule.
(9) Major contributing industries shall further comply with the
requirements of Article VI.
§ 192-14 WALTON CODE § 192-18
1:124
serving not more than five closets shall not be less than four inches in
inside diameter. When serving more than five water closets, the size of
the building sewer shall be increased to sufficient capacity to meet all
requirements, but shall be a minimum of six inches in inside diameter.
§ 192-19. Elevation of building sewer.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
§ 192-20. Connection of surface runoff and groundwater.
No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by
the Superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
§ 192-21. Compliance with connection regulations required.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other rules
and regulations applicable to the Village or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing Materials
and the Water Environment Federation Manual of Practice No. 9. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight and shall be verified by
proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials
must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
§ 192-22. Inspection and testing.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of
the Superintendent or his representative.
§ 192-23. Guarding of excavations; restoration of property.
All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Village.
§ 192-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-23
1:125

ARTICLE V
Use of Public Sewers
§ 192-24. Discharge of unpolluted waters to sanitary sewers.
No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
waters, such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage
or cooling water, to any sewer, except that stormwater runoff from limited
areas, which stormwater may be polluted at times, may be discharged to
the sanitary sewer by permission of the Superintendent.
§ 192-25. Discharge of unpolluted waters to combined sewers or
natural outlets.
Stormwater, other than that exempted under § 192-24 of Article V, and all
other unpolluted drainage, may not be discharged without an SPDES permit
being applied for, and such discharge of cooling water is subject to federal
and state regulation. After such permit is applied for and approval obtained,
it shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as
combined sewers or to a natural outlet approved by state and federal
regulatory agencies and by the Superintendent. Unpolluted industrial
cooling water or process waters may be discharged only upon obtaining a
SPDES permit, as well as the approval of the Superintendent, to a storm
sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
§ 192-26. Prohibited discharges. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the followingdescribed
waters or wastes to any public sewers unless otherwise granted
in a special agreement or industrial permit with the Village:
A. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity
are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to
the treatment works or to the operation of the treatment works. At no
time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the
point of discharge into the system or at any point in the system, be more
than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit
(LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to,
gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, fuel oil, benzene and any other substances
which the Board, the DEC or EPA has notified the user constitute a fire
or explosion hazard to the system.
B. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either
single or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with
any wastewater treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, to create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the treatment
works or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment
standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any
pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Federal Act.
§ 192-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-26
1:127
C. Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the
treatment works.
D. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in
a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
treatment facilities, such as but not limited to grease, shredded
garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal
guts or tissue, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails,
lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass
clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics,
tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or
lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes, snow, ice or
any other solid objects, materials, refuse and debris not normally
contained in ordinary sewage.
E. Any substance which may cause the POTWs effluent or any other
product of the POTW, such as residues, sludge or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation process where the POTW is pursuing a reuse
and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to
the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or
disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or
disposal development pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the
Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act or state criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used.
F. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly
or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to prevent entry into
the sewers for their maintenance and repair.
G. Any substance which will cause the treatment works to violate its State
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) permit or the
receiving water quality standards.
H. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment
process.
I. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no
case heated wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the
sewer system which exceeds 120° F. (50° C.) or in such quantities that
the temperature of wastewater at the POTW treatment works exceeds
104° F. (40° C.).
J. Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference with the treatment works.
K. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life, creates a public
nuisance or is detrimental to aquatic life.
§ 192-26 WALTON CODE § 192-26
1:128
§ 192-27. Discharges subject to approval and regulation by
Superintendent. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
The following-described substances, materials, waters and wastes shall be
limited to discharges to municipal systems of concentrations or quantities
which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or
equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or
will not otherwise endanger life, limb or public property or constitute a
nuisance. The Superintendent, with prior approval by the Board, may set
limitations if in his opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to
meet the above objectives. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability,
the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantity
of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials
of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed,
capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the
water in the wastewater treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The
limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or
wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer, which shall not be violated
without approval of the Superintendent, are as follows:
L. Radioactive wastes. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any radioactive materials or wastes into the POTW.
A. Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum
oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or a product of mineral oil origin.
B. Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified
or not, in excess of 50 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify
or become viscous at temperatures between 32° F. and 150° F.
C. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. (See Article I,
§ 192-1A.) Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from
homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering
establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the
preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the
premises or when served by caterers.
D. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such
material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater
treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent
for such materials and identified in the discharge permit or as
established in a categorical pretreatment standard, whichever is more
stringent.
E. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment
of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal
§ 192-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-27
1:129
or other public agencies with jurisdiction over such discharge to the
receiving waters.
F. Quantities of flow or concentrations, or both, which constitute a slug, as
defined herein.
G. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of
other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving
waters.
H. Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in
the public sewer system, release noxious gases, form suspended solids
which interfere with the collection system or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
I. Solid or viscous substances, such as, but not limited to, grease, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair
and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., in
quantities or of such size capable of impairing the hydraulic capacity of
the sewer or other interference with the operation of the POTW.
J. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as but not
limited to fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate).
(2) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works. The admission into the public sewers of any
waters or wastes having a five-day BOD greater than 200 parts per
million by weight or containing more than 200 parts per million by
weight of suspended solids or containing more than 0.2 parts per
million of total chlorine demand, containing more than eight parts
per million of total phosphorous or containing more than 30 parts
per million of total nitrogen or having an average daily flow greater
than 5% of the average daily sewage flow of the Village shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent.
K. Any discoloration, such as but not limited to dyes, inks and vegetable
tanning solutions, or any other condition in the quality of treatment
works effluent in such manner that receiving water quality
requirements established by law cannot be met.
§ 192-27 WALTON CODE § 192-28
1:130
§ 192-28. Restricted discharges. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
No person or connected entity shall discharge directly or indirectly into
the POTW wastewater containing any of the following substances in
concentrations exceeding those specified below on either a daily or
instantaneous basis unless otherwise granted in a special agreement or
industrial permit with the Village. Concentration limits are applicable to
wastewater effluents at a point just prior to discharge into the Village sewer
system.
Substance*
Allowable Daily Average Effluent
Concentration Limit**
(mg/l)
Ammonia 20.00
Arsenic 1.0
Barium 2.0
Benzene 0.05
Berylium 0.15
Bromine 1.0
Cadmium 1.0
Chlorine 0.2 (as total chlorine)
Chlorobenzene 0.01
Chloroform 0.1
Chromium (hexavalent) 1.0
Chromium (total) 2.0
Copper 5.0
Cyanide (complex) 0.5
Cyanide (free) 0.5
Fluorides 10.0
Gold 0.5
Iodine 2.0
Iron 10.0
Lead 0.5
Manganese 1.0
Mercury 0.25
Nickel 2.0
pH 6.0 to 9.0 (standard units)
Phenol 0.1
§ 192-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-28
1:131
Substance*
Allowable Daily Average Effluent
Concentration Limit**
(mg/l)
Phosphorous 8.0
Selenium 1.0
Silver 1.0
Sulfides 3.0
Trichloroethane 0.05
Zinc 10.0
NOTES:
* All concentrations listed for metallic substances shall be as "total
metal," which shall be defined as the value measured in a sample
acidified to a pH value of less than two without prior filtration.
** As determined by a composite sample taken of the user's daily
discharge over the operational and/or production period.
§ 192-29. Regulation of deleterious discharges.
§ 192-30. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 192-27 of this article and
which, in the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious
effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving
waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the Superintendent may:
(1) Reject the waste.
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers.
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of § 192-34 of this article.
B. If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent.
§ 192-28 WALTON CODE § 192-30
1:132
§ 192-27B, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients,
except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Superintendent and shall be located so as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain
records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by
the Superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not
performed by the personnel of the owner(s) must be performed by currently
licensed waste disposal firms.
§ 192-31. Pretreatment and flow-equalizing facilities.
Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at the expense of the
owner(s).
§ 192-32. Sampling and measurement facilities.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
structure, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances,
in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement
of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 192-33. Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies
are to be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the
Superintendent.
§ 192-34. Agreements with industrial concerns.
Special agreements and arrangements between the municipality and any
persons or agencies may be established when, in the opinion of the
municipality, unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special terms
and conditions. Acceptance of such waste shall not cause the POTW to
violate its SPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards or any
pretreatment regulations promulgated by USEPA or NYSDEC in accordance
with Section 307 of P.L. 95-217.
§ 192-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-34
1:133

ARTICLE VI
Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment
§ 192-35. Registration of existing major contributing industries.
No later than 30 days after the effective date of this article, each major
contributing industry shall register with the Board. Registration may be
accomplished by the user's submitting a completed industrial chemical
survey form and an industrial wastewater discharge permit application
(with application fee) to the Superintendent.
§ 192-36. Permit applications; fee.
§ 192-37. Terms and conditions of permit.
The Board, in issuing a permit, shall impose such terms and conditions as
it deems appropriate in order to ensure compliance with local, state and
federal law and with the terms and conditions of the SPDES permit issued
for the POTW treatment plant.
§ 192-38. Draft and formal permits.
A. All applicants for a permit to discharge industrial wastes into any sewer
tributary to the POTW shall complete and file with the Superintendent
an application on a form provided by the Board.
B. The Superintendent may require such other additional information as
he/she deems necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this
article. All required information shall be furnished by the applicant in
complete cooperation with the Superintendent. The application shall be
completed and signed by:
(1) A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president if
the industrial user is a corporation.
(2) A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively.
(3) A duly designated representative of the individual designated
above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation
of the facilities from which the discharge originates.
C. The fee shall be $250. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. Draft permit. A draft permit will be issued on the basis of the Board's
action on the application for permit. The draft permit will incorporate
such terms and conditions as the Board determines to be appropriate
for the monitoring and control of the permitted discharge. The draft
permit shall be issued to the applicant for his review, and the applicant
shall have 30 days from the date the draft permit is issued to file with
the Superintendent any written objections in regard to the permit terms
§ 192-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-38
1:135
§ 192-39. Modification, suspension or revocation of permit.
§ 192-40. Permit renewal.
Permits are granted for no more than two years. Applications for renewal
of a permit must be made no earlier than 60 days and no later than 30
days prior to the expiration date. When a permittee has made timely and
sufficient application for the renewal of a permit or requested a modification
of its permit with reference to any activity of a continuing nature, the
existing permit does not expire until action on the application has been
taken by the Superintendent and approved by the Board. In cases where
the application is denied or the terms of the new or modified permit are
contested, the existing permit will not expire until the last day for seeking
Board review of the Superintendent's determination or such later date as
may be fixed by the Board.
and conditions. If no written objections are received within 30 days, the
Board may issue a formal permit.
B. Formal permit. Upon approval of the draft permit or after resolution of
permit conditions by the Superintendent, a formal permit will be issued
to the applicant by the Board.
A. Industrial wastewater discharge permits may be modified, suspended
or revoked whenever the Board finds that the user has violated any
term of the permit or that the user obtained the permit by
misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts.
B. Permits may additionally be modified, suspended or revoked whenever
the Board determines that a change in conditions or the existence of a
condition at the treatment plant requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge. The
Superintendent shall notify affected users of any proposed changes in
their permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change.
Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable
time schedule for compliance. Any user aggrieved by a proposed
modification, suspension or revocation of the user's wastewater
discharge permit may appeal to the Board for relief in accordance with
the provision of these rules and regulations.
C. If the Superintendent finds that the public health, safety or welfare
requires emergency action and incorporates a finding to that effect in
his/her order, summary suspension or modification of a permit may be
ordered pending proceedings for modification, suspension, revocation
or other action. As soon as possible thereafter, but not to exceed 15
days, the Board shall provide the affected user an opportunity to be
heard in accordance with the hearing provisions of Article XII.
§ 192-38 WALTON CODE § 192-41
1:136
§ 192-41. Transfer of permit.
Industrial waste discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation and are nontransferable. In the event of any change in ownership
of the industrial facility, the permittee shall notify the new owner of the
existence of the permit by letter, a copy of which shall be forwarded to the
Superintendent.
§ 192-42. Wastewater discharge reports.
As a means of determining compliance with these rules and regulations,
with applicable SPDES permit conditions and with applicable state and
federal law, the Superintendent may require any user discharging
wastewater into the POTW to file wastewater discharge reports and to
supplement such reports as the Superintendent deems necessary. All
information required by the Superintendent shall be furnished by the user
in complete cooperation with the Superintendent.
§ 192-43. Confidential information.
Information and data concerning a user, obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and
from inspections, shall be available to the public or other governmental
agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able
to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board at the time the information
is submitted that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
of the user. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions
of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available
upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to these
rules and regulations, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit, State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) or
any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving
the person furnishing the report. Information accepted by the Board as
confidential shall not be transferred to any governmental agency or the
general public by the Board until and unless a ten-day notification is given
to the user. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be
recognized as confidential information.
§ 192-44. Monitoring, surveillance and sampling.
The Superintendent shall maintain a continuing program of monitoring,
surveillance and sampling of industrial wastes discharged into any sewer
tributary or the POTW. The Superintendent (or any of his/her duly
authorized representatives, including designated commercial laboratories)
shall have the power to obtain samples and make tests and measurements
necessary to determine the nature, concentration and quantity of such
wastes and shall have the right to reassess his/her determinations by taking
§ 192-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-44
1:137
samples and tests at any time or by periodic rechecks without notice to the
user discharging such wastes.
§ 192-45. Monitoring facilities.
Monitoring facilities that are required to be installed pursuant to the permit
shall be constructed, operated and maintained at the user's expense. The
purpose of the facility is to enable inspection, sampling and flow
measurements of wastewaters produced by the user. If sampling and
metering equipment is also required by the Board, it shall be provided,
installed, operated and maintained at the user's expense. The monitoring
facility will normally be required to be located on the user's premises
outside the building. If the monitoring facility is inside the user's fence,
there shall be accommodation to allow safe and immediate access for the
Superintendent (or any of his/her duly authorized representatives), such as
a gate secured with the Superintendent's lock. There shall be ample room in
or near such facility to allow accurate sampling and compositing of samples
for analysis. The entire facility and the sampling and measuring equipment
shall be approved by the Superintendent and maintained at all times in
a safe and proper operating condition by and at the expense of the user.
No person shall falsify, tamper with or knowingly render inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under these rules and regulations.
§ 192-46. Pretreatment.
Where necessary, in the opinion of the Board, users shall make wastewater
acceptable under the limitations established by this article by Section 307
of the Act before discharging into any sewer tributary to the POTW. Any
facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the Board
shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans
bearing the seal of a professional engineer licensed by the State of New
York, showing pretreatment facilities and operating procedures, shall be
submitted to the Superintendent prior to commencement of construction
of the facility. The submission of such plans and operating procedures
will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the
A. Samples shall be taken and flow measurements made at the monitoring
station or stations which are specifically identified with the user.
B. In the event that a monitoring station has not been required, the
samples shall be taken at a suitable and accessible point or points to be
selected by the Superintendent and that are specifically identified with
the user.
C. The user shall pay the total cost of not more than 12 per year samplings
under this section within 30 days from submission of a bill from the
Superintendent. However, if the sampling indicates noncompliance, the
user will be responsible to reimburse the Village for all sampling until
compliance is obtained for two consecutive sampling events.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 192-44 WALTON CODE § 192-46
1:138
facility as necessary to produce an effluent complying with the provisions
of this article and any applicable local, state or federal requirements. Any
subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation
shall be reported to the Superintendent as soon as is reasonably
practicable. When pretreatment regulations are adopted by EPA or DEC for
any industry, then that industry must immediately conform to the EPA or
DEC timetable for adherence to federal or state pretreatment requirements
and any other applicable requirements promulgated by EPA or DEC.
Additionally, such industries shall comply with any more stringent standards
necessitated by local conditions and determined by the Board.
§ 192-47. Federal effluent limitations.
Effluent limitations promulgated by the Federal Act shall apply in any
instance where they are more stringent than limitations in this article.
Users in industrial categories subject to effluent guidelines issued under
Section 304 of the Federal Act and discharging pollutants into the POTW
shall achieve the level of treatment established by federal regulations.
Nothing in these rules and regulations shall be construed to relieve any
industrial user from its obligation to comply with the pretreatment
standards established pursuant to Section 307 of the Federal Act.
§ 192-48. Accidental discharge.
A. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this article. Facilities
to prevent accidental discharge or prohibiting materials shall be
provided and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the Superintendent for review and shall be approved by
the Board before construction of the facility.
B. Users shall notify the Superintendent forthwith upon discharging
wastes in violation of these rules and regulations due to the breakdown
of pretreatment equipment, accidents caused by human error or
negligence or mechanical failure or other causes, such as acts of
nature, to enable countermeasures to be taken by the Superintendent
and/or the Board to minimize damage to the POTW or interference of
passthrough.
C. In addition to the notice provided above, users shall notify the
Superintendent in writing within five days of the date of occurrence by
a detailed statement describing the causes of the discharge and the
measures being taken to prevent future occurrences. Such notification
will not relieve users from liability for any expense, loss or damage to
the sewer system, treatment facility or treatment process or for any
fines imposed on the owners and/or the Board on account thereof under
Section 309 of the Act, or any liability for civil penalties under § 192-79.
§ 192-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-49
1:139
§ 192-49. Notice to employees.
In order for employees of the users to be informed of Board requirements,
users should make available to their employees copies of this article,
together with such other wastewater information and notices as may be
furnished by the Superintendent from time to time, directed toward more
effective water pollution control. A notice shall be furnished and
permanently posted on the user's bulletin board advising employees whom
to call in case of an accidental discharge in violation of these rules and
regulations.
§ 192-50. Inspections.
§ 192-51. Analytical procedures.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the constituents and characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be
determined in accordance with the latest editions of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater and the Methods for Chemical
Analysis of Water and Waste and the latest version of 40 CFR 136, Analysis
of Pollutants, or similar methods approved by the Board.
§ 192-52. Program cost recovery.
The costs to administer the industrial wastewater pretreatment program
will be recovered in part from the industrial users. Additional program
costs will be recovered through the permit and application fee for industrial
wastewater discharge permits.
A. The Superintendent and his duly authorized representatives may enter
upon private premises for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions
of this article. The Superintendent or his/her designated
representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes
used in any industrial operation beyond that point having a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or the on-site
facilities for waste treatment. The Superintendent or his representative
shall, at all reasonable times, have access to and may photocopy any
records which the user is required to maintain under this article or any
applicable local, state or federal provisions.
B. While performing the necessary work on private premises referred to in
this section, the Superintendent or his duly authorized representatives
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises as established
by the owner and/or occupant of the premises.
C. Inspections will be accomplished during hours of operation or at
periods of sewer use with or without notice to the users, and such
inspections shall be conducted to reasonably measure the
characteristics of the discharged wastes and wastes discharged into the
POTW.
§ 192-49 WALTON CODE § 192-52
1:140
ARTICLE VII
Falsification of Data
§ 192-53. False statements; tampering with monitoring device.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation,
record, report, plan or other document filed with the municipality or who
falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this chapter shall be punished by
immediate arrest under a charge of disorderly conduct, malicious mischief
and/or vandalism.
§ 192-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-53
1:141

ARTICLE VIII
Sewer Use Charges
§ 192-54. Source of revenue.
The source of the revenues for debt service and capital expenditures shall
be a sewer capital charge and the source of revenues for operation and
maintenance of the public sewage works shall be a sewer rent charge to
owners of any real property located within the incorporated limits of the
Village, served or required to be served by the sewage works.
§ 192-55. Sewer capital charges. [Amended 9-18-1995 by L.L. No.
6-1995; 10-4-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004: 7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 3-2008;
6-2-2014 by L.L. No. 5-2014; 4-20-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015;
9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017; 5-20-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
The sewer capital charge will be levied and collected quarterly commencing
April 1, 2019. The sewer capital charge will be $15.55 per unit per quarter
and shall be levied until the principal and interest on the outstanding sewer
serial bonds are paid.
§ 192-56. Classification of units. [Amended 3-6-2000 by L.L. No.
2-2000]
The classification of units shall mean the benefits and quantities of usage of
the sewage works assigned to different classifications of real property in the
Village. The basis of the charge for sewer capital charge to be paid by the
owners of real property served or required to be served shall be determined
from the following schedule:
Classification Number of Units
Single residence 1
Multiple residence 1 per dwelling unit, plus 3/4 for each
additional dwelling unit
Trailer park 1 per trailer site
Nursing home and hospital 1/2 per bed
Motel-hotel unit 1/4 per motel-hotel unit
Restaurant
Seating capacity of 50 or
greater
4 each
Seating capacity of less than
50
2 each
General commercial 1 for up to 15 employees, plus 1/15 for
each employee over the basic 15
Automobile dealership and/or
repair
2 each
§ 192-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-56
1:143
Classification Number of Units
Laundromat 1/2 per machine
Car wash 1 per stall
Industry 1 for up to 15 employees, plus 1/15 for
each employee over the basic 15, plus an
additional amount to be assessed as a
result of any unusual or extraordinary
circumstances pursuant to § 192-34 of
this chapter
School 1 for the first 15 pupils and staff, plus 1/
15 for each additional pupil and staff
Religious and fraternal 1 per each major building
Vacant residential building lot
(separately assessed as a lot on
the assessment roll)
3/4 per lot
Agricultural 1 per 10 acres
Dentist office 1/2 per chair
Doctor's office 1/2 per examining room
Mobile home park 1 for first mobile home, plus 3/4 for each
additional mobile home
Bed-and-breakfast 1 1/2
Professional office 1 for up to 15 employees, plus 1/15 for
each additional employee
Gasoline/convenience center 4, not including car wash
§ 192-57. Sewer rent charges. [Amended 9-18-1995 by L.L. No.
6-1995; 3-6-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
The sewer rent charge shall mean a scale of charges established and
imposed by the Board of Trustees for the use of the sewage works. The
amount of such sewer rent shall be based on consumption of water and
will be billed quarterly on the fifth day of each quarter. The sewer rental
charge will apportion the total sewage works operation and maintenance
costs among system users in the proportion of user water consumption to
total water consumption and shall be determined by resolution of the Board
of Trustees adopted at a regular meeting.9
9. Editor's Note: Original Subsection B, regarding properties connected to Village sewer, but
not Village water, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 6-2-2014 by L.L.
No. 5-2014.
§ 192-56 WALTON CODE § 192-58
1:144
§ 192-58. Penalty for late payment; unpaid charges to become lien.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
Sewer capital charges and sewer rental charges which are not paid on or
before the due date (30 days) shall bear a penalty of 10%. A 15% penalty
will be added after 60 days. If such amount remains unpaid on the first
day of April, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall certify the amount due and
payable to the Board of Trustees, which shall levy the same as taxes and
add such sewer capital charge and sewer rentals and penalties to the
succeeding tax roll of the Village. Such tax shall be collected and enforced
in the same manner and at the same time as provided for the collection and
enforcement of Village taxes, and it shall be the duty of the Village Clerk-
Treasurer to charge and collect interest thereon at the same rate specified
for the collection of Village taxes. Such sewer capital charges and sewer
rent charges shall constitute a lien upon the real property served by such
sewage works, and such lien shall be prior and superior to any other lien or
claim, except the lien of an existing tax, assessment or other lawful charge.
§ 192-59. Discontinuance of service.
All sewerage service may be discontinued without further notice if the
sewer rents for such services are not paid within 30 days after rendition of
the final bill therefor.
§ 192-60. Sewer Capital and Rent Fund.
Revenues derived from such sewer capital charges and sewer rents,
including interest, shall be credited to a special fund to be known as the
"Sewer Capital and Rent Fund." Moneys in such fund shall be used for the
payment of the cost of debt service, capital expenditures and operation and
maintenance of the sewage works.
§ 192-61. Applicability of capital and rent charges.
All users of the sewage works, including tax exempt properties, must pay
sewer capital charges and sewer rent charges.
§ 192-62. Review of charges.
Any user claiming to be aggrieved by any surcharge, assessment or cost
apportionment made under this article may seek review of said charge by
serving a notice, in writing, of application for review with the Village Clerk-
Treasurer within 30 days of notice of said charge.
§ 192-63. Board of Review. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
At a time and place and during specified hours, the Board of Review shall
meet to hear complaints in relation to any surcharge, assessment or cost
§ 192-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-63
1:145
apportionment. The Board of Trustees, together with the Superintendent,
shall constitute the Board of Review.
§ 192-64. Effective date of industrial cost recovery provisions.
The provisions of this chapter providing for industrial cost recovery shall
become effective and operate from the date construction on the system is
completed or the date of the first beneficial use, operation or occupancy of
any portion thereof, whichever first occurs.
§ 192-63 WALTON CODE § 192-64
1:146
ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 192-65. Termination of service.
The use of the Village of Walton sewer system shall be a privilege, not a
right. Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter may result
in the termination of such privilege or discontinuance of service, in the
complete discretion of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Walton. Such
discontinuance of service may be in addition to the penalties herein set
forth.
§ 192-66. Provision of service at basement level.
The Village of Walton assumes no responsibility to provide sewer service to
any building or property which is located at such a place or elevation as
to make such service impractical. Wherever service can be provided, the
basement level of a residence or building will be served, unless the location
and grade of the building or property is such that service at the basement
level is not feasible or practical from either an economic or an engineering
point of view. In such case, service shall be provided at such level as is
feasible.
§ 192-67. Adoption of additional rules and regulations.
The Village reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, such additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper in connection
with use and operation of the sewer system, which rules and regulations
shall be, shall become and shall be construed as part of this chapter.
§ 192-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-67
1:147

ARTICLE X
Severability
§ 192-68. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this chapter
shall not affect the validity of any other part of this chapter which can be
given effect without such invalid part or parts.
§ 192-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-68
1:149

ARTICLE XI
Installation of Service Connections
§ 192-69. Permit required; fee. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Before making any sewer connection, the owner or his agent shall obtain a
permit, which shall be available at the Village Clerk-Treasurer's office, 21
North Street, Walton, New York, for a fee of $25.
§ 192-70. Hookup to existing system.
In most cases hookup will be made directly in line with an existing system,
and in no case shall the house sewer cross other private property without
special permission.
§ 192-71. Inspections.
All work is to be done in accordance with these rules. Notice must be
given to the Village by the owner or his agent when the work is ready for
inspection. Inspection will be made by the Village within 48 hours from the
time notice is given for work to be inspected. Under no condition will any
work done be covered up before it has been inspected and tested by the
Village.
§ 192-72. Specifications.
A. Materials.
(1) The pipes shall be made of four-inch extra-heavy cast-iron pipe or
four-inch extra-strength PVC gravity sewer pipe, as selected by the
owner.
(2) The extra-heavy cast-iron pipe shall meet all requirements of ASTM
74-75. Joints shall be bell-and-spigot type with a rubber ring
assembly. The pipe length shall be no greater than five feet.
(3) The PVC gravity sewer pipe shall meet all requirements of ASTM
3034-74 SDR-35. Pipe and fittings shall be joined with a solid
rubber ring. The pipe shall have an integral bell-and-spigot joint
with a factory locked-in rubber ring.
B. Fittings. The fittings shall have no ledges, shoulders or reductions
which can retard or obstruct flow in the piping. All transition joints in
house connections between similar and dissimilar materials of equal or
unequal size shall be made watertight by means of a connector or
adaptor of the compression or mechanical type. Flexible couplings of
the mechanical seal type shall have tightening clamps or devices made
of 304 stainless steel. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 192-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-72
1:151
C. Pipe size. A minimum of four-inch pipe shall be used on all sewer
connections.
D. Pipe slope. Pipe slope shall be:
(1) One-eighth-inch minimum fall per foot.
(2) One-fourth-inch maximum fall per foot.
E. Pipes in certain areas. All pipes going through foundation walls, under
driveways or subject to traffic or basement floors shall have extra-heavy
cast iron and extend four feet from the building wall.
F. Cleanouts. A cleanout shall be provided on all sewer lines at the point of
entrance in the building, with a minimum of three feet clearance of
obstruction. At every 100 feet of line, there shall be a cleanout installed
that is extended to grade level. This cleanout shall be made so that a
sewer rod may be used on that line. For any sewer direction change of
over 45°, there shall be a cleanout installed. Cleanouts shall not be less
than four inches in size. No bend sharper than a one-eighth-bend shall
be used for changes in direction of run. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
G. Building traps. Building traps are prohibited. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
H. Excavation and preparation of trench. The trench should be wide
enough to provide room for inspection of joints, grade and alignment of
pipe, but must not exceed three feet in width. The trench should not be
dug deeper than necessary so that pipe can rest on firm, undisturbed
soil. All rocks and stone are to be removed and a layer of sand or fine
gravel is to be placed in the bottom of the ditch to a depth of six inches.
I. Backfill. Clean sand or fine gravel shall be used to cover the pipe a
minimum of six inches. Clean backfill is to be used on the remainder of
the ditch. Backfill of the trench shall not begin until exposed sewer line
and backfill material are inspected by the Village Inspector.
J. Water and sewer in same ditch.
(1) The top of the sewer line will be a minimum of 12 inches lower than
the waterline.
(2) The water service pipe must be placed on a solid shelf at the side of
the trench.
(3) The water service pipe will be one piece between the building and
curb stop.
(4) The building sewer shall be tested after installation by the installer
to the Village Inspector's satisfaction.
K. Performance and workmanship. All work will be performed in
accordance with the International Plumbing Code. The installer shall
§ 192-72 WALTON CODE § 192-72
1:152
§ 192-73. Discharge into system.
§ 192-74. Conditions requiring notification of Village.
These rules and the attached drawing10 describe the average connection to
the new sewer system. For multiple dwellings and unusual conditions, the
Village shall be notified of such and will instruct accordingly.
§ 192-75. Registration of contractors and other installers.
All contractors who will be installing sewer connections are to provide
the Village Clerk-Treasurer with their name, address and name of liability
insurance carriers. Persons who desire to install their own sewer
connections should so notify the Village Clerk.
§ 192-76. Existing septic tank.
The existing septic tank shall be removed completely or filled with sand, at
the homeowner's option.
§ 192-77. Connection date.
All property owners are required to connect to the public sewer within 90
days after official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within
100 feet of the property line. The official date to commence connection is
June 1, 1978. Therefore, all connections should be completed on or before
August 30, 1978.
§ 192-78. Questions concerning connection.
All questions concerning the sewer connections shall be addressed to the
Village-appointed inspectors.
perform the work in a good and workmanlike manner in accordance
with the practice in the community and to the satisfaction of the Village
Inspector. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. No water that has accumulated in the trench excavation shall be
drained into the sewer system.
B. Roof drains, cellar drains and any natural accumulation of water will
not be permitted to drain into the sewerage system; only domestic
sewage will be permitted.
C. Industrial wastes, gasoline or any flammable liquids shall not be
discharged into the sewer.
10.Editor's Note: The drawing of the typical sanitary sewer service connection is on file in the
Village offices.
§ 192-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-78
1:153

ARTICLE XII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 192-79. Civil penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of, or who fails to perform
any duty imposed by, these rules and regulations or any other order or
determination of the Board or the terms of any permit issued thereunder
shall be liable to the owners for a civil penalty of not less than $1,000, to be
assessed after a hearing before the Board. Each violation shall be a separate
and distinct violation, and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's
continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such
penalty may be recovered in an action brought by the Board's Attorney in
the name of the owners in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such civil
penalty may be released or compromised by the Board before the matter
has been referred to the Board's Attorney, and, where such matter has
been referred to the Board's Attorney, any such penalty may be released
or compromised, and any action commenced to recover the same may be
settled and discontinued by the Board's Attorney only with the consent of
the owners.
§ 192-80. Judicial enforcement.
In addition to the power to assess penalties as set forth in § 192-79, Civil
penalties, the Board shall have the power, following a hearing held by the
Board, to issue an order suspending, revoking or modifying the violator's
permit and enjoining the violator from continuing the violation. Any such
order of the Board shall be enforceable in an action brought by the Board's
Attorney at the request of the Board in the name of the owners in any court
of competent jurisdiction.
§ 192-81. Judicial review.
Any civil penalty or final order issued by the Village Board pursuant to
this article shall be reviewable in a proceeding pursuant to Article 78 of
the CPLR. Application for such review must be made within 30 days after
service, in person or by mail, of a copy of the determination or order upon
the attorney of record for the applicant and of each person who has filed a
notice of appearance, or the applicant in person, if not directly represented
by an attorney.
§ 192-82. Penalties for offenses. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who willfully violates any provision of these rules and
regulations or any final determination or order of the Board shall, in
addition, be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by imprisonment of not more than one year or by a fine of not
more than $1,000. Each offense shall be a separate and distinct offense,
§ 192-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-82
1:155
and, in the case of a continuing offense, each day's continuance thereof
shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
§ 192-83. Civil liability.
Any person violating any of the provisions of these rules and regulations
shall, in addition, be liable to the owners for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned the owners by reason of such violation and any expense incurred
in correcting the violation, including but not limited to any fines, violations
or penalties imposed on the Board by any other regulatory or governmental
agency.
§ 192-84. Right to seek relief.
The Board's Attorney shall have the right to seek equitable relief in the
name of the owners to restrain the violation of, or to compel compliance
with, these rules and regulations or any order or determination issued
thereunder by the Board.
§ 192-85. Summary abatement.
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, whenever the Board
finds, after investigation, that any user is causing, engaging in or
maintaining a condition or activity which, in his/her judgment, presents
an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare or to the
environment or is likely to result in irreversible or irreparable damage to
the public sewer system, and it therefore appears to be prejudicial to the
public interest to delay action until notice and an opportunity for a hearing
can be provided, the Board may, without prior hearing, order such user
by notice, in writing wherever practicable or in such other form as in the
Board's judgment will reasonably notify such person whose practices are
intended to be proscribed, to discontinue, abate or alleviate such condition
or activity, and thereupon such person shall immediately discontinue, abate
or alleviate such condition or activity. In the event of a user's failure to
comply voluntarily with such emergency order, or where the giving of notice
is impracticable, the Board may take all appropriate action to abate the
violating condition. As promptly as possible thereafter, not to exceed 15
days, the Board shall provide the user an opportunity to be heard.
§ 192-82 WALTON CODE § 192-85
1:156
Chapter 206
SOLID WASTE
§ 192-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-85
1:157

ARTICLE I
Littering and Disposal of Refuse
[Adopted 3-15-1971 (Ch. 35 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 206-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
REFUSE — All dirt, rubbish, waste article or substance, whether liquid or
solid, yard waste (leaves, grass clippings, brush, etc.), tires, containers,
appliances, fill or other obstructions.[Amended 3-6-2017 by L.L. No.
2-2017]
§ 206-2. Regulation of sanitary landfill areas.
The Board of Trustees shall have the power to regulate by resolution any
sanitary landfill area now or hereafter established.
§ 206-3. Littering prohibited. [Amended 3-6-2017 by L.L. No.
2-2017]
No refuse shall be thrown, placed, left, deposited or dumped within the
Village of Walton, including, but not limited to, the streets, storm drains,
culverts, ditches, streams and rivers or in any sanitary landfill area now
or hereafter established by the Village, except at such place or places
designated by the Board of Trustees.
§ 206-4. Transporting refuse for hire.
No person, firm or corporation shall transport refuse for hire to any sanitary
landfill area now or hereafter established by the Village without having first
obtained a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
§ 206-5. License term, fee and renewal.
A license to transport refuse for hire shall be issued by the Village Clerk-
Treasurer upon payment of an annual fee of $100. The term of such license
shall be one year from date of issuance, and such license may be renewed
annually at an annual renewal fee of $100.
§ 206-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-6-2017 by L.L. No.
2-2017]
A. Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be served in
person or by ordinary United States first class mail by the Village of
Walton Code Enforcement Officer with written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing seven days for satisfactory correction
thereof from the date of either service or mailing. The violator shall,
within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.
§ 206-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-6
1:159
§ 206-7. Repeal of prior local laws. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
All prior local laws or parts of local laws of this Village, including, but
not limited to, prior Chapter 35, §§ 35-1 to 35-6 inclusive, are hereby
repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution
or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of
any local law hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this article.
§ 206-8. Enforcement. [Added 3-6-2017 by L.L. No. 2-2017]
The provisions of this local law may be enforced by the Village Code
Enforcement Officer or the Village Police.
B. If, after the expiration of the notification period, the violation has not
been corrected, then the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a
citation upon the violator that states the nature and substance of the
violation and requires the violator to appear before the local justice
having jurisdiction within, the Village of Walton.
C. Any person found in violation of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined an
amount no less than $50 and not to exceed $250 for each violation. If
the identified refuse has not been removed at the time of sentencing,
the Court may direct the removal of the identified refuse by a specific
date and if the refuse is not removed by that date, that the refuse may
be removed by the Village of Walton and the cost of such removal shall
be assessed as restitution against the violator.
§ 206-6 WALTON CODE § 206-8
1:160
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[The recycling program and regulations of Delaware County are controlling
in the Village of Walton.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-8
1:161
Chapter 213
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 206-8 WALTON CODE § 206-8
1:162
ARTICLE I
Use Regulations
[Adopted 1-12-1905 (Ch. 43, Art. I, of the 1973 Code)]
§ 213-1. Playing ball or coasting in streets; exemption authorized.
§ 213-2. Obstructions in streets; exceptions.11
A. No person or persons shall play ball or throw and catch ball, or throw
any ball with the intent that it shall be caught by himself or another, in
any of the public streets, sidewalks or alleys of the Village.
B. No person or persons shall coast in or upon any of the streets of the
Village; nor shall any person ride upon any vehicle, sled, bobs or other
means of conveyance which is propelled or obtains its momentum by
descending a grade or incline in any of the streets of the Village.
C. The Board of Trustees may by resolution exempt any street or streets of
the Village from the operation of this section or any of the provisions
thereof for such period of time as it may deem proper.
D. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or both. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. No person shall place or leave any obstruction in or upon or over any of
the streets or highways of said Village within the outer line of said
streets or highways; except that the Mayor of the Village may by written
permit authorize the use of a part of the street by the adjacent
landowner for the assembling of building material and its reasonable
use in connection with the erection of a building upon said street, in
which case the permit shall specify the space, manner and length of
time of occupancy, and may, as a condition thereof, direct therein how
and in what manner the public shall be protected against injury by such
obstruction; except, also, the Mayor of the Village may by written
permit authorize the moving of any building upon any of the streets or
highways of the Village, in which case the permit shall specify the
streets along which the building may be moved, and also provide what
notice or warning shall be given to the public to avoid injuries thereby.
B. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or both; and in addition thereto shall be subject to a
penalty of $25 to be recovered in a civil action by the Village.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
11.Editor's Note: On 5-5-1905 this section was amended as follows: "Resolved that the Village
bylaws be and hereby are amended as follows, viz: Article II, Section 2, add the words
'excepting Liberty Street and Park Street'."
§ 213-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-3
1:163
§ 213-3. Advertisements on bridges, fences, etc.; exception.
§ 213-4. Utility poles and wires. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
No additional telegraph, electric light or telephone poles shall be erected
in the streets of the Village; nor shall any additional telegraph or telephone
wires be erected or stretched across, upon, over or along any street of the
Village, except by virtue of the provisions of a resolution of the Board of
Trustees of the Village duly made and entered.
§ 213-5. Steam escaping into streets.
§ 213-6. Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks. [Amended
1-9-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984; 4-18-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994; 6-1-2009
by L.L. No. 4-2009]
A. No person shall paint, paste or write any notice or advertisement upon
any bridge, sidewalk, fence or erection upon or along any of the streets
of the Village; nor in any manner mar or deface any such fence,
sidewalk, bridge or erection; nor shall any placard, bill, advertisement,
notice or playbill, nor any written or printed paper, be attached, pasted
or affixed upon any tree, telegraph, telephone or electric light pole, or
upon any post, fence, sidewalk, building, showboard or other erection
within the streets or public places of the Village, except upon such
boards as shall be provided for that purpose by the Board of Trustees of
the Village or designated by the written permit of the Mayor of the
Village.
B. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or both. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. No person or corporation shall cause any steam from any boiler or
engine exhaust to be blown or allowed to escape into, upon or over any
of the streets or public highways of the Village.
B. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or both.12 [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. Removal from sidewalks; duty of owner or occupant. It shall be the duty
of the owner and occupant of each and every parcel of real estate in the
Village abutting or bordering upon any street, avenue, highway or other
public place to remove or cause to be removed all snow and ice from the
sidewalk in front of or adjacent to such premises to the full paved width
12.Editor's Note: Original § 43-7, Locomotives blocking crossings, of the 1973 Code, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 2-2-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009.
§ 213-3 WALTON CODE § 213-6
1:164
§ 213-7. Injuring trees adjacent to street. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
of such sidewalk before 9:00 a.m. of each day; provided, however, that
where footways or sidewalks have not been paved or duly established,
snow and ice shall be removed to a width of not less than four feet from
that portion of the street or way which is used in common as a footway
in such street or way.
B. Use of ashes, sand, similar material. In case the snow and ice on the
sidewalk shall be frozen so hard that it cannot be removed without
injury to the pavement, the owner and occupant of every parcel of said
real estate shall, within the time specified in Subsection A of this
section, cause the sidewalk abutting or adjacent to such premises to be
strewn and to be kept strewn with ashes, sand or some other suitable
material and shall, as soon thereafter as the weather shall permit,
thoroughly clean such sidewalk.
C. Authority of Code Enforcement Officer to cause removal; assessment of
cost of removal by Village. Whenever any owner or occupant of such
parcel of real estate shall fail or neglect to remove such snow and ice as
aforesaid, the Code Enforcement Officer may have the snow and ice
removed therefrom without notice to such owner or occupant, and the
cost of such removal, together with an additional charge of 50% thereof
for supervision and administration, shall be assessed against such
property, and the same shall be levied, corrected, enforced and
collected in the same manner, by the same proceedings, at the same
time, under the same penalties, and having the same lien upon the
property so assessed as the general Village tax and as a part thereof.
A. No person shall mark, deface, cut or injure any tree in or adjacent to
any street, lane, highway or park of the Village.
B. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or both.
§ 213-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-7
1:165

ARTICLE II
Laying Out Streets
[Adopted 9-24-1892 (Ch. 43, Art. III, of the 1973 Code)]
§ 213-8. Authorization; expense.
The Trustees of the Village are hereby authorized and directed to lay out
and cause to be opened such new streets as they may deem necessary or
proper for the present or probable future need of the Village, proceeding
in the matter as provided by statute, all expense incurred in the purchase
or condemnation of land for such street to be a charge upon the Village of
Walton, to be raised by a tax thereon, as now provided by law.
§ 213-9. Expenditure of funds; prior laying out required. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
No public money or labor shall be expended by the Trustees or DPW
Superintendent of the Village upon any so-called street, alley or lane, until
the same shall have been duly laid out and recorded as a public highway or
street of the Village.
§ 213-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-9
1:167
Chapter 220
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
§ 213-9 WALTON CODE § 213-9
1:168
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 220-1. Title and approval date.
In order that land subdivision may be made in accordance with the
authority, jurisdiction and policy as set forth herein, these regulations,
which shall be known as the "Village of Walton Land Subdivision
Regulations," have been approved by the Village Board on September 18,
1995.
§ 220-2. Legislative authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of Article 7 of the Village Law of the State
of New York, and acts amendatory thereto, the Walton Planning Board is
authorized to approve plats showing lots, blocks or sites, with or without
roads or highways, and to approve the development of entirely or partially
undeveloped plats already filed in the office of the County Clerk.
§ 220-3. Purpose.
These regulations are adopted for the following purpose:
§ 220-4. Jurisdiction. [Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
Land within the incorporated portion of the Village of Walton may be
subdivided into lots or blocks, with or without streets or highways, only
if approved by the Planning Board in accordance with the procedures and
requirements as set forth in these regulations, and only if the approved plat
is duly filed in the office of the County Clerk of Delaware County, New York.
Construction, excavation, filling, regrading, clearing of vegetation or other
similar activities shall not begin within any area proposed or intended for
subdivision until said subdivision shall have been approved, or conditionally
approved, by the Planning Board.
§ 220-5. Severability.
If any part or provision of these regulations, as contained herein or as
hereafter amended, shall be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction
A. That land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it is
compatible with the future growth and development plans of the Village
as defined in the Comprehensive Plan and is of such character that it
can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or
peril from fire, flood or other menace.
B. That the design and layout of the subdivision shall not cause any
adverse effects, such as erosion, traffic congestion and inadequate or
unavailable utilities.
C. That the subdivision insure provisions for open spaces or parks and
playgrounds where applicable.
§ 220-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-5
1:169
to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the regulations as
a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid.
§ 220-6. Building permits. [Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No.
5-2000]
No building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building within a
proposed subdivision until said subdivision has been duly approved by the
Planning Board and filed in the office of the County Clerk.
§ 220-7. Resubdivision.
A resubdivision, as defined herein, is subject to the same procedures, rules
and regulations applicable to an original subdivision.
§ 220-8. Compliance with reasonable conditions. [Amended
12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable
conditions is an exercise of valid police power delegated by New York State
to the Village. The subdivider or developer has the duty of compliance
with reasonable conditions laid down by the Planning Board for design,
dedication, improvement and restrictive use of the land so as to conform to
the physical and economical development of the Village and to the safety
and general welfare of the future plat owners in the subdivision and the
community at large.
§ 220-9. Waivers and modifications.
A. Waivers. Where the Planning Board finds that, because of the special
circumstances of a particular case, extraordinary hardship may result
from strict compliance with these regulations, the Planning Board shall
have the authority to vary or modify the application of any of the
requirements related to layout and platting of land for subdivision or
boundary line adjustment; provided, however, that any such waiver will
not have the effect of nullifying the spirit and intent of these standards,
the Comprehensive Plan, the Official Map or any other regulations, if
such exists. [Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
B. Design innovations. When design concepts which are imaginative and
beneficial to the public interest are proposed by the subdivider, the
Planning Board may modify the requirements of these regulations and
impose additional conditions as necessary to permit the
accomplishments of such concepts.
C. Application procedure. Applications for waivers or modifications shall
be submitted by the subdivider at the time the sketch plan is submitted
to the Planning Board. The application shall state fully the grounds and
all the facts relied upon by the applicant.
§ 220-5 WALTON CODE § 220-9
1:170
§ 220-10. Amendments.
These regulations may be amended by the Village Board after public
hearing on such amendments. Any proposed preliminary subdivision plat
which has not received conditional approval prior to the effective date of an
amendment to these regulations, shall fully comply with any amendment to
these regulations.
§ 220-11. Enforcement.
§ 220-12. Grievance procedures.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Planning Board relative to
a subdivision may have such decision reviewed by a special term of the
Supreme Court in the manner provided by Article 78 of the Civil Practice
Law and Rules, provided that the proceeding is commenced within 30 days
after the filing of the decision in the office of the Village Clerk, all as set
forth in § 7-740 of the Village Law, or acts amendatory thereto.
D. No survey waivers shall be granted where a person is subdividing more
than 25% of his/her deeded lot. [Added 12-18-2000 by L.L. No.
5-2000]
A. Penalties for offenses. Any person, firm or corporation who fails to
comply with or violates any of these regulations shall, upon conviction,
be deemed guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not more than
$250. Each week a violation continues shall constitute a separate
additional violation.
B. Civil enforcement. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken
at law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to
prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct
or abate a violation or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure or premises; and these remedies shall be in addition to the
penalty described above and as may exist in a separate local law.
§ 220-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-12
1:171

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 220-13. Word usage.
§ 220-14. Definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, certain words and terms shall have
the following meanings:
APPLICANT — The owner of the land proposed to be subdivided or his/her
duly appointed representative.
BOND — Any form of security, including a cash deposit, surety bond,
collateral, property or instrument of credit, in an amount and form
satisfactory to the Village Board.
BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT — A subclassification of a minor
subdivision for the expressed purpose of transferring a portion of one lot to
another adjoining lot, and where no new lots are created. The portion of the
land to be transferred to an adjoining lot shall be incorporated into the deed
of that lot. The adjusted lots must meet zoning requirements.[Amended
12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
BUILDING — Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, and includes
any structure or part thereof.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Building Inspector which
indicates the applicant has submitted an approved application and plan
for building construction in compliance with the Village of Walton
requirements.
CENTRAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — The community sewer system, including
collection and treatment facilities operated by the Village of Walton.
CENTRAL WATER SYSTEM — The community water system, including
treatment and distribution facilities operated by the Village of Walton.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A form of development that permits a
reduction in lot area and bulk requirements, provided that there is no
increase in the number of lots permitted under a conventional subdivision
or increase in the overall density of development, and the remaining area
A. Except where specifically defined, all words used in these standards
shall carry their customary meanings. Words used in the present tense
shall include the future, and words used in the singular shall include the
plural, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
B. The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is permissive.
"Building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. The word "person"
includes an individual person, a firm, a corporation, a copartnership
and any other agency of voluntary action.
§ 220-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-14
1:173
is devoted to open space, active recreation, preservation of environmentally
sensitive areas, or agriculture.
CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS — The maps and/or drawings accompanying
a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of
improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the
requirements of the Planning Board as a condition of the approval of the
plat.[Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
DEVELOPER — The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his duly
appointed representative.
EASEMENT — Authorization by a property owner for the use of any
designated part of his property by another, and for a specified purpose.
ENGINEER — A person licensed as a professional engineer by the State of
New York or licensed in a state with a reciprocal agreement with New York
State.
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT FORM (EAF) — A form used by the
Planning Board in the State Environmental Quality Review process to assist
in determining the environmental significance of an action or
project.[Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT (EIS) — A written document
required for each proposed action which the Planning Board determines
may have a significant effect on the environment.[Amended 12-18-2000
by L.L. No. 5-2000]
ESCROW — A deposit of cash with the Village in lieu of an amount required
and still in force on a performance or maintenance bond.
FINAL PLAT — A drawing in final form, showing a proposed subdivision
containing all information and detail required by law and these regulations
to be presented to the Planning Board for approval and which, if approved,
shall be duly filed and recorded by the applicant in the office of the County
Clerk.[Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
IMPROVEMENTS, LOT — Any building, structure, place, work of art or
other object or improvements to the land as may be required by the
Planning Board, including clearing, final grading and drainage
improvements that constitute a physical betterment of real property or any
part of such betterment.[Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC — Any drainage ditch, road, sidewalk,
pedestrian way, tree, off-street parking area, lot improvement, recreation
area or other facility for which the Village may ultimately assume the
responsibilities for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an
improvement for which Village responsibility is established.
LOT — A tract or parcel of land held in single or joint ownership, not
necessarily shown on a duly recorded map, which is occupied or capable of
being occupied by buildings, structures and accessory buildings, including
such open spaces as are arranged, designed or required. The term "lot"
§ 220-14 WALTON CODE § 220-14
1:174
shall also mean parcel, plot, site or any similar term.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
MASTER PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan prepared for and by the Board
pursuant to § 7-722 of the Village Law, which plan indicates the general
locations recommended for the various public works, places and structures
and for the general physical development of the Village, and includes any
unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such
plan or parts thereof.
MODEL HOME — A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which
typifies the types of units that will be constructed in the subdivision.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map established by the Village of Walton, if any,
pursuant to § 7-724 of the Village Law showing the streets, highways and
parks theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law and any
amendments thereto adopted by the Village or additions thereto resulting
from the approval of subdivision plats by the Planning Board and the
subsequent filing of such approved plats. Streets not accepted by the Village
as public streets may be shown thereon but shall be marked as private
streets.[Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
OWNER — The person or persons actually holding title of a parcel or tract
of land.
PARCEL — See "lot."
PERFORMANCE BOND — A bond to assure the full and satisfactory
completion of all required subdivision improvements as specified in the
Planning Board resolution of approval.[Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No.
5-2000]
PLANNING BOARD — The duly appointed Planning Board of the Village of
Walton, Delaware County, New York.
PLAT — A plan, map or chart of a piece of land with actual or proposed
features (as lots).
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A drawing or drawings clearly marked "preliminary
plat" showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision, submitted to
the Planning Board for approval prior to submission of the plat in final form
and of sufficient detail to apprise the Planning Board of the layout of the
proposed subdivision.[Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
RESUBDIVISION — Any change in a map of an approved or recorded
subdivision plat if such change affects any road layout or any lot line shown
on such plat or if it affects or changes any map or plan legally recorded prior
to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land, acquired by reservation, dedication,
forced dedication, prescription or condemnation, occupied or intended to be
occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees or other
special use. Public use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be
§ 220-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-14
1:175
dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way
is established.
ROAD PAVEMENT — The wearing or exposed surface of the road right-ofway
designed to be used by vehicular traffic.
ROAD REVIEW COMMITTEE — A committee appointed by the Village
Board to review plans and make periodic inspections during the
construction phase of required improvements. The committee shall consist
of one member of the Village Board, one member of the Planning Board and
the Village Highway Superintendent or his designee.
ROAD WIDTH — The width of the right-of-way between property lines
measured at right angles to the center line of the road at any given point.
ROAD, DEAD END OR CUL-DE-SAC — A road or portion of a road with only
one vehicular traffic outlet.
ROAD, EXISTING — An existing state, county or Village road or highway or
other private roadway shown on a plat approved by the Planning Board or
shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County Clerk
prior to the effective date of these regulations.[Amended 12-18-2000 by
L.L. No. 5-2000]
ROAD, PERIMETER — An existing road to which the parcel of land to be
subdivided abuts on only one side.
SKETCH PLAT — A sketch of a proposed subdivision showing the
information specified by these regulations, to enable the subdivider to save
time and expense in reaching general agreement with the Planning Board
as to the form of the layout and objectives of these regulations.[Amended
12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
STATE ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW ACT13 (SEQR) — A process
to help government and the public protect and improve the environment.
SEQR requires that environmental factors be considered along with social
and economic considerations in government decision making.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street which collects traffic from local streets
and connects with minor and major arterials.
STREET, LOCAL — A street designed to provide vehicular access to abutting
property and to discourage through traffic.
STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL — A street with signals at important
intersections and stop signs on the side streets and which collects and
distributes traffic to collector streets.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or any legal
entity who shall lay out any subdivision or part thereof as defined herein,
either for himself or others.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into two or more lots,
blocks or sites for any purpose and requiring the extension of Village
13.Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 220-14 WALTON CODE § 220-14
1:176
infrastructure, including, but not limited to, water and sewer lines (not
including lateral connections), electricity, gas lines or the construction of
new roads. Any portion of the land to remain unsubdivided shall have access
onto an existing state, county, town or Village highway.14
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision of land into more than five lots,
inclusive of the original parcel.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — Any subdivision of land into five lots or less,
inclusive of the original parcel.
TYPE I ACTION — An action that is likely to have a significant effect
on the environment as listed in 6 NYCRR 617.4 of the SEQR
regulations.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
UNLISTED ACTION — An action that may have a significant effect on
the environment as listed in 6 NYCRR 617.2 of the SEQR
regulations.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
VILLAGE ATTORNEY — The licensed attorney designated by the Village
Board to furnish legal assistance.
VILLAGE BOARD — The legislative body of the Village of Walton, Delaware
County, New York.
VILLAGE CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS — The standards and
specifications adopted by the Village Board for the construction of new
roads and related improvements and in compliance with the New York State
Uniform Building Code.
14.Editor's Note: The definition of "subdivision, exempt," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000.
§ 220-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-14
1:177

ARTICLE III
Application Procedure
§ 220-15. Sketch plat review.
A. Submission of sketch plat. It is recommended that any owner of land,
prior to subdividing or resubdividing land, submit to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer three copies of a sketch plat of the proposed subdivision and
a sketch plat application. Applications shall be submitted at least seven
days prior to a scheduled meeting of the Planning Board. The sketch
plat should comply with the requirements of Article IX, § 220-46, for the
purpose of classification and preliminary review. The subdivider or his
duly authorized agent should attend the meeting of the Planning Board
to discuss the requirements of these regulations.
B. Classification of sketch plat. At this time, the Planning Board shall
classify the sketch plat as to whether it is a minor or major subdivision,
or a boundary line adjustment. If the sketch plat is classified as a minor
subdivision, the subdivider shall then comply with the procedure
outlined in Article III, § 220-17, of these regulations. If it is classified as
a major subdivision, the subdivider shall then comply with the
procedures outlined in Article III, §§ 220-16 and 220-17. If it is classified
as a boundary line adjustment, the subdivider will comply with § 220-49
of these regulations. [Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
C. State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA)15 requirements. The
Planning Board shall also determine the applicability of SEQR. An
environmental quality review application required under the
Environment Quality Review Law (NY Envir Conser Ch. 43-B, Art. 8)
shall be filed with the Village Clerk. An environmental assessment form
(EAF) shall be completed by the applicant if the proposed subdivision is
classified as a Type I or unlisted action according to the Village SEQR
Law.
D. Sketch plat review and recommendations.
(1) The Planning Board shall take into consideration the requirements
of these standards and the best use of the land being subdivided.
Particular attention will be given to the arrangement, location and
width of roads, their relationship to the topography of the land,
sewage disposal, drainage, lot sizes and arrangements, the further
development of adjoining land, as yet unsubdivided and the goals
and objectives of the Village Comprehensive Plan as it may exist.
(2) The Planning Board shall review the location of the proposed
subdivision for the presence of any adverse natural considerations
limiting development on the site. If the site falls into areas having
development limitations, the Planning Board may require the
subdivider to consult with appropriate technical review or
15.Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 220-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-15
1:179
§ 220-16. Preliminary plat for major subdivision.
assistance agencies. The Planning Board may not approve a
preliminary or final plat which has failed to adequately address
these critical resource concerns. After reviewing the sketch plat
and any reports, the Planning Board shall determine whether the
sketch plat meets the purposes of these regulations and shall,
where it deems necessary, make specific recommendations, in
writing, to be addressed by the applicant in the next submission.
E. Referrals. When applicable, the Planning Board shall present a copy of
said minor subdivision sketch plat to the Delaware County Planning
Board for its review and report in accordance with the provisions of
§ 239-n of Article 12-B of the General Municipal Law and Article 25-AA
of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
A. Application and fee.
(1) Within six months after Planning Board classification of the sketch
plat as a major subdivision, the applicant shall file an application
for approval of a preliminary plat, in duplicate, of the proposed
subdivision. Such preliminary plat shall be clearly marked
"preliminary plat" and shall be in accordance with § 220-47 of these
regulations, except where a waiver may be specifically authorized
by the Planning Board.
(2) Three copies of the preliminary plat shall be presented to the
Village Clerk-Treasurer at least seven days prior to a regular
meeting of the Planning Board. The application for approval of the
preliminary plat shall be accompanied by an application fee set by
the Village Board and on file in the Village Clerk's office.
(3) An EAF, completed by the applicant, for the proposed subdivision
shall be available for review at the meeting of the Planning Board.
B. Referrals. When applicable, the Planning Board shall present a copy of
said preliminary plat to the Delaware County Planning Board for its
review and report in accordance with the provisions of § 239-n of
Article 12-B of the General Municipal Law and Article 25-AA of the
Agriculture and Markets Law. In addition, the preliminary plat may be
referred to other county or state agencies which may have jurisdiction
or review approval of the subdivision.
C. Study of preliminary plat.
(1) The Planning Board shall study the practicality of the preliminary
plat, taking into consideration the requirements of the community.
Particular attention shall be given to the arrangement, location,
width and design of roads and their relation to the topography,
water supply, sewage disposal, surface drainage, lot sizes and
arrangement, potential flood hazards, the future development of
adjoining lands as yet not subdivided and the recommendations
§ 220-15 WALTON CODE § 220-16
1:180
and requirements of the Comprehensive Plan, the Official Map
and zoning regulations. The applicant or his duly authorized
representative shall attend the meeting of the Planning Board to
discuss the preliminary plat.
(2) The Planning Board may schedule a field trip to the proposed
subdivision site accompanied by the applicant or his agent. In order
to facilitate field inspection and review of the site, temporary
staking along the center line of all proposed roads at fifty-foot
intervals and front lot corners may be required. [Amended
12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
D. Public hearing. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within
62 days of submission of a complete application. Said hearing shall be
advertised at least once in the official newspaper and a notice of
hearing posted in at least three prominent places at least five days
before such hearing. The Planning Board may thereupon approve,
modify and approve, or disapprove such preliminary subdivision plat.
The approval required by this section, or the refusal to approve shall
take place within 62 days from the date of the public hearing. Failure to
act within the stated time period or a mutually agreed-upon extension
thereof shall constitute approval of such preliminary plat.
E. SEQRA review. The lead agency in the SEQR review process will
evaluate the Environmental Assessment Form and make a
determination of significance. A statement of findings will accompany
approval of the plat.
F. Approval of preliminary plat.
(1) When granting approval to a preliminary plat, the Planning Board
shall state the conditions of such approval. Within five days of
conditional preliminary plat approval, the action of the Planning
Board, plus any conditions attached thereto, shall be noted on, or
attached to, two copies of the preliminary plat. One copy shall be
returned to the applicant, and one copy retained by the Planning
Board. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval
of the final subdivision plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an
expression of approval of the design submitted on the preliminary
plat as a guide to the preparation of the final subdivision plat.
(2) In the event of disapproval of a preliminary plat, the Village Board
shall fully set forth the reasons for such disapproval in its
resolution and formally notify the applicant, in writing, of the
reason(s) for disapproval. [Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No.
5-2000]
G. Model homes. For the purpose of allowing the construction of model
homes in a subdivision, the Planning Board may permit a portion of a
major subdivision involving no more than three lots to be created in
accordance with the procedures for minor subdivisions, provided that
§ 220-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-16
1:181
§ 220-17. Final plat for major and minor subdivisions.
said portion derives access from existing state, county or Village
highways, and provided that no future road or other improvement
is anticipated where said lots are proposed. The subdivision plat for
the "minor" portion shall be submitted to the Planning Board
simultaneously with the preliminary plat for the entire major
subdivision. After preliminary approval, the model(s) may be
constructed, subject to such additional requirements that the Planning
Board may require.
A. Filing of application; fee.
(1) Within six months after the classification of a sketch plan as a
minor subdivision, or within six months of approval of the
preliminary plat for a major subdivision, the applicant shall file an
application for final plat approval. If the final plat is not submitted
within the said six months, the Planning Board may revoke
approval of the preliminary plat. The application and accompanying
data shall conform to the requirements of § 220-48 of these
regulations.
(2) The applicant should provide the Village Clerk-Treasurer with two
copies of the application, three copies of the final plat, the original
and one copy of all offers of cession, covenants and agreements,
and five prints of all construction drawings at least seven days in
advance of the regular Planning Board meeting. The application for
final plat approval shall be accompanied by an application fee in
the amount on file in the Village Clerk's office.
(3) Evidence shall be supplied that any proposed water supply and
sewage disposal facility or connection thereof to the Village
municipal system associated with the subdivision plat, requiring
approval by the Department of Environmental Conservation, New
York State Board of Health, New York City Department of
Environmental Protection and Village of Walton Engineer, shall
have received at least preliminary approval(s) of such facilities.
B. Public hearing. For minor subdivisions, a public hearing on the final plat
shall be held within 62 days after the submission of the final plat for
approval. The Planning Board shall render a decision on such minor
subdivision final plat within 62 days of the public hearing. A public
hearing on the final plat for major subdivisions may be held by the
Planning Board if there are substantial changes from the approved
preliminary plat. Such hearing shall be held within 62 days after the
time of submission of the final plat for approval. Both hearings shall be
advertised in the same manner as the previous public hearing for
preliminary plat approval.
C. Action on final plat.
§ 220-16 WALTON CODE § 220-17
1:182
§ 220-18. Final approval and filing.
(1) The Planning Board shall, within 62 days of submittal of the final
plat (or within 62 days of second public hearing, if necessary),
approve, conditionally approve with or without modifications, or
disapprove said plat and so indicate on the plat. This time period
may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant and Planning
Board. Failure to act within the stated time period, or a mutually
agreed-upon extension thereof, shall constitute approval of the
plat.
(2) A resolution of conditional approval shall also duly authorize and
empower the Chairperson of the Planning Board to sign the plat for
recording with the County Clerk, subject to completion of any
requirements as may be stated in the resolution. Conditional
approval of a final plat shall expire 180 days after the date of the
resolution granting such approval, except that this time may be
extended by the Planning Board for additional periods of 90 days
each. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(3) Within five business days of the adoption of the Planning Board
resolution granting conditional or final approval, the final
subdivision plat shall be certified by the Planning Board as
conditionally or finally approved, and a copy of such certification
shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer. A copy of
the resolution shall be mailed to the applicant. [Amended
12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000; at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. The Chairman or other duly authorized officer of the Planning Board
shall endorse the Board's final approval on the plat only after being
satisfied that all required conditions, modifications and improvements
have been met and/or completed in accordance with the Planning
Board's resolution of approval of the plat and construction plans, or
alternatively that a bond of the required amount and surety has been
filed and that all other approvals, conditions of approval and fees have
been complied with. The Planning Board endorsement shall be by
signature and date in ink on the original of the plat (which shall be
returned to the applicant for filing) and on three prints of the plat, one
of which shall be retained by the Planning Board in its files.
B. The approved plat shall be filed with the Delaware County Clerk within
62 days of the date of the Planning Board endorsement. Any subdivision
plat not so filed or recorded within 62 days shall become null and void.
C. No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made on any
subdivision plat after approval has been given by the Planning Board
and endorsed in writing on the plat, unless the said plat is first
resubmitted to the Planning Board and such Board approves any
modifications. In the event that any such subdivision plat is recorded
§ 220-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-18
1:183
§ 220-19. Status of roads, parks and/or easements. [Amended
12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
without complying with this requirement, the same shall be considered
null and void, and the Board shall institute proceedings to have the plat
stricken from the records of the County Clerk.
D. The applicant shall submit one copy of the final plat showing the
endorsement and file number of the County Clerk to the Village Clerk
within 30 days of the date of filing.
A. Acceptance by Village. Acceptance of any offer of surrender of roads or
parks shall rest with the Village Board. The approval by the Planning
Board of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute nor imply
the acceptance by the Village of any road, utility, recreation area,
easement, park or other open space shown on such subdivision plat.
The Planning Board shall require the addition of appropriate notes to
this effect on the plat. Any dedication of land or improvements to the
Village shall be free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the
property and public improvements thus dedicated.
B. Road maintenance agreement. In the event that no offer of cession to
the public is made for the roads, parks and required easements shown
on the plat, there shall be submitted with the final application copies of
agreements or other documents providing for and fixing responsibility
for suitable maintenance of such facilities and statements of all rights
which exist with respect to the use of such property(ies). The adequacy
of such documents shall be subject to Village Board approval, based
upon recommendations of the Village Attorney. A model road
maintenance agreement may be obtained from the Delaware County
Planning Department.
§ 220-18 WALTON CODE § 220-19
1:184
ARTICLE IV
Required Improvements and Assurance of Completion
§ 220-20. Completion of improvements; performance bond.
Before the Planning Board grants final approval of the subdivision plat, the
Planning Board may elect to require that all improvements be completed or
accept a performance bond or similar instrument in lieu of completion of
the improvements. The applicant shall follow the procedure set forth by the
Planning Board in either Subsection A or B below.
§ 220-21. Modification of bond.
An applicant may request, in writing, that the Planning Board authorize
a reduction in the amount of the bond. Such request shall itemize the
extent of required improvements remaining to be completed and the bond
reduction requested. Upon approval of the Village Board, and after due
notice, the Planning Board may, if it determines that sufficient required
improvements have been installed to warrant such action, reduce the face
amount of the bond by an appropriate amount so that the new amount
will cover the cost in full of all required improvements remaining to be
completed, and any security deposited with the bond may be reduced
proportionately.
§ 220-22. Extension of time.
The construction or installation of any improvements or facilities other than
roads, for which guarantee has been made by the subdivider in the form
of a bond or certified check deposit, shall be completed within one year
from the date of approval of the final plat. Road improvements shall be
completed within two years from the date of approval of the final plat.
The subdivider may request an extension of time, provided that he can
A. The applicant shall complete all required improvements to the
satisfaction of the Road Review Committee or other representative
designated by the Village Board to fulfill such duties, who shall file with
the Planning Board a letter signifying the satisfactory completion of
improvements required by the Board; or
B. The applicant shall either file with the Village Clerk a certified check in
an amount set by the Planning Board from an estimate proposed by the
Village Highway Superintendent or other duly designated officer to
cover the full cost of the required improvements, or file with the Village
Clerk-Treasurer a performance bond issued by a bonding or surety
company approved by the Village Board to cover the full cost of the
required improvements. Any such bond shall comply with the
requirements of § 7-730 of the Village Law and further shall be
satisfactory to the Village Board and Village Attorney as to form,
sufficiency, manner of execution and surety. A period of one year shall
be set forth in the bond within which required improvements must be
completed.
§ 220-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:185
show reasonable cause for inability to perform said improvements within
the required time. The extension shall not exceed six months, at the end of
which time the Village may use as much of the bond or check deposit as
necessary to construct the improvements. The same shall apply whenever
construction of improvements is not performed in accordance with the plans
and specifications filed by the applicant. There shall be no extension of time
given unless and until the bond or other approved financial security shall
be extended as well and proof of such extension is provided to the Planning
Board prior to granting an extension.
§ 220-23. Maintenance guaranty.
§ 220-24. Modification of required improvements. [Amended
12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
Upon approval by the Village Board, the Road Review Committee may
waive, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any such
improvements or requirement if, in its judgment, of the special
circumstances of a particular plat, it is not in the interest of the public
health, safety and welfare. If such modification affects the scope of work
covered by a bond, the Village Board may require or allow appropriate
modification of such bond.
§ 220-25. Inspection of improvements.
A. In order that the Village has the assurance that the improvements
mentioned above function properly for a reasonable period, the
applicant shall enter into an agreement with the Village upon
completion of the work required under the installation guaranty so that:
(1) Such work is guaranteed for a minimum of two years after it is
completed and inspected; and
(2) Such work is guaranteed for the total improvement costs.
B. The method of providing the maintenance guaranty shall meet the
approval of the Village Board and Village Attorney.
A. Routine inspection. At least five days prior to commencing construction
of required improvements, the applicant shall pay to the Village Clerk-
Treasurer the inspection fee required by the Planning Board and shall
notify the Road Review Committee, in writing, of the time when he
proposes to commence construction of such improvements. The
Committee will then make periodic inspections to assure that all
required improvements as required by the Planning Board meet the
specifications as outlined in these subdivision regulations.
B. Final inspection. A final inspection of all improvements will be made to
determine whether the work is satisfactory and in agreement with the
approved final plat and construction drawings. Upon a satisfactory final
inspection report, action will be taken to release the performance bond
§ 220-22 WALTON CODE § 220-25
1:186
or release the amount in escrow (if such instruments were used)
covering such improvements and utilities. The Road Review Committee
shall also notify the Planning Board that all work has been completed
to its satisfaction.
§ 220-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-25
1:187

ARTICLE V
Minimum Design Standards; General Improvements
§ 220-26. Lot improvements.
A. Lots to have buildable site.
(1) The lot size, width, depth, shape and arrangement shall be such
that there will not be foreseeable difficulty, for reasons of
topography or other natural conditions, in securing building
permits to build on all lots in compliance with these and all
applicable regulations.
(2) All parcels must be designed to assure proper drainage, water
supply, sewage disposal and the preservation of important
ecological features. Lot area and dimensions shall conform to the
requirements of the Chapter 260, Zoning.
B. Side lines. Side lines of lots shall generally be at right angles to road
lines and radial to curved road lines, unless a variance from this rule
will give a better road or lot arrangement.
C. Corner lots. Corner lots shall be larger than interior lots to allow for
proper building setbacks for each road and to provide a desirable
building site.
D. Double-frontage lots. Lots fronting on two roads, other than corner lots,
shall be voided except where deemed essential by the Planning Board.
The Planning Board may require greater lot depth, access limitations
and/or buffers and landscaping for such double frontage lots.
E. Driveways. Driveway access shall conform to applicable Village, county
and state standards. The Planning Board may require the installation of
driveways at specific locations as a condition of final plat approvals
where topographic and clear site distances create difficulties.
F. Drainage. Lot drainage shall be laid out so as to provide positive
drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be
coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area.
Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm
drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots.
G. Debris and waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, junk, rubbish or other
waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any road right-of-way.
Such material shall be disposed of in a manner acceptable to the
Planning Board.
H. Frontage on approved roads. The area proposed to be subdivided and
all proposed lots shall have frontage on and direct access to a public
road or private road which conforms to Village Law and the
construction standards as prescribed in these regulations.
§ 220-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-26
1:189
§ 220-27. Streets.
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the Master Plan and to the Official Map, if any, and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical
conditions, to public convenience and safety and to the proposed uses of the
land to be served by such street, as to cause no undue hardship to adjoining
properties.
I. Water bodies. No more than 25% of the minimum area of a lot may be
satisfied by land under water. Where a watercourse separates the
buildable area of a lot from the road by which it has access, provisions
shall be made for the installation of a bridge, culvert or other drainage
facility, of design approved by the Village Engineer, to provide
satisfactory access across such watercourse for fire, police and other
emergency equipment.
A. The arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall provide for the
continuation, if appropriate, of adjacent streets in the surrounding
area, or conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved by the
Planning Board, to meet a particular situation where topographical or
other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets
impracticable.
B. Local and access streets shall be laid out so that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged.
C. Streets shall be graded and improved with pavement, sidewalks, curbs,
gutters, streetlighting, street signs, road plantings, water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm drains, fire alarm signal devices, fire hydrants
and other utilities, except where waivers may be requested, and the
Planning Board may waive such improvements as it considers are not
required in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. The
subdivider shall install any required service connections to the property
line of each lot before the street is paved. Except where waivers are
granted, all such grading and road improvements shall conform to
these regulations and any Village standards and specifications for
streets.
D. The street plan of a proposed subdivision shall bear a logical
relationship to the topography of the property. Grades of streets shall
conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination
of steep grades and curves shall be avoided.
E. Street names shall be sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from
other road names in the Village so as not to cause confusion. A street
which is a continuation of an existing street shall bear the same name.
Street names are subject to the approval of the Village Board.
F. Street signs shall be provided by the developer for each new street
within a subdivision. The type of street sign is subject to the approval of
§ 220-26 WALTON CODE § 220-27
1:190
the Village Board and will be placed at a designated position agreeable
to the Village Highway Department.
G. Streetlighting shall be provided by the developer at the time of
subdivision. Design and location shall be approved by the appropriate
utility company. All wiring shall be underground, and street lamp
designs shall meet with the Village Board's approval.
H. The creation of dead-end streets or culs-de-sac shall be avoided
wherever possible. A circular turnaround shall be provided as outlined
in the street design details. The Village Board may require an easement
to the boundary line of the property to accommodate future roads,
utilities, drainage facilities and/or pedestrian traffic. Easements for
future streets shall be 50 feet wide and 20 feet wide for other purposes.
I. Intersections.
(1) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at less
than 75°.
(2) In general, all streets shall join each other so that for a distance of
at least 100 feet the street is approximately at right angles to the
street it joins.
J. Street trees and miscellaneous.
(1) Street trees shall be planted by the developer. The number, location
and type of trees shall be approved by the Planning Board prior to
final approval.
(2) Planting strips will be provided between the gutter and the
property line to be seeded by developer and shall be maintained by
the owner.
(3) Planting screens may be requested at the discretion of the Village
Board. The planting screen shall be requested where the property
line of a subdivision adjoins an industrial, commercial, major street,
railroad or other similar use. The planting screen shall be at least
10 feet wide, across which there shall be no right of access.
[Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
§ 220-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-27
1:191

ARTICLE VI
Design Standards for Streets
§ 220-28. General.
§ 220-29. Monuments.
The tract boundary lines and the lines of all streets or roads shall be
monumented with concrete, stone or iron monuments with monument caps.
Individual properties shall be monumented with iron pins or pipes.
§ 220-30. Road surfacing and improvements.
After sewer and water utilities have been installed by the developer, the
applicant shall construct curbs and gutters and shall surface or cause to be
surfaced roadways to the widths prescribed in these regulations. Adequate
provision shall be made for culverts, drains and bridges. All road pavement,
shoulders, drainage improvements and structures, curbs, turnarounds and
sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards and specifications
adopted by the Village Board, and shall be submitted by the developer for
approval.
§ 220-31. Tangent and street jogs.
A tangent of at least 100 feet in length shall be introduced between reverse
curves on all proposed roads to ensure that clear visibility is provided for a
safe distance. Road jogs with center line offsets of less than 150 feet shall
not be allowed.
§ 220-32. Street rights-of-way.
Street right-of-way widths shall not be less than 60 feet on all minor
arterials and collector streets and a minimum of 50 feet on all local streets.
§ 220-33. Turnarounds.
Turnarounds shall have a minimum of 90 feet of pavement, and a minimum
of 120 feet of right-of-way. Dead-end streets shall not be permitted.
A. All street layouts and related construction shall be the responsibility of
the subdivider unless indicated, and shall be in accordance with the
standards of this section.
B. Prior to or no later than 90 days after the granting of final approval, the
subdivider shall have installed or shall have furnished adequate
security (bond or certified check, whichever is acceptable to the Village
Board) for the installation of the improvements listed and described in
this section. All the required improvements shall be made in full
compliance with the specifications of each of the various units of work,
as required by the municipality or the state and county health
authorities, according to the nature of the improvement.
§ 220-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-34
1:193
§ 220-34. Street grades.
Street grades shall not exceed 10% and shall not be less than 0.5% on any
minor/major collector or local, and/or minor arterial road. The maximum
grade on an approach to an intersection shall be 2%. Upon recommendation
of the Road Review Committee, the Planning Board may permit grades
up to 13% for short, straight runs, but not within 100 feet of any given
intersection.
§ 220-35. Subgrade by developer.
§ 220-36. Base course by developer.
A. All topsoil shall be removed from an area on each side of the center line,
sufficient to accommodate the required pavement and shoulder width,
unless a fill of three feet or more is required. Fills must be made with
material approved by the Engineer or Superintendent of Public Works
and shall be placed in layers not over six inches thick and each layer
shall be properly rolled. All muck, quicksand, spongy material and any
other objectionable material shall be removed.
B. The subgrade of all streets and roads shall be graded as follows: A
distance sufficient to accommodate the required pavement and
shoulder width on each side of the center line shall be 12 inches below
the finished grade, as shown on the street profile. After it has been
properly shaped, it shall be thoroughly rolled and compacted. Drainage
ditches, where provided, shall be on each side of the road at a suitable
distance from the center line of the road, and shall be adequate to carry
all stormwater drainage, and shall be otherwise satisfactory to, and be
approved by, the Road Review Committee. Where in the opinion of the
Road Review Committee such open drainage ditches cannot be
appropriately provided without creating a hazard or a nuisance, storm
sewers shall be provided. The grade of the outside area or sidewalk and
planting strip section shall in no case be lower than the crown of the
pavement nor more than eight inches above the crown. No gravel or
stone is to be placed on the subgrade until the subgrade is approved by
the Engineer or Superintendent of Public Works.
A. The thickness and method of constructing the base course may vary,
depending upon the amount of traffic anticipated, the type of material
used, and the condition of the subgrade. All materials and construction
procedure shall be subject to the approval of the Engineer or
Superintendent of Public Works and shall comply with current
construction and material specifications of the New York State
Department of Transportation.
B. A base course consisting of not less than 12 inches of compacted stone
or gravel approved by the Engineer or Superintendent of Public Works
shall be installed. Street and road culverts shall be installed by the
developer where necessary. Driveway culverts shall not be less than 12
inches in diameter and 20 feet in length and shall be corrugated metal
§ 220-34 WALTON CODE § 220-36
1:194
§ 220-37. Surface course by developer.
The surface course shall consist of 2.5 inches of compacted binder and 1.5
inches of compacted type 7 top. The finished driving surface shall be a
minimum of 30 feet wide.
§ 220-38. Curbing by developer.
§ 220-39. Sidewalks by developer.
The Planning Board, with the approval of the Road Review Committee,
may require sidewalks as it deems necessary to provide for the safety of
pedestrians. Concrete sidewalks at least four feet wide and four inches thick
shall comply with the design standards as per these regulations. Sidewalks
in driveways shall be six inches thick. All sidewalks shall be constructed of
five-thousand-pound Class A sidewalk concrete.
or reinforced concrete; installation to be approved by the Engineer or
Superintendent of Public Works. Where there is no natural stream or
watercourse for the drainage of surface water from the proposed street
or road, the developer shall secure rights-of-way and construct ditches
or install stormwater sewers to a natural waterway or as the Road
Review Committee directs.
A. Curbing shall be required throughout the proposed subdivision.
B. Curbing shall be in accordance with design standards as specified in
these regulations.
§ 220-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-39
1:195

ARTICLE VII
Minimum Design Standards for Utility Improvements
§ 220-40. Water supply and sewage disposal by developer.
§ 220-41. Storm drainage by developer.
§ 220-42. Electrical utilities by developer.
A. Municipal and community water supply systems. The developer shall
connect each lot at the property line with the public water supply and
sewer. The developer shall provide a schematic sketch, prepared by a
licensed engineer, of proposed connection showing all grades, pipe
sizes and connections. The developer is responsible for all costs
associated with the connection of water and sewer. The plans shall be
approved by the Public Works Superintendent responsible for the
central water system. Community water supply systems, where
provided, must conform to standards and inspection by the New York
State Department of Health.
B. No new wells for the purpose of individual water supply, regardless of
use, shall be allowed within the Village limits. New wells for municipal
purposes will be allowed.
A. Storm and surface water drainage shall be designed for the subdivision
in relation to the drainage area above the site and drainage outlets into
adjacent areas. Drainage structures and facilities shall be installed as
necessary to assure adequate drainage for the site, and drainage
easements shall be provided where necessary. Storm sewers shall be
required in all new subdivisions, except where topography or other
conditions are such as to make their inclusion impractical as
determined by the Board of Trustees. No stormwater shall be allowed to
enter sanitary sewers. Water in gutters and ditches shall not be allowed
to flow over intersection streets or driveways, but shall be placed in
adequate culverts.
B. Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical
the inclusion of drainage facilities within the road right-of-way,
perpetual unobstructed easements shall be provided for such across
properties outside the road lines and with satisfactory access to the
road. When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private
land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be
secured in a form satisfactory to the Village Attorney and suitable for
recording in the office of the County Clerk.
A. In order to ensure greater safety and improved appearance, all utility
lines and related equipment for providing electric power and
communication services shall be placed underground in the manner
prescribed by the regulations of the utility company having jurisdiction.
Underground utilities shall be located outside of the traveled way of
roads but, except in unusual circumstances, within the road right-of-
§ 220-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-42
1:197
way. The subdivider shall install underground service connections to
the property line of each lot for such required utilities before the road
is paved. All utilities shall be shown on the construction drawings.
B. Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical
the inclusion of utilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual
unobstructed easement shall be provided for such utilities across
properties outside the road lines and with satisfactory access to the
road.
§ 220-42 WALTON CODE § 220-42
1:198
ARTICLE VIII
Environmental Considerations
§ 220-43. Preservation of natural features.
Existing natural features which are of ecological, aesthetic or scenic value
to residential development or to the Village as a whole, such as wetlands,
watercourses, water bodies, rock formations, stands of trees, historic spots,
views and vistas, or man-made features indigenous to the area, such as
stone walls and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved, insofar
as possible, through harmonious design of the subdivision, and, where
appropriate, the Planning Board may require the inclusion of such features
in permanent reservations.
§ 220-44. Preservation of flood areas. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Land subject to serious or regular flooding shall not be subdivided for
residential occupancy or for such other uses as may increase danger to
life or property or aggravate the flood hazard, but such land may be used
for such uses, subject to any zoning regulations, or in such a way that the
flood danger to this property and other upstream or downstream properties
will not be increased and periodic or occasional inundation will not be a
substantial threat to life or property. The provisions of this section shall
apply to all land falling within the one-hundred-year flood limit as shown
on maps prepared by the Village and the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, as periodically amended and as regulated under Chapter 151, Flood
Damage Prevention, of the Code of the Village of Walton.
§ 220-45. Preservation of soils.
The subdivider shall provide effective sediment control measures for
planning and construction of subdivisions. Use of the following technical
principles shall be applied as deemed appropriate by the County Soil and
Water Conservation district:
A. Trees.
(1) A conscious effort shall be made to preserve all worthwhile trees
and shrubs which exist on the site. On individual lots or parcels,
care shall be taken to preserve selected trees to enhance the
landscape treatment of the development. The developer shall
provide a sketch showing areas to be cleared and/or landscaped,
which the Planning Board shall review and make
recommendations. [Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
(2) The Planning Board may require the planting of road trees in
subdivisions which are lacking in trees or in which a substantial
loss of trees will occur in the process of road construction.
§ 220-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-45
1:199
A. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one time
during the development, and the exposure shall be kept to the shortest
practical period of time.
B. Temporary vegetation and/or emulsion shall be used to protect critical
areas exposed during development.
C. Provision shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changing soils and surface conditions during and after
development. This can be accomplished through the installation of
sediment basins or debris basins (silting basins or silt trips).
D. Permanent final vegetation and structures should be installed as soon
as practical in the development.
E. Wherever feasible, natural vegetation should be retained and
protected.
§ 220-45 WALTON CODE § 220-45
1:200
ARTICLE IX
Submission of Documents
§ 220-46. Sketch plat. [Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
The sketch plat initially submitted to the Planning Board shall be based
on Tax Map information or some other similarly accurate base map at a
scale (preferably not less than 400 feet to the inch) to enable the entire
tract to be shown on one sheet. In the event that a plat submitted for
approval covers only a part of the applicant's acreage in the area, a map
shall be prepared and provided showing the entire contiguous acreage of
the applicant as it relates to the parcel submitted for approval and shall
include lands previously subdivided. The sketch plat shall be submitted
showing the following information:
§ 220-47. Major subdivision preliminary plat.
The preliminary plat shall be submitted at a scale of one inch equals 100
feet, or another scale approved by the Planning Board, whichever most
A. A location map to indicate the relationship of the proposed subdivision
to existing community facilities which will serve or influence the layout,
such as existing road patterns, schools, parks and other public lands,
local villages and hamlets, and special district, including school, fire,
agricultural, etc.
B. All existing structures, burial grounds, railroad rights-of-way, existing
property lines, wooded areas, streams or watercourses, flood hazard
areas, wetlands, quarries or excavations, bedrock outcrops and other
significant physical features within the area to be subdivided and within
200 feet thereof.
C. Topographic conditions shall be indicated at contour intervals of not
more than 20 feet.
D. The name of the owner, the name of the professional person(s)
responsible for the subdivision design, and the names of all adjoining
property owners as disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records
within 200 feet of any perimeter boundary of the subdivision.
E. The proposed subdivision name, the Tax Map sheet, block and lot
numbers, scale, North arrow and acreage involved.
F. All the utilities currently available, including any existing easements,
and all roads which are either proposed, mapped or built.
G. The proposed pattern and approximate dimensions and area of lots,
road layout, recreation area, proposed surface water drainage,
sewerage and water supply within the subdivision area.
H. All existing restrictions on the use of land, including easements,
covenants or zoning districts.
§ 220-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-47
1:201
clearly illustrates the subdivider's proposal. The preliminary plat shall be
clearly marked "preliminary plat" and shall include:
A. All information required in § 220-46B and D.
B. Proposed subdivision name; name of Village and county; and name and
address of property owner, subdivider, engineer or surveyor preparing
the plat, including license number and seal, date, true North point and
scale.
C. The approximate location and dimensions of all property lines, the total
acreage of the proposed subdivision, the location of any zoning district
lines, special districts or municipal boundary lines affecting the
subdivision.
D. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use for roads,
highways, easements, parks or other public facility and the conditions
of such dedication.
E. Accurate topography at a vertical contour interval of not less than 10
feet. The topographic data shall be determined by field survey unless
the Planning Board specifically waives this requirement and/or permits
the substitution of topographic information obtained from other
sources determined satisfactory for the particular case.
F. Location of existing sewers, water mains, culverts and drains serving
the property, with pipe sites, grades, direction of flow and existing
easements.
G. The width, location and names of any roads or public ways or places
shown on the Official Map or in the master plan, if any, within the area
to be subdivided and the right-of-way width, location, grades, proposed
and existing easements and road profiles of all roads or public ways
proposed by the developer. Contours with intervals of five feet or less as
required by the Planning Board, including elevations on existing roads.
H. Approximate location and size of all proposed water lines, valves, fire
hydrants and sewer lines. Profiles of all proposed water and sewer
mains.
I. Storm drainage plan indicating the approximate location and size of
proposed lines, their profiles and connection to existing lines or
alternative means of disposal, including existing and proposed drainage
easements. Temporary measures to control erosion shall also be shown.
J. Construction plans, profiles, cross-sections and other drawings as
required to show the proposed location and types of all improvements
required by the Planning Board or proposed by the subdivider.
K. Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be required.
L. The proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and area of each
lot. An actual field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving
§ 220-47 WALTON CODE § 220-47
1:202
§ 220-48. Major and minor subdivision final plat.
complete descriptive data by bearings and distances made and certified
to by a licensed land surveyor. Corners of the tract shall also be located
on the ground and marked by monuments as approved by the Road
Review Committee and shall be referenced and shown on the plat.
M. Where the topography or design is such as to make difficult the
inclusion of required facilities within the public areas as laid out, the
preliminary plat shall show the boundaries of proposed permanent
easements, which shall not be less than 20 feet in width, and which
shall provide satisfactory access to an existing or proposed public road
or public open space shown on the subdivision or Official Map.
N. A copy of any covenants or deed restrictions that are intended to cover
any lot in all or part of the tract.
O. If the preliminary plat submitted for approval covers only a part of the
subdivider's entire holding in the area, then a map shall be prepared, at
a scale of not less than one inch equals 400 feet, showing the entire
tract as it relates to the parcel included on the preliminary plat.
P. A site location sketch, at a maximum scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet,
showing the general situation of the applicant's property with respect
to surrounding properties and roads, including all utility lines.
A. The final plat, to be approved by the Planning Board and filed in the
office of the County Clerk, shall be drawn at the same scale as the
preliminary plat and shall conform to the filing requirements of the
Delaware County Clerk. When more than one sheet is required, an
additional index map on the same size sheet shall be prepared and
included for filing, showing to scale the entire subdivision with lot and
block lines clearly legible.
B. The final plat submission shall show:
(1) All information required in §§ 220-46B and D and 220-47B, G, L, N
and P.
(2) Sufficient data to enable the Planning Board to determine readily
the location, bearing and length of every road line, lot line,
boundary line and to reproduce such lines upon the ground. The
length and bearing of all straight lines, radii, length of curves and
central angles of all curves and tangent bearings shall be given for
each road. All dimensions and angles of the lines of each lot shall
also be given. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of
a foot. Where applicable, these data should be referenced to
monuments and tied into other reference points previously
established.
(3) The final plat shall show, by proper designation thereon, all public
open spaces for which deeds are included and the title(s) to which
§ 220-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-48
1:203
is reserved by the developer. For any of the latter, there shall be
submitted with the plat copies of agreements or other documents
showing the manner in which such areas are to be maintained and
the provisions made therefor. All offers of cession and all covenants
governing the maintenance of open space shall bear the certificate
of approval of the Village Attorney as to their form and legal
sufficiency.
(4) Where private roads are proposed, the plat shall show the
minimum right-of-way and other design requirements for roads in
minor subdivisions. Also a note to the effect that this is not a Village
road shall be placed on the map.
(5) Notations explaining any drainage, sight, slope, road widening,
park area or other reservations or easements, as may be required
by the Planning Board, including any self-imposed restrictions or
covenants.
(6) The boundaries of the property, location, total acreage included in
the entire subdivision and the identification number and acreage of
all lots and land reservations within the proposed subdivision. Lots
and blocks shall be numbered or lettered in accordance with the
prevailing Village practice.
(7) Construction drawings including plans, profiles and typical crosssections,
as required, showing the proposed location, size, grade
and type of roads, sidewalks, road lighting standards, road trees,
curbs, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, pavement and
subbase, manholes, catch basins and other improvements as
required by the Planning Board or proposed by the subdivider.
(8) The following notes shall be placed upon the final plat:
(a) No building permit shall be issued to any property owner
within this subdivision other than to the owner or applicant
unless all improvements are completed and approved in
accordance with the Planning Board's resolution of approval of
this plat.
(b) Sanding, snowplowing and other similar maintenance of
highways within this subdivision shall be the responsibility of
the developer until such time as the Village may accept the
roads.
(9) A statement from the appropriate Village officials certifying that
required improvements have been satisfactorily installed or that an
acceptable bond for such installation has been filed with the Village
Clerk.
(10) The plat shall conform with the filing requirements of the Delaware
County Clerk's office.
§ 220-48 WALTON CODE § 220-48
1:204
§ 220-49. Boundary line adjustment procedure. [Added 12-18-2000
by L.L. No. 5-2000]
§ 220-50. Model road maintenance agreement. [Added 12-18-2000
by L.L. No. 5-2000]
(11) A form, for endorsement by the Village Board Chairman, as follows:
[Amended 12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 5-2000]
"Approved by Resolution of the Village of Walton Planning Board
__________."
A. Application.
(1) The applicant shall submit the following to the Walton Village
Planning Board before classification is made:
(a) A completed boundary line adjustment application.
(b) Sketch plan of the lot(s) involved. Said plan should include Tax
Map numbers, road name and approximate acreage involved.
(2) The Planning Board will review the proposal for accessibility of the
lots involved and whether or not the zoning requirements have
been met.16 A survey of the property will be required to ensure
compliance with the zoning.
(3) The Planning Board will then classify the proposal.
B. Survey.
(1) The applicant shall survey the portion of the land to be transferred.
The surveyed plat should reflect any changes recommended by the
Planning Board in terms of zoning compliance.
(2) Applicant shall produce new deed. The Planning Board shall sign
the boundary line adjustment form when the applicant has
produced the new deed confirming the transfer and combination of
parcels. The new deed shall specify that the incorporated land can
not be sold separately without subdivision review by the Walton
Village Planning Board.
C. Filing. The applicant must file the boundary line adjustment with the
Delaware County Clerk within 62 days of Planning Board endorsement.
D. Waivers. Waivers may be granted to the applicant by the Village of
Walton Planning Board as outlined in § 220-9, Waivers and
modifications, of this chapter.
A. The following information packet, "Model Road Maintenance
Agreement,"17 has been produced for the purpose of informing
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 260, Zoning.
§ 220-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-50
1:205
Delaware County towns and villages of the existence of such
agreements. A Road Maintenance Agreement (RMA) can be required
by towns and villages for subdivisions in order to ensure adequate
accessibility of emergency vehicles and, if done in the future, to make
the transfer of a road from the private to public a more effortless
process, in that roads will already meet subdivision road standards.
B. An RMA is an agreement which is intended to establish the rights and
duties of lot owner(s) with respect to maintenance of a private road.
The private road provides access from a public road to existing
residential lots and to additional lots which may be created through
future subdivisions. An RMA is an agreement between all landowners
on a private road, in which an understanding or agreement is made,
stating that a specified timely contribution will be made by the owners
fronting on the private road, for the purpose of repairing and
maintaining the private road. The time to make such an agreement is
during subdivision review, when all the lots are owned by the same
person.
C. The primary purpose of the agreement is to assure that the road
remains in good repair. Maintenance considerations should include
proper drainage, width and snow removal of the private road. The
importance of such upkeep and repair is of particular concern to the
town or Village in which the private road resides when considering
emergency access to the road. The maintenance See attached sample
RMA agreement should state that the road shall be maintained to the
minimum standards required by the town or Village.
D. The lot owners' agreement should state the amount of money that will
be spent on yearly maintenance and stipulate that any additional money
required for maintenance will not be spent until consent of an
agreement-upon percent of the landowners is obtained.
E. The amount of money to be contributed by each owner for road repairs
can be determined according to several types of ownership criteria. The
criteria are as follows:
(1) Prorated share based upon the number of lots fronting said road at
the beginning of each year (standard practice);
(2) Prorated share based upon the assessed value of each owner's
property;
(3) Prorated share based upon the distance the property owner lives
up the road.
F. The lot owners should elect an officer to handle the details of the
agreement, including organizing and contracting out the repairs and
maintenance of the private road. Voting rights shall be such that each
17.Editor's Note: A sample road maintenance agreement is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 220-50 WALTON CODE § 220-50
1:206
lot owner shall be limited to one vote. However, each property owner's
vote may be weighted according to ownership criteria as stated above.
Voting may be necessary in circumstances where additional moneys
are requested by the officer for further repairs or for additional
improvements beyond those included in the agreement.
G. It should be stated in the RMA that existing lots and/or future lots
created on the road are required to enter into the RMA.
H. Towns and villages may require that all RMA's be filed with the New
York State Attorney General's office, Town or Village Clerk-Treasurer
and Village Board. It is important that the agreement be on record. In
the event that any lot owner violates the provisions of the agreement,
any other lot owner may initiate any proceeding for the recovery of
damages against the persons violating the agreement.
I. Towns and villages have the authority to require the maintenance of
private roads. Using this authority is beneficial to both the town or
Village and the public in that it guarantees that future subdivision roads
will be maintained to the level that the subdivision regulations require
when the road is originally constructed. Hence, the certainty of
emergency vehicles being able to easily maneuver on such roads will be
guaranteed. Also, if transfer of a road from private to public occurs, the
road will not require much improvement, making the transfer a less
difficult process.
§ 220-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-50
1:207
Chapter 228
TAXATION
§ 220-50 WALTON CODE § 220-50
1:208
ARTICLE I
Utilities Tax
[Adopted 11-17-1967 (Ch. 47 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 228-1. Tax imposed.
A tax equal to 1% of its gross income or of gross operating income, as
the case may be, from and after January 1, 1968, is hereby imposed upon
every utility doing business in the Village of Walton. This tax shall have
application only within the territorial limits of the Village of Walton, and
shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. Such tax shall not be imposed
on any transaction originating or consummated outside of the territorial
limits of the Village of Walton, notwithstanding that some act be necessarily
performed with respect to such transaction within such limits.
§ 228-2. General definitions. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The terms used in this article shall have the definitions as set forth in Tax
Law § 186-a.
§ 228-3. "Gross income" further defined.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article or of § 186-a of the Tax
Law of the State of New York, the words "gross income" shall include:
§ 228-4. Records to be preserved.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of its
business and in such form as the Village Clerk-Treasurer may require, and
such records shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the
Village Clerk-Treasurer may consent to their destruction within that period
or may require that they be kept longer.
§ 228-5. Filing of tax return.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file, on or before March 25,
June 25, September 25 and December 25, a return for the three calendar
months preceding each such return date or any portion thereof for which
the tax imposed hereby is effective, each of which returns shall state
the gross income or gross operating income for the period covered by
each such return. Returns shall be filed with the Village Clerk-Treasurer
on a form to be furnished by him for such purpose and shall contain
A. In the case of a utility engaged in selling telephony or telephone
service, only receipts from local exchange service wholly consummated
within the Village of Walton; and
B. In the case of a utility engaged in selling telegraphy or telegraph
service, only receipts from transactions wholly consummated within the
Village of Walton.
§ 228-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-5
1:209
such other data, information or matter as the Village Clerk-Treasurer may
require to be included therein. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions
of this subdivision, any utility whose average gross income or average
gross operating income, as the case may be, for the aforesaid three-month
periods is less than $1,500 may file a return annually on June 25 for the
12 preceding calendar months, and the Village Clerk-Treasurer may require
any utility to file an annual return which shall contain any data specified
by him, regardless of whether the utility is subject to tax under this article.
Every return shall have annexed thereto a certification by the head of the
utility making the same, or of the owner or of a copartner thereof, or of
a principal officer of the corporation, if such business be conducted by a
corporation, to the effect that the statements contained therein are true.
§ 228-6. Tax payable upon filing return.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall pay
to the Village Clerk-Treasurer the tax imposed by this article for the period
covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of
filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which
the return is required to be filed.
§ 228-7. Village Clerk-Treasurer to determine amount of tax;
hearing.
In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Village Clerk-Treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient
return is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice from
the Village Clerk-Treasurer, or if no return is made for any period, the
Village Clerk-Treasurer shall determine the amount of tax due from such
information as he is able to obtain, and, if necessary, may estimate the tax
on the basis of external indices or otherwise. The Village Clerk-Treasurer
shall give notice of such determination to the person liable for such tax.
Such determination shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the
person against whom it is assessed shall, within one year after the giving
of notice of such determination, apply to the Village Clerk-Treasurer for
a hearing, or unless the Village Clerk-Treasurer, of his own motion, shall
reduce the same. After such hearing, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall give
notice of his decision to the person liable for the tax. Any final determination
of the amount of any tax payable hereunder shall be reviewable for error,
illegality or unconstitutionality, or any other reason whatsoever, by a
proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules if the
proceeding is commenced within 90 days after the giving of the notice
of such final determination; provided, however, that any such proceeding
under said Article 78 shall not be instituted unless the amount of any tax
sought to be reviewed, with such interest and penalties thereon as may
be provided for by local law or resolution, shall be first deposited and an
undertaking filed, in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice of
the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect that, if such proceeding be
dismissed or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay all costs and charges
which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
§ 228-5 WALTON CODE § 228-8
1:210
§ 228-8. Petitioner to pay costs of proceeding.
Where any tax imposed hereunder shall have been erroneously, illegally
or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund thereof duly
made to the Village Clerk-Treasurer, and such officer shall have made a
determination denying such refund, such determination shall be reviewable
by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules;
provided, however, that such proceeding is commenced within 90 days after
the giving of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due
was not previously made, and that an undertaking is filed with the proper
fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice
of the Supreme Court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding be
dismissed, or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay all costs and charges
which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
§ 228-9. Time limitation for taxes imposed.
Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with intent to
evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made with respect
to taxes imposed under this section after the expiration of more than three
years from the date of the filing of a return; provided, that where no return
has been filed as provided herein, the tax may be assessed at any time.
§ 228-10. Mailing of notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return filed by him under this article, or, if no return has been
filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to
whom addressed. Any period of time, which is determined according to the
provisions of this article by the giving of notice, shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 228-11. Penalty for failing to file return.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return, or to pay any tax
or any portion thereof, within the time required by this article, shall be
subject to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax
for each month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month after
such return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the Village
Clerk-Treasurer, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or
any portion of such penalty.
§ 228-12. Application for refund. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
If, within one year from the giving of notice of any determination or
assessment of any tax or penalty, the person liable for the tax shall make
application for a refund thereof and the Village Clerk-Treasurer or the
§ 228-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-12
1:211
court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was
erroneously or illegally collected, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall refund
the amount so determined. For like cause and within the same period, a
refund may be so made on the initiative of the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
However, no refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to
a determination of the Village Clerk-Treasurer as hereinbefore provided
unless the Village Clerk-Treasurer, after a hearing as hereinbefore
provided, or of his own motion, shall have reduced the tax or penalty or it
shall have been established in a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules and Village Law § 5-530 of the State of New York
that such determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds shall be made
out of moneys collected under this article. An application for a refund,
made as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for the
revision of any tax or penalty complained of and the Village Clerk-Treasurer
may receive additional evidence with respect thereto. After making his
determination, the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the
person interested, and he shall be entitled to commence a proceeding to
review such determination subject to the provisions of Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules and Village Law § 5-530 of the State of New York.
§ 228-13. Tax to be charged against utility. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and may be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the utility
to customers or others.
§ 228-14. Enforcement of payment.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed under the
provisions of this article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the
Village Clerk-Treasurer, bring an action to enforce payment of the same.
The proceeds of any judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to
the Village Clerk-Treasurer.
§ 228-15. Powers of Village Clerk-Treasurer.
In the administration of this article the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall have
power to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with
law, as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance
of his duties, and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records
relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony
and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his
official duty under this article, and to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses, and the production of books, records, papers and documents.
§ 228-16. Effective date.
This article shall take effect on the first day of January 1968.
§ 228-12 WALTON CODE § 228-16
1:212
ARTICLE II
Senior Citizens Exemption
[Adopted 3-17-1975 by L.L. No. 2-1975 (Ch. 46 of the 1973 Code);
amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 228-17. Exemption granted.
A partial exemption from taxation to the extent of 50% of the assessed
valuation of real property which is owned by certain persons with limited
income who are 65 years of age or older meeting the requirements set forth
in § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law is hereby granted.
§ 228-18. Maximum income level.
The maximum income level for the 50% exemption is established at
$29,000.
§ 228-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-18
1:213

ARTICLE III
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 10-1-1984 by L.L. No. 6-1984 (Ch. 46A of the 1973 Code)]
§ 228-19. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to reduce the maximum veterans exemption
allowable pursuant to § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of
New York.
§ 228-20. Exemption. [Amended 11-15-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
Pursuant to the provisions of Subdivision 2(d) of § 458-a of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York, the maximum veterans
exemption from real property taxes allowable pursuant to § 458-a of the
Real Property Tax Law is established as follows:
A. Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of 15% of the assessed value of such property; provided,
however, that such exemption shall not exceed the lesser of $6,000 or
the product of $9,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate of
the Village of Walton.
B. In addition to the exemption provided by Subsection A of this section,
where the veteran served in a combat theater or combat zone of
operations, as documented by the award of a United States campaign
ribbon or service medal, qualifying residential real property also shall
be exempt from taxation to the extent of 10% of the assessed value of
such property; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed
the lesser of $4,000 or the product of $6,000 multiplied by the latest
state equalization rate of the Village of Walton.
C. In addition to the exemptions provided by Subsections A and B of this
section, where the veteran received a compensation rating from the
United States Veterans' Administration because of a service-connected
disability, qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from
taxation to the extent of the product of the assessed value of such
property multiplied by 50% of the veteran's disability rating; provided,
however, that such exemption shall not exceed the lesser of $20,000 or
the product of $30,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate
for the Village of Walton.
§ 228-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-20
1:215

ARTICLE IV
Exemption for Disabled Persons With Limited Incomes
[Adopted 2-1-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999 (Ch. 45A of the 1973 Code)]
§ 228-21. Eligibility. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
All real property in the Village of Walton meeting the application,
ownership, residency, income and use requirements of § 459-c of the Real
Property Tax Law shall receive an exemption equal to 50% of the property's
assessed value. The maximum income (M) for purposes of the 50%
exemption shall equal $29,000. The Village Board of Trustees of Walton
may alter the income maximum in the future by enactment of a resolution
providing for such change.
§ 228-22. Computation after other exemptions.
Any exemption provided by this chapter shall be computed after all other
partial exemptions have been subtracted from the total assessed value. No
parcel may receive an exemption pursuant to this Article IV, Exemption
for Disabled Persons With Limited Income, and Article II, Senior Citizens
Exemption, of this article of the Code of the Village of Walton (regarding
aged persons with limited income).
§ 228-23. Application requirements. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Application for such exemption must be made annually by the owner or
all of the owners of the property, on application forms prescribed by the
New York Commissioner of Taxation and Finance, and filed in the Assessor's
office on or before March 1 of each year; provided, however, that proof of
a permanent disability need be submitted only in the year this exemption
is first sought or the disability is first determined permanent. At least 60
days prior to the taxable status date, the Assessor shall annually mail to
all exemption recipients listed on the latest completed assessment roll an
application form and a notice that such application must be filed on or
before the taxable status date.
§ 228-24. Unreimbursed medical uses excluded.
The computation of income pursuant to § 228-25 of this article shall exclude
all medical and prescription expenses which are not reimbursed or paid by
insurance.
§ 228-25. When effective; applicability.
This chapter shall take effect immediately and shall apply to assessment
rolls prepared on the basis of taxable status dates occurring on or after
March 1, 1999.
§ 228-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-25
1:217

ARTICLE V
Cold War Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 6-2-2008 by L.L. No. 1-200818 (Ch. 46AA of the 1973
Code)]
§ 228-26. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to allow a real property tax exemption for
Cold War Veterans as is allowed pursuant to § 458-b of the Real Property
Tax Law of the State of New York.
§ 228-27. Exemption allowed.
Said real property tax exemption is hereby granted to Cold War veterans as
defined and provided for in said § 458-b of the New York Real Property Tax
Law.
§ 228-28. Maximum amount of exemption.
The maximum amount of exemption for qualifying residential real property
pursuant to the Cold War veterans exemption granted herein shall be
15% of the assessed value of such property; provided, however, that such
exemption shall not exceed the lesser of $9,000 or the product of $9,000
multiplied by the latest state equalization rate of the Village of Walton.
§ 228-29. Duration. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
In accordance with the provisions of Real Property Tax Law § 458-b and
pursuant to Chapter 290 of the New York State Laws of 2017, it is intended
that the Cold War exemption remain in effect indefinitely or until such
time as it is revoked by local law or authorizing state legislation requires
modification.
18.Editor's Note: This local law also provided that it shall apply to all assessment rolls
prepared on the basis of taxable status dates occurring on or after the local law's effective
date.
§ 228-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-29
1:219

ARTICLE VI
Tax Delinquency Enforcement
[Adopted 3-6-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
§ 228-30. Legislative intent.
The Village of Walton has historically chosen not to enforce delinquent real
property taxes due the Village for three years from the due date. This is
one year longer that the statutory period set by the New York State Real
Property Tax Law. The Village now wishes to conform to that statute by
adopting this article to authorize the Village to commence tax foreclosure
proceedings after the passage of two years from the due date.
§ 228-31. Statutory authority; redemption period; required
compliance.
The Village of Walton shall hereafter comply with the provisions of § 1110,
Subdivision 2, of the New York State Real Property Tax and the redemption
period for real property taxes in the Village shall expire two years after lien
date.
§ 228-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-31
1:221
Chapter 234
TAXICABS
§ 234-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
OWNER — Includes any person, firm or corporation or association owning
and operating one or more taxicabs.
TAXICAB — A passenger automobile or motor vehicle with a seating
capacity in the interior thereof of seven or fewer passengers which is used
for the transportation or carrying of a person or persons from one place to
another either wholly or partly within the Village of Walton for pay or hire.
§ 234-2. License required.
No person shall use any motor vehicle in the conduct of a taxicab business
in the Village of Walton unless a license issued therefor by the Mayor
and countersigned by the Village Clerk-Treasurer shall be in full force and
effect.
§ 234-3. Application for license.
Application for a taxicab license shall be made to the Mayor by the owner,
in writing, under oath, which shall show:
§ 234-4. Use of similar names prohibited.
The licensing of each motor vehicle shall be subject, however, to the
following conditions: If the owner proposes to operate a taxicab or taxicabs
under a corporate or assumed name, such information must be included in
his or her application. If it shall appear from said application for a license
that the name intended to be used is so similar to a name or names already
in use that it is liable to deceive the public or to create confusion or in the
event that it shall appear that said corporate or assumed name is misleading
as to the actual ownership of said taxicab, then and in that event the
Mayor is authorized to withhold a license to said application or to revoke or
suspend the license.
§ 234-5. Term of license; display.
A. The owner's name and address.
B. The identification number and make of the vehicle.
C. The year manufactured.
D. The New York State license number attached thereto.
E. Proof of a current New York State inspection.
§ 228-31 WALTON CODE § 234-5
1:222
§ 234-6. Renewal of license.
Application for renewal of taxicab licenses shall be filed not later than May
15 of each year.
§ 234-7. Fees. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 234-8. Transfer of license.
In the event that the owner of one or more taxicabs shall dispose of his or
her taxicab or taxicabs and obtain a new taxicab or taxicabs, the license for
the motor vehicle or vehicles so disposed of may be transferred to the new
taxicab or taxicabs upon application and notice to the Mayor and providing
the information as set forth in § 234-3 of this chapter by filing the same in
the Village Clerk's office, and a new license or licenses shall be issued for
the new taxicab or taxicabs.
§ 234-9. Countersignature and record.
Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be countersigned by the
Village Clerk, who shall keep a record thereof and the amount of the fee to
be paid therefor.
§ 234-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more than
15 days, or both. A separate violation shall occur each day that any such
owner shall be in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 245
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
A. Licenses shall be issued annually for a period beginning June 1 and
expiring on May 31 of the following year.
B. Such license shall be placed above the windshield in a conspicuous
place where the passengers of such taxi or police may easily locate the
same.
A. The fee for a taxicab license shall be the sum of $25 for each vehicle per
year.
B. An owner may pay a license fee of $60, which shall entitle him or her to
licenses for three taxicabs, and licenses for additional taxicabs shall be
at the rate of $20 each per year.
§ 234-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-10
1:223

ARTICLE I
Terminology
§ 245-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purpose of this
chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for purposes of
the traffic laws of this Village.
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas shall be considered "holidays."
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named
herein or on traffic-control devices, they shall mean the time standard
which is in current use in this state.
PARKING ZONE — A designated location regulated by signs indicating
length of time for parking.[Amended 1-3-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983]
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — A plot or parcel of land or building owned
and/or leased by this Village, not including highways, upon or within
which the parking of vehicles is regulated by signs and/or parking
meters.
§ 245-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-1
1:225

ARTICLE II
Traffic Control Devices
§ 245-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Village Highway Superintendent shall install and maintain trafficcontrol
devices when and as required under the provisions of this chapter
to make effective the provisions of said ordinance, and may install and
maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary
to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York, subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that Law.
§ 245-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-2
1:227

ARTICLE III
Delegation of Powers
§ 245-3. Authority of Mayor to regulate.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 1603(a) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law,
power is hereby delegated to the Mayor to exercise, by official order, rule
or regulation, the following powers granted to the legislative body of this
Village in Article 39 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, subject, however, to the
limitations imposed by §§ 1645 and 1684 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law:
A. Designate through highways and order stop signs, flashing signals or
yield signs erected at specified entrances thereto or designate any
intersection as a stop intersection or a yield intersection, and order like
signs or signals at one or more entrances to such intersection.
B. Prohibit or regulate the turning of vehicles or specified types of vehicles
at intersections or other designated locations.
C. Regulate the crossing of any roadway by pedestrians.
D. Designate any highway or any separate roadway thereof for one-way
traffic.
E. Exclude trucks, commercial vehicles, tractors, tractor-trailer
combinations and trucks in excess of any designated weight from
designated highways.
F. Prohibit, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles.
G. Determine those highways or portions of highways which shall be
marked to indicate where overtaking and passing or driving to the left
of such markings would be especially hazardous in accordance with the
standards, minimum warrants and sign or marking specifications
established by the Department of Transportation.
H. Designate safety zones.
I. Provide for the installation, operation, maintenance, policing and
supervision of parking meters, establish parking time limits at such
meters, designate hours of operation of such meters, and fix and
require the payment of fees applicable to parking where such meters
are in operation. Such fees shall be paid to such city or Village and
credited to its general fund, unless a different disposition prescribed by
local law enacted prior to or after the effective date of this section.
J. Establish a system of truck routes upon which all trucks, tractors and
tractor-trailer combinations having a total gross weight in excess of
10,000 pounds are permitted to travel and operate and excluding such
vehicles and combinations from all highways except those which
constitute such truck-route system. Such exclusion shall not be
construed to prevent the delivery or pickup of merchandise or other
property along the highways from which such vehicles and
§ 245-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-3
1:229
combinations are otherwise excluded. Any such system of truck routes
shall provide suitable connection with all state routes entering or
leaving such city or Village.
K. Regulate traffic by means of traffic control signals.
L. License, regulate or prohibit processions, assemblages or parades.
Whenever such a procession, assemblage or parade authorized by a
local authority will block the movement of traffic on a state highway
maintained by the state, or on a highway which connects two state
highways maintained by the state, or on a highway which connects two
state highways maintained by the state to make a through route, for a
period in excess of 10 minutes, such authority must, prior to such
blocking, provide and designate with conspicuous signs a detour
adequate to prevent unreasonable delay in the movement of traffic on
said highway maintained by the state.
M. Prohibit or regulate the operation and the stopping, standing or parking
of vehicles in cemeteries and in public parks.
N. Provide for the removal and storage of vehicles parked or abandoned on
highways during snowstorms, floods, fires or other public emergencies,
or found unattended where they constitute an obstruction to traffic or
any place where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited, and for the
payment of reasonable charges for such removal and storage by the
owner or operator of any such vehicle.
O. Prohibit, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles
upon property owned or leased by the Village.
§ 245-3 WALTON CODE § 245-3
1:230
ARTICLE IV
Traffic Control Signals
§ 245-4. Traffic control signals. [Amended 7-11-1994 by L.L. No.
3-1994; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
Traffic control signals shall be installed, maintained and operated as
follows:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 245-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-4
1:231

ARTICLE V
One-Way Roadways
§ 245-5. One-way roadways.
One-way roadways designated as follows:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Gardiner Place Northerly Entire length
Pine Street [Amended
7-15-1985 by L.L. No.
1-1985]
Easterly From Townsend Street to North
Street and for two-way traffic
from North Street to Bruce
Street
Opera Avenue [Added
1-3-1983 by L.L. No.
1-1983]
Westerly From North Street to Gardiner
Place
Orchard Street
[Amended 6-18-1984
by L.L. No. 5-1984]
Easterly Entire length
Shepard Street [Added
6-3-2019 by L.L. No.
3-2019]
Southerly Entire length
§ 245-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-5
1:233

ARTICLE VI
Turning Movements
§ 245-6. Prohibition of left turns. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Location
(Reserved)
§ 245-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-6
1:235

ARTICLE VII
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 245-7. Stop and yield intersections. [Amended 3-22-1972;
1-7-1974; 1-3-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983; 7-15-1985 by L.L. No.
1-1985; 7-11-1994 by L.L. No. 3-1994; 1-6-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997;
4-28-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997]
A. The intersections listed below are hereby designated as stop
intersections, and stop signs shall be erected at the entrances to said
intersections as stated in the listing:
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance(s) From
Benton Avenue [Added
7-1-2002 by L.L. No.
2-2002]
Griswold Street North and south
Bridge Street [Added
4-5-2010 by L.L. No.
1-2010]
Water Street West
Burton Street St. John Street North and south
Delaware Street Munn Street North
Delaware Street Munn Street
Extension
South and north
Delaware Street New Street North
East Brook Road Brook Street East
East Brook Road East Street East
East Brook Road Fitch Street West
East Street Austin-Lincoln Road North
East Street Bruce Street North and south
East Street East Brook Road North
East Street Flynn Street North
East Street Griswold Street South
East Street Liberty Street South
East Street North Street North and south
East Street Quarry Street North
East Street St. John Street North and south
East Street Shepard Street South
East Street Townsend Street North and south
Fancher Avenue Holley Street West
Flynn Street Wells Street West
§ 245-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-7
1:237
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance(s) From
Gardiner Place Opera Avenue East
Griswold Street Benton Avenue East and west
Griswold Street Union Street East and west
High Street Harby Street East
High Street White Rock Road North and east
Holley Street Marvin Avenue North
Liberty Street Mead Street East and west
Liberty Street Platt Street East
Maple Street Bush Avenue West
Maple Street Camp Avenue West
Maple Street Guild Avenue West
Maple Street Harby Drive East
Maple Street Robinson Avenue West
Mead Street Howell Street North and south
Mead Street Liberty Street North and south
Mead Street St. John Street North
Mead Street Shepard Street North
Mead Street Townsend Street North and south
Mead Street Tripp Avenue North
North Street Benton Avenue East
North Street East Street East and west
North Street Gardiner Place West
North Street Mead Street West
North Street Orchard Street West
North Street Pine Street West
North Street Platt Street West
North Street Union Street East and west
Ogden Street New Street South
Ogden Street West Prospect Street North and south
Park Street High Street East
St. John Street Kelly Avenue East
St. John Street Miller Avenue East
St. John Street Reymakes Street West
Shepard Street Burton Street West
§ 245-7 WALTON CODE § 245-7
1:238
Intersection of With Stop Sign on Entrance(s) From
Shepard Street Miller Avenue West
South Street Fair Street West
South Street Holley Street East
South Street More Avenue West
Stockton Avenue Sewell Place South
Townsend Street Austin-Lincoln
Street
West
Townsend Street East Street East and west
Townsend Street Franklin Road East and west
Townsend Street Mead Street East and west
Townsend Street Platt Street East and west
Townsend Street Union Street East
Union Street Bruce Street North
Union Street North Street North and south
West Street Mead Street East
West Street Ogden Street West
B. The intersections listed below are hereby designated as yield
intersections, and yield signs shall be erected at the entrances to said
intersections as stated in the listing:
Intersection of
With Yield Sign
on Entrance(s) From
Bruce Street Pine Street West
Franklin Road Bruce Street South
Franklin Road North Street South
C. Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, every driver of a
vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line,
but if none then he shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection or, in the event that there is no crosswalk, at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
the approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection.
D. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none then he shall
stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection
or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of the approaching
traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection.
§ 245-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-7
1:239

ARTICLE VIII
Speed Relations
§ 245-8. Maximum speed limits.
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Highways within the
corporate limits of the
Village
30
North Street [Added
7-2-1979 by L.L. No.
1-1979]
15 Between a point 300 feet northerly
and a point 300 feet southerly from
the extension of the building lines
of the Townsend School (Walton
Elementary School), as said
building lines would extend into
North Street
Public parks,
cemeteries, school
grounds and hospital
grounds within the
Village
15
§ 245-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-8
1:241

ARTICLE IX
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 245-9. Application of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 245-10. Standing and parking prohibited in designated locations.
A. The standing of vehicles is hereby prohibited in any of the following
locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Delaware Street [Added
1-3-1983 by L.L. No.
1-1983]
South At the intersection with the
east corner of Bridge Street,
running east approximately
100 feet
Delaware Street [Added
1-3-1983 by L.L. No.
1-1983]
North The west side of Liberty Street
north to Mead Street
approximately 75 feet
Delaware Street,
running west [Added
1-3-1983 by L.L. No.
1-1983; amended
12-12-1983 by L.L. No.
5-1983; 6-18-1984 by
L.L. No. 5-1984]
South At the intersection with the
west corner of Bridge Street,
running west approximately
540 feet
Delaware Street,
running west [Added
1-3-1983 by L.L. No.
1-1983; amended
12-12-1983 by L.L. No.
5-1983; 6-18-1984 by
L.L. No. 5-1984]
South Starting at a point
approximately 1,290 feet from
the intersection of Bridge
Street, running west
approximately 292 feet
Delaware Street,
southerly [Added
1-3-1983 by L.L. No.
1-1983]
South Along the west side of Bridge
Street, to the Delaware River
Gardiner Place East From its intersection with
North Street to the southerly
boundary line of Ogden Free
Library property
Gardiner Place West Church Drive
Liberty Street East From its intersection with East
Street
§ 245-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-10
1:243
Name of Street Side Location
Mead Street [Amended
5-5-1975]
North From its intersection with St.
John Street to a point plus or
minus 133 feet east thereof
Townsend Street East From its intersection with
Delaware Street to its
intersection with Mead Street
B. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in any of the following
locations: [Added 1-7-1974]
Name of Street Side Location
Benton Avenue South From its intersection with
Griswold Street to its
intersection with North Street
Bruce Street West From its intersection with
Union Street to its intersection
with East Street
Burton Street [Added
6-2-2014 by L.L. No.
4-2014]
North From St. John Street to its
westerly terminus
Camp Avenue [Added
11-21-1994 by L.L.
No. 5-1994]
South Entire length
Delaware Street (N.Y.S.
Route 10) [Added
8-20-2001 by L.L. No.
1-2001]
North From the easterly curbline of
Griswold Street, easterly for a
distance of 150 +/- feet
East Street North From its intersection with
Griswold Street to its
intersection with Townsend
Street
Franklin Road [Added
10-18-1993 by L.L.
No. 1-1993]
South From Mount Pleasant to the
Village limits
Griswold Street
[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
East From its intersection with the
East Brook Bridge to its
intersection with Delaware
Street
Howell Street [Added
10-18-1993 by L.L.
No. 1-1993]
East From its intersection with
Delaware Street to its
intersection with Mead Street
§ 245-10 WALTON CODE § 245-10
1:244
Name of Street Side Location
Maple Street East From its intersection with
Stockton Avenue to its
intersection with Harby Drive
Maple Street [Added
10-18-1993 by L.L.
No. 1-1993]
East From the school entrance to its
southerly terminus
Mead Street North From its intersection with
Liberty Street
North Street East From its intersection with
Benton Avenue to its
intersection with Franklin Road
Platt Street [Amended
1-3-1983 by L.L. No.
1-1983]
South From its intersection with
North Street to its intersection
with Liberty Street
South Street [Added
10-18-1993 by L.L.
No. 1-1993; amended
3-6-2000 by L.L. No.
1-2000]
East From Stockton Avenue to the
Village limits
St. John Street West From its intersection with
Burton Street to its
intersection with East Street
Stockton Avenue
[Added 2-23-2004 by
L.L. No. 1-2004]
South In front of the Walton High
School starting at 109 feet east
of the intersection with Harby
Drive and continuing 110 feet
easterly
Stockton Avenue
[Added 8-5-1996 by
L.L. No. 2-1996;
amended 2-23-2004
by L.L. No. 1-2004]
South In front of the Walton High
School starting at 114 feet
west of the intersection with
Harby Drive and continuing 90
feet westerly
Titus Place Both From its intersection with
Stockton Avenue to the
northerly boundary of the
property owned by Delaware
Valley Hospital, Inc.
Union Street North From its intersection with
Townsend Street to its easterly
terminus
West Street [Added
10-18-1993 by L.L.
No. 1-1993]
East From its intersection with
Delaware Street for a distance
of 70 feet
§ 245-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-10
1:245
C. Parking prohibited certain hours. No person shall park a vehicle
between the times specified upon any of the following described streets
or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Any street in the
Village [Added
1-7-1974;
amended
9-13-1976 by L.L.
No. 1-1976; at
time of adoption
of Code (see Ch.
1, General
Provisions, Art.
II)]
Both 12:00 a.m. to
7:00
a.m./November
1 through April
1
Entire length
Bruce Street
[Added 7-11-1994
by L.L. No.
3-1994]
Both Between
November 1 and
April 30
From its
intersection with
Fitch Street to its
intersection with
Franklin Road
Franklin Road
[Added 7-11-1994
by L.L. No.
3-1994]
Both Between
November 1 and
April 30
Maple Street
[Added
10-18-1993 by
L.L. No. 1-1993]
Both Between the
hours of 7:30
a.m. and 8:30
a.m. and 2:30
p.m. and 3:30
p.m. when
school is in
session
South Street
[Added 3-6-2000
by L.L. No.
1-2000]
West During the week
of the Delaware
County Fair
from Sunday
evening at 6:00
p.m. until the
following
Sunday at 6:00
p.m.
From Stockton
Avenue to the
Village limits
§ 245-10 WALTON CODE § 245-10
1:246
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Stockton Avenue
[Added
10-18-1993 by
L.L. No. 1-1993]
Both During the week
of the Delaware
County Fair
from Sunday
evening at 6:00
p.m. until the
following
Sunday at 6:00
p.m.
From Bridge Street
to South Street
Fair Street [Added
8-7-2006 by L.L.
No. 6-2006]
Both Each year
during Fair
Week (defined
as a period of
168 hours from
12:00 midnight
on Sunday to
12:00 midnight
on Saturday,
during which
period the
annual
Delaware
County Fair is
held)
Holley Street
[Added 8-4-2014
by L.L. No.
6-2014]
South Each year
during Fair
Week (defined
as a period of
168 hours from
12:00 midnight
on Sunday to
12:00 midnight
on Saturday,
during which
period the
annual
Delaware
County Fair is
held)
From Fancher
Avenue to South
Street
§ 245-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-10
1:247
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
More Street
[Added 8-7-2006
by L.L. No.
6-2006]
Both Each year
during Fair
Week (defined
as a period of
168 hours from
12:00 midnight
on Sunday to
12:00 midnight
on Saturday,
during which
period the
annual
Delaware
County Fair is
held)
D. Parking of vehicles over certain weights excluded. Vehicles in excess of
the weights indicated are hereby excluded from the streets or parts of
streets described below, except for the purpose of loading and
unloading:
Name of Street
Maximum
Gross Weight
(tons) Location
All Village streets
zoned residential
[Added 1-7-1974]
3 Entire length
E. The standing and parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in any of the
following locations: [Added 9-13-1976 by L.L. No. 1-1976]
Name of Street Side Location
Designated fire
zones [Added
1-3-1983 by L.L.
No. 1-1983]
Griswold Street
[Added 1-3-1983
by L.L. No.
1-1983]
East From East Brook Bridge to Delaware
Street
North Street
[Added 1-3-1983
by L.L. No.
1-1983]
West In a southerly direction 110 feet from
the intersection of said North Street
and Pine Street
§ 245-10 WALTON CODE § 245-10
1:248
Name of Street Side Location
Townsend Street East From its intersection with Meade
Street to its intersection with Franklin
Road
F. The parking of vehicles without handicapped parking permits or
designations is hereby prohibited in any of the following locations:
[Added 7-7-1997 by L.L. No. 4-1997]
Name of Street Side Location
Gardiner Place East In the first parking space 39 feet from
the intersection of Delaware Street
and Gardiner Place
Gardiner Place East In the first parking space 97 feet from
the intersection of North Street and
Gardiner Place
North Street
[Added 8-5-2013
by L.L. No.
3-2013]
West In the first parking space 20 feet from
the intersection of Pine Street
G. The stopping of vehicles is hereby prohibited in any of the following
locations: [Added 2-23-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004; amended
10-4-2004 by L.L. No. 2-2004]
Name of Street Side Location
North Street [Added
2-7-2005 by L.L.
No. 1-2005]
East In front of the Townsend
Elementary School from a point
175 feet northerly of the northerly
edge of the school driveway
known as "Nichols Drive" and
continuing for 150 feet northerly
North Street Westerly From its intersection with Platt
Street 55 feet northerly
Stockton Avenue South In front of the Walton High School
from its intersection with Harby
Drive 114 feet westerly
Stockton Avenue South In front of the Walton High School
from its intersection with Harby
Drive 109 feet easterly
Stockton Avenue North From its intersection with the
easterly entrance to Terrace
Avenue 80 feet easterly
§ 245-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-10
1:249
Name of Street Side Location
Stockton Avenue North From its intersection with the
easterly entrance to Terrace
Avenue 40 feet westerly
Stockton Avenue North From its intersection with the
westerly entrance to Terrace
Avenue 80 feet easterly
Stockton Avenue
[Amended
10-1-2007 by L.L.
No. 4-2007]
North From its intersection with the
westerly entrance to Terrace
Avenue 50 feet westerly
H. No school bus, of any type or size, or other commercial bus shall be
allowed to park on any portion of either side of Maple Street or Camp
Avenue. [Added 8-7-2006 by L.L. No. 6-2006]
I. No parking shall be allowed on either side of West Street from its
intersection with Ogden Street to the end of the Walton Fire
Department premises (Tax Map No. 251.18-2-9). [Added 8-7-2006 by
L.L. No. 6-2006]
§ 245-10 WALTON CODE § 245-10
1:250
ARTICLE X
Two-Hour Parking Zones
[Amended 1-3-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983]
§ 245-11. Zones.
A. Highways. Two-hour parking zones are hereby established on highways
as follows:
Name of Street Side Location
Delaware Street North Running from the bridge over
the West Brook east to Liberty
Street
Delaware Street North Running from Liberty Street east
to approximately 50 feet west of
Townsend Street
Delaware Street North Running east from Gardiner
Place to North Street
Delaware Street South From 100 feet east of Bridge
Street to East Brook
Delaware Street
[Added 6-18-1984
by L.L. No. 5-1984]
South Running from a point 540 feet
west of the intersection of
Bridge Street for a distance of
approximately 750 feet to the
easterly end of the bridge at
West Brook
Delaware Street
[Amended
6-18-1984 by L.L.
No. 5-1984]
North Starting approximately 113 feet
on the west side of Townsend
Street in a northerly direction
approximately 175 feet
Delaware Street
[Amended
9-8-2008 by L.L.
No. 5-2008]
North On the west side of Gardiner
Place to the entrance of the
parking lot of 132 Delaware
Corporation
Delaware Street
[Amended
9-8-2008 by L.L.
No. 5-2008]
North On the east side of Gardiner
Place north to the intersection of
Opera Avenue
Delaware Street
[Amended
9-8-2008 by L.L.
No. 5-2008]
North North to the corner of Opera
Avenue, on the west side of
North Street. Running north
from the north side of Delaware
Street on the east side of North
Street approximately 175 feet to
the existing no-parking zone.
§ 245-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-11
1:251
§ 245-12. Parking time limits.
Parking time limits on highways. The parking of vehicles is hereby
prohibited for a period of longer than two hours from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except Sundays and holidays, in the parking zone locations described
in § 245-11 herein.
§ 245-13. Fees. [Amended 7-11-1994 by L.L. No. 3-1994; 1-6-1997
by L.L. No. 1-1997; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
Any vehicle parked over the two-hour limit, parked illegally in a designated
handicapped zone or parked in a no-parking zone shall be ticketed and fined
a fee of $50 if the fine is paid within 30 days of the date of the offense and
$75 if the fine is paid after 30 days.
Name of Street Side Location
North Street
[Added 10-18-1993
by L.L. No. 1-1993]
West From Gardiner Place to Mead
Street
North Street
[Added 8-6-2007
by L.L. No. 3-2007;
amended 9-8-2008
by L.L. No. 5-2008]
West From Opera Avenue to Gardiner
Place
North Street
[Added 9-8-2008
by L.L. No. 5-2008]
West From Mead Street to Platt Street
while school is in session
Opera Avenue
[Amended
9-8-2008 by L.L.
No. 5-2008]
North Approximately 302 feet to the
curve in the road of Gardiner
Place
B. An exception to all of the above applies to vehicles parked relating to
official Village of Walton government business. [Added 8-6-2007 by
L.L. No. 3-2007]
§ 245-11 WALTON CODE § 245-13
1:252
ARTICLE XI
Handicapped Parking Permits
[Added 5-15-1978]
§ 245-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HANDICAPPED PERSON — For the purpose of § 1203-a of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law (Chapter 838 of the Laws of 1977):
§ 245-15. Suspension, revocation or denial of permit.
The issuing agent shall suspend, revoke or refuse to issue or renew any
permit if the issuing agent determines that any applicant or parent or
guardian of any applicant has:
§ 245-16. Notification of change in circumstances required.
The applicant or parent or guardian of such applicant shall notify the issuing
agent of any change of address or disability within 10 days after such
change, and the issuing agent shall cancel such permit upon failure to give
such notice.
Any person who has any one or more of the following impairments,
disabilities or conditions which are permanent in nature:
(1) Limited or no use of one or both lower limbs.
(2) A neuromuscular dysfunction which severely limits mobility.
A pulmonary or cardiovascular condition which limits mobility or
severely limits the individual's activities in the open air.
(3)
A.
Any person whose physical or mental impairment or condition is other
than those specified above but is of such nature as to impose unusual
hardships in utilization of public transportation facilities, and such
condition is certified by a physician duly licensed to practice medicine
in this state as constituting an equal degree of disability (specifying the
particular condition) so as to prevent such person from getting around
without great difficulty.
B.
Any child with any one or more of the impairments or conditions listed
above.
C.
A. Made a material false statement in the application.
B. Used or permitted the use of the permit contrary to conditions set forth
in the permit.
C. Failed to comply with or observe any of the conditions of the application
and/or the permit.
§ 245-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-17
1:253
§ 245-17. Hearings.
Upon denial of an application for a permit or upon suspension or revocation
of a permit, the issuing agent shall grant a hearing to an applicant therefor
within 10 days after written request is received for such hearing. The
applicant may be heard in person or by counsel. The hearing on said
objections or charges shall be at such time and place as the issuing agent
may designate. Notice requesting such hearing must be filed with the
issuing agent no later than 30 days following notification of disapproval,
termination or suspension.
§ 245-18. Notification of approval or disapproval.
Within 21 days after receipt of a completed application, the applicant will
be notified whether it has been approved or disapproved. If disapproved, a
statement setting forth the reasons for disapproval will be provided.
§ 245-19. Application requirements.
§ 245-20. Application form for handicapped parking permit.
The application form for a handicapped parking permit shall be as follows:
Application for Handicapped Parking Permit
City, Town or Village of
__________ County of __________,
New York State
For Office Use Only
Permit No.
PART I. (to be completed by the handicapped applicant, or the parent or
guardian on behalf of a handicapped child)
Name of
Handicapped
Person
Last First Middle
Residence
Street
City State Zip Code
Age (on last
birthday)
Sex M F Telephone No.
A. Applications must be fully completed and properly executed. All
questions must be answered and medical certification must accompany
the application. Incomplete applications or failure to attach the medical
certification will result in disapproval.
B. Applications and other notices shall be mailed or delivered personally
to the issuing agent as follows: Walton Village Clerk-Treasurer, P.O. Box.
29, 21 North Street, Walton, New York 13856. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 245-17 WALTON CODE § 245-20
1:254
Occupation (if student, specify name and location of school):
Business or School Address
Business Telephone No.
Nature of Disability
Designated Vehicle(s).
(1) Make:
Owner's Name:
Year: License Plate No.:
(2) Make:
Owner's Name:
Year: License Plate No.:
(3) Make:
Owner's Name
Year: License Plate No.:
I certify that the above disability, impairment or condition is permanent
in nature and the statements contained herein are true. I further
acknowledge that I have read and understand the conditions of this
application and the handicapped parking permit and shall observe and
comply with same.
Attached to this application is certification by a physician licensed to
practice in the State of New York.
Date: ____________________
Signature of Applicant or
Signature of Parent or Guardian
PART II: (to be completed by certifying physician)
MEDICAL CERTIFICATION
Name of Physician: License No.
please print
Address: Telephone No.
Name of Handicapped Person:
please print
In the space provided below, please indicate the handicapping condition
which necessitates that the above-named applicant be granted a
handicapped parking permit, thereby entitling this individual to special
parking privileges as provided by this city, town or Village and indicate
if this condition is expected to be permanent and describe the limitations
which it imposes on this handicapped person.
§ 245-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-20
1:255
To assist you in making a determination of eligibility for such permit, we
provide a definition of a "handicapped person" presently being utilized to
determine eligibility for such a permit under § 1203-a of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law (Chapter 838, Laws of 1977).
A "handicapped person" shall mean any person who has any one or more of
the following impairments, disabilities or conditions which are permanent
in nature:
(a) Has limited or no use of one or both lower limbs.
(b) Has a neuromuscular dysfunction which severely limits
mobility.
(c) Has a pulmonary or cardiovascular condition which limits
mobility or severely limits the individual's activities in the
open air.
(d) A person whose physical or mental impairment or condition
is other than those specified above but is of such nature
as to impose unusual hardships in utilization of public
transportation facilities, and such condition is certified by
a physician duly licensed to practice medicine in this state
as constituting an equal degree of disability (specifying the
particular condition) so as to prevent such person from
getting around without great difficulty.
(e) A child with any one or more of the impairments or conditions
listed above.
Date:
Signature of Physician
NOTE: The above certification may be made by the applicant's personal
physician or may be furnished, at no cost or expense to the applicant, by a
physician designated by the issuing agent upon request by the applicant or
parent or guardian of such applicant.
PART III. (to be completed by the issuing agent)
APPROVED
DISAPPROVED
REASON FOR DISAPPROVAL: (specify in detail).
Date:
§ 245-20 WALTON CODE § 245-20
1:256
ARTICLE XII
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 245-21. Authority to impound vehicles.
§ 245-22. Storage and charges. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this article, the Village police
may store such vehicle in a suitable place at the expense of the owner.
Such owner or person in charge of the vehicle may redeem the same upon
payment to the Village police of the amount of all expenses actually and
necessarily incurred in effecting such removal.
§ 245-23. Notice of removal.
The Village police shall without delay report the removal and the disposition
of any vehicle removed, as provided in this article, to the Village Police
Department, and it shall be the duty of such Village Police Department to
ascertain to the extent possible the owner of the vehicle or person having
the same in charge and to notify him of the removal and disposition of such
vehicle and of the amount which will be required to redeem the same.
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within this
Village during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency which
affects that portion of the public highway upon which said vehicle is
parked or abandoned, said vehicle may be removed by the Village
police.
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway within this
Village where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, said
vehicle may be removed by the Village police.
C. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within this
Village where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited, said vehicle
may be removed by the Village police.
§ 245-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-23
1:257

ARTICLE XIII
Penalties
§ 245-24. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 7-15-1985 by L.L. No.
1-1985; 7-11-1994 by L.L. No. 3-1994]
A. It is a traffic infraction for any person to violate any signs, traffic control
devices or rules of the road established by any of the provisions of this
chapter, unless such violation is declared to be a misdemeanor or felony
by any other law of this state.
B. Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter for which another penalty is not provided
shall for a first conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not more than
$150 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment; for a conviction of a second violation, both of
which were committed within a period of 18 months, such person shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $300 or by imprisonment for not
more than 45 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a
conviction of a third or subsequent violation, all of which were
committed within a period of 18 months, such person shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $450 or by imprisonment for not more than
90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
C. Fines imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall remain with
the Village of Walton.
§ 245-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-24
1:259

ARTICLE XIV
Repeal of Prior Laws
§ 245-25. Laws repealed, general.
All prior laws or parts of laws of this Village regulating traffic are hereby
repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution
or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of
any law hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 245-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-25
1:261

ARTICLE XV
Effect of Ordinance
§ 245-26. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 245-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-26
1:263

ARTICLE XVI
Vehicle Weight Limits and No Through Traffic
[Added 7-2-1979 by L.L. No. 1-1979]
§ 245-27. Five-ton weight limit established. [Amended 1-3-1983 by
L.L. No. 1-1983; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)19]
No person shall operate or move a vehicle or a combination of vehicles
over, on or through the areas listed below if the weight of such vehicle, or
combination of vehicles, and load is greater than five tons:
Name of Street or Bridge Location
North Street Running from Delaware to Franklin
Road
§ 245-28. No through traffic. [Added 1-3-1983 by L.L. No. 1-1983]
There shall be no through traffic on the areas listed below:
§ 245-29. No through truck traffic.20 [Added 9-9-2013 by L.L. No.
5-2013]
Truck traffic is prohibited on the areas listed below:
Name of Street
High Street
Park Street
Upper Delaware Street [Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Upper Ogden Street [Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. Both entrances to Delaware Valley Hospital.
19.Editor's Note: An entry from this table, "Bridge located on East Street over East Brook,"
was deleted due to said bridge being removed.
20.Editor's Note: Original Article XVI of the 1973 Code, Seasonal Use Highways, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 245-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-29
1:265
Chapter 252
WATER
§ 245-29 WALTON CODE § 245-29
1:266
ARTICLE I
Water Use
[Adopted 5-4-1981 (Ch. 51 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 252-1. Applicability.
These rules and regulations apply to the entire territory now served and to
be served by the water facilities of the Walton Village Water Supply.
§ 252-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VILLAGE — The Village of Walton and/or its water supply system.
§ 252-3. Applications for service.
A. All applications for the use of water must be made in writing on forms
provided by the Village, designated "Application for Water Service."
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
APPLICATION FOR METERED WATER SERVICE
_____ 20_____
To: Village of Walton
The undersigned, being the owner of the premises situated at
____________________ requests the Village to supply water at said
premises and hereby agrees to pay the rates and comply with the rules
and regulations of the Village.
Request is hereby made for a _____ inch service and a _____ inch meter.
The undersigned agrees to give prompt written notice to discontinue
service, it being understood that failure to do so will make the
undersigned liable for all water charges at the premises until the time
written notice is received.
Owner
B. Application for new service must be signed by the property owner.
C. Applications will be accepted subject to there being an existing main in
the street or right-of-way abutting on the premises to be served, but
acceptance shall in no way obligate the Village to extend its mains to
serve the premises.
D. A separate application must be made for each premises. The word
"premises" as used herein shall be defined as follows:
§ 252-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-3
1:267
§ 252-4. Service connections.
(1) A building under one roof, owned by one customer and occupied as
one residence or one place of business.
(2) A combination of buildings owned by one customer, in one common
enclosure, occupied by one family or one corporation or firm, as a
residence or place of business.
(3) Each unit of a multiple house or building separated by a solid
vertical partition wall, occupied by one family or one firm, as a
residence or place of business.
(4) A building owned by one customer having a number of apartments,
offices or lofts which are rented to tenants and using in common
one hall and one or more means of entrance.
(5) A building one or more stories high under one roof, owned by one
customer having an individual entrance for the ground-floor
occupants and one for the occupants of the upper floors.
(6) Garden apartments owned by one individual or firm and located in
one common enclosure.
A. Installation from main to property line.
(1) Service connections from the Village main to the property line will
be installed by the Village or its authorized representative at the
expense of the applicant and shall consist of a corporation stop
inserted into the main, sufficient copper tubing to reach the
applicant's property line and a curb stop and box.
(2) In case of the installation of new services, the owner pays a tapping
fee for which the Village taps the main and installs the service
connection to the curb or property line. The fee for such
installations shall be an amount as set from time to time by
resolution of the Village Board. [Amended 6-2-2014 by L.L. No.
3-2014]
(3) All curb boxes once installed shall be adjusted to changes in grade
and shall be kept accessible and in repair by the owner.
(4) Service pipe and service connections shall not be trespassed upon
nor interfered with in any respect. The curb stop may not be used
by the customer for turning on or shutting off the water supply, but
is for the exclusive use of the Village.
B. The applicant shall, at his own expense, install the service pipe from the
curb box shutoff to the premises and a valve to be located preferably
just inside the building wall, permitting control of the water supply by
the customer. This property shall be maintained, at the expense of the
customer and, when necessary, replaced. For this installation and
maintenance thereof, the customer shall employ a competent plumber,
§ 252-3 WALTON CODE § 252-4
1:268
§ 252-5. Construction.
and all work shall be performed in a manner satisfactory to the Village.
The minimum size, materials, depth of cover and method of
construction shall be the same as specified for a service pipe installed
by the Village. If any defects in workmanship or materials are found,
or if the customer's service pipe has not been installed in accordance
with such specifications or with the Village requirements, water service
either will not be turned on or will be discontinued if such defects are
not remedied.
C. All service pipes shall have a minimum cover of five feet. No service
pipes shall be less in size than three-fourths-inch inside diameter.
United States Government Specification Type K soft tempered copper
tubing shall be used on three-fourths-inch and one-inch services. Type
K copper tubing shall be used on one-and-one-half-inch and two-inch
services. All services larger than two inches in diameter shall be ductile
iron pipe of quality equal to American Water Works Association
standard specifications and of weight suitable for service under a
pressure of 150 pounds per square inch. All connections of service
pipes to a main with a ground cover of less than five feet shall be made
on the side of the main so that such service pipes shall in no case have
less covering than the main. The Village reserves the right in all cases
to stipulate the size and type of service connection to be used.
D. After November 1 of any year, the Water Department will make no
installation of water mains or service connections until weather permits
in the spring, except in case of an emergency.
E. The Water Department shall not be responsible if the service pipes from
the water main freeze, and, if the Water Department consults in
thawing them out, the cost shall be borne by the property owner.
A. Approval required. All new development which requires public water
facilities shall be subject, without exception, to final approval by the
Water Department.
B. Construction expense. All mains, hydrants, valves and necessary
appurtenances thereto, other than replacement of existing and
accepted ones or other than on lands accepted for highway purposes
prior to the adoption of the rules and regulations, shall be constructed
and installed without expense to the Water Department and shall
become the property of said Water Department by deed, easement or
bill of sale without expense to the Water Department before being
placed in use. Further, all replacement or repair of mains, pipes,
hydrants, valves, etc., outside the Village which are supplied regularly
with water by the Water Department shall be under the supervision of
the Water Department and made without expense to the Water
Department.
§ 252-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-5
1:269
§ 252-6. Metered service. [Amended 7-17-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995]
C. Inspection and certification. All new facilities and service connections,
whether within or without the Village, which are supplied regularly
with water by the Water Department shall be inspected and certified by
the Water Department to be free from leaks, defects of installation, etc.,
before they are accepted and placed in use. No main of a size smaller
than six inches shall be installed. Five feet of earth coverage and a
distance of not less than four feet from any open area or vault shall be
required.
D. Acceptance. No deed or easement or dedication of land for highway
purposes shall be accepted by the Village unless such deed also conveys
completed facilities, including mains, valves and hydrants, or until the
grantor tenders a performance bond, labor and material bond and
payment bond to the Village.
E. Materials. Unless otherwise approved by the Water Department, the
following specifications shall be conformed to:
(1) Pipe. Class 52 ductile iron pipe, shall be push-on joint type with
rubber gaskets, four brass connecting wedges to each joint, cement
lined and tar coated to meet American National Standard Institute
Specification A21.52-1976.
(2) Fittings. Shall be cast-iron Class 250 to meet American National
Standards Institute Specification A21.11-1972 and American Water
Works Association Specification C 111-72.
(3) Hydrants. Shall conform to American Water Works Association
specifications and shall meet the requirement of the Underwriters'
Laboratories. Hydrants shall be six inches, having a mechanical
joint connection, two two-and-one-half-inch hose connections and
one pumper connection. Threads for nozzles shall be as required by
the Village Fire Department. Hydrants shall be dry-barrel type
conforming to AWWA Standard C-502.
A. Meters. The Village will furnish, install and maintain meters and meter
couplings, but the customer shall install on his premises the necessary
piping, fittings, valves and pipe couplings to receive the meter. The
Village will maintain meters as stated insofar as ordinary wear and tear
is concerned, but in case of damage by freezing, hot water or external
damage, the customer will be held responsible for the cost of repairs.
The Village recommends the installation of suitable equipment,
properly located and installed, to prevent backflow of hot water which
may cause damage to the meter or other damage to customer's
plumbing.
B. Location and reading of meters. The customer shall provide a place
acceptable to the Village for the location of the meter. Meters shall be
§ 252-5 WALTON CODE § 252-6
1:270
§ 252-7. Payment for water service.
accessible for inspection and reading by the Village's authorized
representative at any reasonable hour.
C. Right to remove and test meters. The customer grants the right of
access to property to remove and test any meter at any time and to
substitute another meter in its place.
D. Testing of meters.
(1) The Village will test its meters periodically. In case of a disputed
account involving the accuracy of a meter, the Village will test the
meter upon the request of the customer. A fee payable in advance
of the test is required, and said fee will be at the actual cost of the
Village for private testing.
(2) In the event that the meter is found to overregister in excess of 4%
at any flow within the normal test flow limits, the fee will be
returned to the customer; otherwise it will be retained. Adjustment
in bills for overregistration of the meter will be made.
E. Nonregistering meters.
(1) The reading of a duly installed meter showing the amount of water
consumed shall be used for all metered billing purposes except
where it appears that the meter has ceased to register or has
registered inaccurately.
(2) In cases where it is found that a meter has ceased to register or has
registered inaccurately and the percentage of inaccuracy cannot be
determined by reasonable test, an estimated bill for the billing
period may be rendered to the consumer. The estimated bill shall
be based upon the amount of water consumed in the corresponding
period in prior years, except where it appears that there has been a
change in the occupancy of the premises or in the use of water, in
which case an equitable adjustment shall be made.
A. Meters are read and customers are billed quarterly. All bills are due and
payable within 30 days at the Village Office. On bills remaining unpaid
after 30 days, a 10% penalty charge will be added, and on bills
remaining unpaid 60 days after rendition, a 15% penalty charge will be
added.
B. Failure to receive bills shall be no reason for not paying the added
penalty charge.
C. Persons making complaint as to the correctness of meter bills and
claiming to be overcharged can, by application to the Water
Department within 10 days after rendition of the bill, have the meter
examined and the dial reread. The Water Department is authorized to
correct any charge due to a fault in the meter or to incorrect reading of
§ 252-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-7
1:271
§ 252-8. General rules. [Amended 7-17-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995]
the dial but shall have no power to reduce meter bills for any other
reason whatsoever. This determination shall be made by the Board of
Trustees.
A. Change of occupancy. The customer shall notify the Village five days
prior to any change in ownership.
B. Discontinuance of service for nonpayment. All bills are due and
payable, net cash, within 30 days after rendition. In case any water bill
or charges provided for in and by these rules shall not have been paid
within 60 days following the rendering of the bill, the Village will send a
ten-day notice to the customer of its intent to discontinue water service
to the customer. If the customer does not pay within 10 days after the
mailing of this notice, the Village may discontinue water service to the
customer, and in addition the customer shall become liable for a penalty
fee which shall be an amount as set from time to time by resolution of
the Village Board. [Amended 12-21-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998;
12-18-2000 by L.L. No. 7-2000; 6-2-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
C. Seasonal occupancy.
(1) Seasonal customers or those customers who take water for only
part of the year will be charged the minimum charge for each
quarter or part of each quarter during which water service is
supplied. All water used will be charged at the regular Village
metered rates. A deposit may be required from seasonal customers
to ensure payment.
(2) When service is discontinued by a seasonal customer, the customer
will notify the Village, who will then disconnect the water service.
When service is desired to be reestablished, the customer will
notify the Village at least five days in advance. The customer will
make arrangements for someone to meet the Water Department at
which time the water service will be reconnected and the customer
will be charged a fee for such installations which shall be an
amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Village Board.
[Amended 6-2-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
(3) If so desired, the Village will remove the meter at an additional
cost, which shall be an amount as set from time to time by
resolution of the Village Board. [Amended 6-2-2014 by L.L. No.
3-2014]
D. Interruption of supply.
(1) As necessity may arise in the case of breaks in water mains or other
emergencies of a similar nature, including the necessity for making
repairs, connections, extensions and/or the installing and repairing
of consumer services, the Water Department shall have the right
§ 252-7 WALTON CODE § 252-8
1:272
and authority to temporarily shut off the water supply in order to
perform the necessary work.
(2) The Water Department will use, if possible, all reasonable and
practicable means to notify the consumers in advance of such
discontinuation of water service.
(3) However, the Water Department shall not be liable for any
inconvenience suffered by the consumer or for any damage which
may result to the consumer's piping, fixtures, heating
appurtenances, appliances, etc., resulting from the shutting off of
the water supply for any purpose whatever, whether or not
previous notice has been given.
(4) The Water Department will not be liable in any case for any claim
against it at any time for the interruption of water service,
lessening of the water supply, inadequate water pressure or any
other cause which may be beyond its control.
(5) The Water Department will not be responsible for any accidents or
damages that may result through supplying steam or hot-water
boilers directly from the service pipe and depending upon the
pressure from the distributing pipes of the Water Department to fill
such boilers under working pressure; nor will it be responsible for
any accidents or damages that may result in consequence of house
boilers being unprotected by vacuum or other valves or of the
imperfect action of the same nor for any lack of strength in the
boilers or in their appurtenances to withstand the pressure in the
distributing mains; neither will it be responsible for any damage
occasioned by reason of the breaking of any lock, valve or of any
service pipe or appurtenances thereto nor for any accidents or
damages arising from shutting off the water for the repairs of
mains, for new work or for any purpose whatever.
E. Discontinuance of service for violation of rules. Water service may be
discontinued for any one of the following reasons:
(1) For use of water other than represented in application or through
branch connections on the street side of the meter or place
reserved therefor.
(2) For willful waste or use of water through improper and imperfect
pipes or by any other means.
(3) For molesting any service pipe, seal, meter or any other appliance
owned by the Village.
(4) For nonpayment of bills for water or services rendered.
(5) For cross-connecting pipes carrying water supplied by the Village
with any other source of supply or with any apparatus which may
endanger the quality of the water supply.
§ 252-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-8
1:273
§ 252-9. Repealer.
Existing rules and regulations are repealed.
§ 252-10. Unpaid rents to become lien.
Unpaid water rent becomes a lien on the property.
§ 252-11. Rates. [Amended 2-3-1986 by L.L. No. 1-1986; 5-7-1990
by L.L. No. 4-1990; 12-21-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
(6) For refusal of reasonable access to the property for the purposes of
inspecting fixtures or piping or for reading, repairing, testing or
removing meters.
(7) For submetering or reselling water.
F. Hydrants. [Amended 6-2-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
(1) No person shall open or interfere with or draw water from any
public fire hydrant without permission from the Village of Walton
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works. In case of
testing a private fire connection, the Village of Walton
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works shall be
notified.
(2) The Village of Walton Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works will not issue any permits for the use of hydrants unless
there is no other possible way to get water without reasonable
hardship. No permits will be issued in winter. If the Superintendent
of the Department of Public Works issues a temporary permit, the
person or persons making application will pay a fee which shall be
an amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Village
Board. Additional charges will be made for the water used in
accordance with the schedule of water rates.
G. Cross-connection to other sources prohibited. No pipe or fixtures
connected with the mains of the Village shall be connected with pipes or
fixtures supplied with water from any other source nor any apparatus
which may endanger the quality of the Village's water supply unless a
permit is obtained from the Water Department.
H. Sprinkling or irrigation. There may be times when, in the opinion of the
Village, it may be necessary to restrict the use of this service to certain
definite periods or to prohibit it entirely. In this event, all customers will
be notified by public notice.
A. Rates for water services shall be as follows:
(1) Metered rate, per quarter per 1,000 gallons: $5.83. [Amended
7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008; 6-1-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009;
6-2-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014; 4-6-2020 by L.L. No. 4-2020]
§ 252-8 WALTON CODE § 252-11
1:274
(2) Minimum charges per quarter: $44.25. This is a capital
improvement charge and is charged regardless of water usage or
lack thereof.21 [Amended 5-7-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007;
7-7-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008; 6-1-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009;
6-2-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014; 9-11-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017;
3-3-2020 by L.L. No. 2-2020]
B. All service bills are due and payable 30 days after rendition.
C. On bills remaining unpaid after 30 days, a penalty of 10% will be added.
After 60 days, 15% will be added.
D. The property owner is responsible for all water bills.
21.Editor's Note: Original Subsections A(3), (4) and (5), regarding unmetered, mobile home
and private fire protection rates, which immediately followed this subsection, were
repealed 6-2-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014.
§ 252-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-11
1:275

ARTICLE II
Cross-Connections and Backflow Protection
[Adopted 4-21-1986 by L.L. No. 3-1986 (Ch. 52 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 252-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to:
§ 252-13. Definitions; word usage.
A. Protect the public potable water supply of the Village of Walton from
the possibility of contamination by isolating within its customer's
internal distribution system or its customer's private water system such
contaminations or pollutants which could backflow into the public
water supply system.
B. Comply with the requirements of the New York State Sanitary Code
5-1.21, in conformance with the State Health Department's Crossconnection
Control Manual.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the
context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein
are defined as follows:
AIR GAP SEPARATION — A physical break between a supply pipe and
a receiving vessel. The air gap shall be at least double the diameter of
supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, and in
no case no less than one inch.
APPROVED CHECK VALVE — A check valve that seats readily and
completely. It must be carefully machined to have free-moving parts
and assured watertightness. The face of the closure element and valve
sear must be bronze, composition or other noncorrodible material
which will seat tightly under all prevailing conditions of field use.
Pins and bushings shall be bronze or other noncorrodible, nonsticking
material, machined for easy, dependable operation. The closure
element (e.g., clapper) shall be internally weighted or otherwise
internally equipped to promote rapid and positive closure in all sizes
where this feature is obtainable.
APPROVED DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY — An assembly of
at least two independently acting approved check valves, including
tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the check valve assembly
and suitable test cocks plus connections available for testing the
watertightness of each check valve.
APPROVED REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPAL BACK-FLOW
PREVENTION DEVICE — A device incorporating two or more check
valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located
between the two checks, two shutoff valves, and equipped with
necessary appurtenances for testing. The devices shall operate to
maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves, less
§ 252-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-13
1:277
than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. At
cessation of normal flow the pressure between the check valves shall
be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either valve, the
differential relief valve shall operate to maintain this reduced pressure
by discharging to the atmosphere. To be approved, these devices must
be readily accessible for maintenance and testing and installed in a
location where no part of the device shall be submerged.
APPROVED WATER SUPPLY — Any supply approved by, or under the
public health supervision of, a public health agency of the State of New
York, the County of Delaware or the Village of Walton. In determining
what constitutes an approved water supply, the Department of Health
of the State of New York (herein called the "State Health Department")
shall have the final judgment as to its safety and potability.
CERTIFIED TESTER — That individual or firm approved by the State
Health Department to make inspections and operational tests of
backflow prevention devices.
CONSUMER — Any person to whom water is sold and furnished from
the Village of Walton.
CONTAMINATION — An impairment of the quality of the Village water
supply by the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological or biological) to a degree which creates a hazard to the
public health.
CROSS-CONNECTION — An unprotected connection between any part
of the Village water works system used or intended to supply water
for drinking purposes and any source or system containing water or
substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome and
potable for human consumption.
NONTOXIC SUBSTANCE — Any substance of a nonpoisonous nature
that may create a moderate or minor hazard to the water supply
system.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust or association or persons, joint venture, corporation,
or company and includes the United States, the State of New York, the
County of Delaware, any special purpose district, and any officer or
agent thereof.
PREMISES — Integrated land area, including improvements thereon
undivided by public thoroughfares or water distribution mains of the
Village of Walton and where all parts of the premises are operated
under the same management and for the same purpose.
PROTECTIVE DEVICE — Any of the following devices:
(1) Air gap separation.
(2) Approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
(3) Approved double check valve assembly.
§ 252-13 WALTON CODE § 252-13
1:278
§ 252-14. Where protection required; type of protection.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The terminal end of a service connection
from the Village water supply at its point of delivery to the consumer. If
a meter is installed, "service connection" means the downstream end of
the meter. No unprotected take-offs from the service line ahead of any
meter or backflow protective device located at the point of delivery to
the consumer shall be permitted.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Water of the Village of
Walton, or his authorized representative.
TOXIC SUBSTANCE — Any substance (liquid, solid or gaseous),
including raw sewage and lethal substances, that when introduced into
the water supply system creates or may create a danger to the health
and well being.
UNAPPROVED WATER SUPPLY — Any water supply on or available to
the premises other than an approved water supply.
VILLAGE — The Village of Walton.
VILLAGE WATER SUPPLY — An approved water supply sold and
delivered to the consumers' premises through the water works system
of the Village of Walton.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
A. Unapproved water supply. At the service connection to any premises
having an unapproved water supply, the Village water supply shall be
protected by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow
protection device or an air gap separation.
B. Toxic substances (hazardous facility). At the service connection to any
premises on which toxic substances may be handled in such a manner
as to constitute a cross-connection, the Village water supply shall be
protected by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device or an air gap separation.
C. Nontoxic substances. At the service connection to any premises on
which a substance that would be objectionable (but not necessarily
hazardous to health) if introduced into the Village water supply is
handled in such a manner as to constitute a cross-connection, the
Village water supply shall be protected by an approved double check
valve assembly.
D. Nonhazardous to hazardous. In the event a facility is rated
nonhazardous and on such date becomes hazardous, notification of at
least 30 days be given to the Superintendent before the change takes
place. Protection by the use of a protective device as required on
hazardous substances must be installed.
E. Sewage treatment plant and dumping stations. At the service
connection to any sewage treatment plant or sewage pumping station,
§ 252-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-14
1:279
the Village water supply shall be protected by an air-gap separation.
The air gap shall be located as close as practicable to the service
connection, and all piping between the service connection and
receiving tank shall be entirely visible. If these conditions cannot be
reasonably met, the Village water supply shall be protected with an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow device, providing this
alternative is acceptable to the Superintendent. A final decision in this
matter shall be made by the State Health Department.
F. Fire system. At the service connection to any premises in which a fire
protective system is installed, the Village water supply shall be
protected based on the water source and arrangement of supplies in
accordance with the following classifications:
(1) Class 1. Direct connection from public water mains only; no pumps,
tanks or reservoirs; no physical connections from auxiliary water
supplies, no antifreeze or other additives of any kind; all sprinkler
drains discharging to atmosphere, dry wells or other safe outlets.
Protection: single check valve assembly if not already installed in
the system.
(2) Class 2. Same as Class 1, except booster pump may be installed in
the connections from the street mains. Protection: single check
valve assembly if not already installed in the system.
(3) Class 3. Direct connection from public water supply main plus one
or more of the following: elevated storage tanks; fire pumps taking
suction from aboveground covered reservoirs or tanks; and
pressure tanks. Protection: approved double check valve.
(4) Class 4. Directly supplied from public mains similar to Classes 1
and 2, and with an auxiliary water supply or available to the
premises; or an auxiliary supply may be located within 1,700 feet of
the pumper connection. Protection: approved air gap or reduced
pressure principle backflow protective device.
(5) Class 5. Directly supplied from public main, and interconnected
with auxiliary supplies, such as pumps taking suction from
reservoirs exposed to contamination or rivers and ponds; driven
wells; mills or other industrial water systems; or when antifreeze or
other industrial water systems, or where antifreeze or other
additives are used. Protection: approved air gap or reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device.
(6) Class 6. Combined industrial and fire protection systems supplied
from the public water mains only, with or without gravity storage or
pump suction tanks. Protection: determined by the Superintendent
upon review of engineering drawings or the system.
G. Lawn sprinkling systems. At the service connection to any permanently
installed lawn sprinkling system the Village water supply shall be
protected by an approved double check valve assembly. If the lawn
§ 252-14 WALTON CODE § 252-14
1:280
§ 252-15. Responsibility.
§ 252-16. Inspections and records.
The consumer on whose premises any protective device is installed shall
have each such device inspected by a certified tester annually. If successive
inspections disclose repeated failures in the operations of any device, the
Superintendent may require more frequent inspections. Each device shall
be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the consumer
wherever it is found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and
overhauls shall be kept and a copy of such records forwarded to the
Superintendent on an annual basis. The Superintendent shall have the
duty of determining that the inspections required herein are performed
properly. If following demand therefor, the consumer fails to have any of
the inspections made as required herein or to make the above described
records available, the Superintendent shall have the right to have the device
tested and the consumer shall pay the cost thereof.
§ 252-17. Compliance required; discontinuance of service; notice;
right to enter premises.
sprinkling system handles liquid fertilizers or other chemicals, the
Village water supply shall be protected by an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device.
A. Consumer responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of each consumer
at his own expense to furnish, install and keep in good working order
and safe condition any and all protective devices required in this
chapter. The Village shall not be responsible for any loss or damage
directly or indirectly resulting from or caused by the improper or
negligent installation, operation, use, repair or maintenance of, or
interfering with, any protective device by any customer or any other
person.
B. Design and approval. The design for the installation of a backflow
prevention device must be prepared in accordance with New York State
laws and regulations, and must be approved by the Superintendent and
all agencies required by state laws and regulations.
A. No water service connection shall be installed on the premises of any
consumer unless the Village water supply is protected as required by
this chapter.
B. Delivery of water to the premises of any consumer may be discontinued
by the Superintendent if any protective device required by this chapter
has not been installed, inspected, tested and maintained, or is
defective, or has been removed or bypassed.
C. Delivery of water shall be discontinued immediately and without notice
to the consumer if the Superintendent determines that:
§ 252-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-17
1:281
(1) The Village water supply is being contaminated or is in immediate
danger of contamination.
(2) A protective device required by this chapter has not been installed,
or is defective, or has been removed or bypassed.
(3) The consumer cannot be immediately located.
D. Notice.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection C, delivery of water shall not be
discontinued until written notice thereof has been given to the
consumer. The notice shall state:
(a) The conditions or defects which must be corrected.
(b) The manner in which the stated conditions or defects are to be
corrected.
(c) The date on or after which delivery of water will be
discontinued, and which shall not be less than 15 nor more
than 90 days following the date of delivery of mailing of this
notice. The Superintendent may grant the consumer an
extension for an additional period not to exceed 90 days if he
determines the consumer has exercised due diligence but has
been unable to comply with the notice within the time
originally allowed.
(2) The notice shall be given by delivering same to the consumer, the
manager or agent thereof, or to any person in charge of, or
employed in the place of business of the consumer; or, if the
consumer has not a place of business, then at the place of residence
of the consumer if known, or by leaving the notice at either the
place of business or the residence of the consumer. If the consumer
cannot be found, service of the notice shall be mailed, postage fully
prepaid, addressed to the consumer at the place of business or
residence set forth in the application of consumer for water service
in the records of the Village.
(3) Once discontinued, delivery of water shall not be resumed until any
protection device required by this chapter and approved by the
Superintendent has been properly installed, or until the conditions
at the consumer's premises creating the need for a protective
device have been abated or corrected to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent.
E. For the purpose of making any inspections or discharging the duties
imposed by this chapter, the Superintendent shall have the right to
enter upon the premises of any consumer. Each consumer, as a
condition of the continued delivery to his premises of water from the
Village water supply, shall be considered as having stated his consent to
§ 252-17 WALTON CODE § 252-17
1:282
§ 252-18. Existing devices.
All presently installed prevention devices which do not meet the
requirements of this chapter but were approved devices for the purposes
described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly
maintained shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements
under § 252-16 be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long
as the Superintendent is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the
Village's water supply. Whenever the existing device is moved from the
present location or requires more than minimum maintenance which
constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow
prevention device meeting the requirements of this chapter.
§ 252-19. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is for
any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional
or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this article.
the entry upon his premises of the Superintendent for the purposes
stated herein.
§ 252-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-19
1:283
Chapter 260
ZONING
§ 252-19 WALTON CODE § 252-19
1:284
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 260-1. Authority.
Pursuant to the authority conferred by Article 7 of the Village Law of the
State of New York, the Board of Trustees for the Village of Walton, New
York, hereafter referred to as the Village Board, hereby adopts and enacts
as follows.
§ 260-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Walton
Zoning Law."
§ 260-3. Purpose.
A. The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been
made in accordance with the Village of Walton Comprehensive Plan.
The purpose of this Zoning chapter is to promote, in accordance with
present and future needs, the health, safety, morals, convenience,
order, prosperity and general welfare of the present and future
inhabitants of the municipality. These regulations are intended, among
other things, to:
(1) Provide for the lessening of congestion in the streets or roads and
reducing the waste of excessive amounts of roads.
(2) Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers.
(3) Provide adequate light and air.
(4) Prevent excessive and wasteful scattering of population or
settlement.
(5) Promote distribution of populations, classification of land uses,
distribution of land development and utilization of lands as will
tend to facilitate and provide adequate provisions for public
requirements, including transportation, water flowage, water
supply, drainage, sanitation, educational opportunities, recreation,
soil fertility and food supply.
(6) Protect the tax base; secure economy in governmental
expenditures.
(7) Foster the municipality's agricultural and other industries.
(8) Protect both urban and nonurban development.
(9) Prevent destruction of or encroachment upon historic areas.
(10) Protect and restore banks of waterways.
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-3
1:285
§ 260-4. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Zoning chapter, the
provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
of the public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, comfort, prosperity
or general welfare. It is not intended by this Zoning chapter to interfere
with, abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements
between parties; provided, however, that where this Zoning chapter
imposes a greater restriction upon the height of buildings or requires
larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other resolutions, rules
or regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions
of this Zoning chapter shall govern. If because of error or omission in
the preparation of Official Maps any property in the jurisdiction of this
Zoning chapter is not shown as being in a zoning district, the classification
of such property shall be R-R Residential Recreational until changed by
amendment.
§ 260-5. General standards.
(11) Make provisions for, so far as conditions may permit, the
accommodation of solar energy systems and equipment and access
to sunlight necessary therefor.
(12) Encourage a good civic design and arrangement.
(13) Facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious
community by regulating and limiting or determining the height
and bulk of buildings and structures, the area of yards and other
open spaces, and the density of use.
B. The zoning regulations have been made with reasonable consideration,
among other things, for the existing use and character of property, for
the character of the particular uses and for trends of growth or change
and with a view to conserving natural resources and the value of land
and buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land
throughout the municipality.
A. Conformance with regulations required. No building or land shall
hereafter be used, and no building or part thereof shall be erected,
reconstructed, converted, enlarged, moved or structurally altered,
unless in conformity with the regulations as set forth in this Zoning
chapter.
B. Location on a lot required. Every building hereafter erected,
reconstructed, converted, moved or structurally altered shall be located
on a lot as herein defined, and in no one case shall there be more than
one main building on one lot unless otherwise provided in this Zoning
chapter.
C. Street frontage required. Except for camp cabins and summer cottages
for seasonal occupancy, no lot shall be used in whole or in part for
§ 260-3 WALTON CODE § 260-5
1:286
dwelling purposes unless such lot abuts upon a street in accordance
with the minimum street frontage requirements of this Zoning chapter.
D. Encroachment; reduction of lot area. The minimum yards, height limits,
parking spaces and open spaces, including lot area per family, required
by this Zoning chapter for each and every building existing at the time
of the passage of these regulations, or for any building hereafter
erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as a required yard
or open space for any other building, except as hereinafter provided,
nor shall any lot area or lot dimensions be reduced below the
requirements of these regulations.
E. Accessory buildings: use for dwelling. No accessory building shall be
used for dwelling except in accord with the specific provisions of this
Zoning chapter.
F. Uses that are prohibited. For the purpose of this Zoning chapter,
permitted uses are listed for the various districts. Unless the contrary is
clear from the context of the lists or other regulations of this Zoning
chapter, uses not specifically listed are prohibited.
§ 260-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-5
1:287

ARTICLE II
Word Usage; Definitions
§ 260-6. Word usage.
The following general rules of construction shall apply to the regulations of
this Zoning chapter:
§ 260-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle that is mechanically
inoperable due to age, deterioration or damage and has no economic value
except for salvage or junk; any vehicle, as herein defined, which is not
registered in accordance with the laws of the State of New York and which
is not being used for its intended purpose or which is incapable of being
used for its intended purpose.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building or a portion of the main
building, the use of which is clearly incidental to or customarily found in
connection with and (except as otherwise provided in this Zoning chapter)
located on the same lot as the main building or principal use of the land.
ACCESSORY USE — An allowed use which is clearly incidental to or
customarily found in connection with and (except as otherwise provided in
this Zoning chapter) is located on the same lot as the principal use of the
premises. When the term "accessory" is used in this chapter, it shall have
the same meaning as accessory use.
ACTION — As defined by the New York State Environmental Quality Review
Act (SEQRA) as any project or physical activity that is directly undertaken,
A. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular,
unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
B. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses, and
the future the present.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are always mandatory. The word "may" is
permissive.
D. The word "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof, and the
word "building" includes the word "structure".
E. The words "used" and "occupied" include the words "intended,
designed or arranged to be used or occupied."
F. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual.
G. Words and terms not defined herein shall be interpreted in accord with
their normal dictionary meanings and customary usage.
§ 260-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:289
funded, or approved by a state or local agency that may affect the
environment.
ADMINISTRATIVE BODY — Boards created through local legislation to
undertake administrative functions, including, but not limited to, the review
of applications for site plans, subdivisions, and special use permits.
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER — An establishment providing for the care,
supervision, and protection of adults.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE — An establishment consisting of,
including, or having the characteristics of any or all of the following:
ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO — An establishment or business
which provides the service of applying paint or other substance,
whether transparent or nontransparent, to or on the human body and
which is not open to the public generally, but excludes any minor by
reason of age.
A.
ADULT BOOKSTORE/VIDEO STORE — An establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines,
other periodicals, films, slides, videotapes or adult toys/marital aids and
which establishment is customarily not open to the public generally, but
excludes any minor by reason of age.
B.
ADULT DRIVE-IN THEATER — A drive-in theater that customarily
presents motion pictures that are not open to the public generally, but
excludes any minor by reason of age.
C.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET —
An establishment devoted to adult entertainment, either with or
without a liquor license, presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or
relating to sexual activities or anatomical genital areas and is an
establishment not open to the general public, but excludes any
minor by reason of age;
(1)
A public or private establishment which presents topless dancers,
go-go dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, lingerie
or other private modeling, exotic dancers or other similar
entertainment for observation by patrons and which establishment
is customarily not open to the public generally, but excludes any
minor by reason of age.
(2)
D.
ADULT MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a
fixed place of business where massages are administered for pay,
including, but not limited to, massage parlors, sauna baths and steam
baths. This definition shall not be construed to include a hospital,
nursing home or medical clinic or the office of a physician, surgeon,
chiropractor, osteopath or a duly licensed physical therapist or
barbershops or beauty salons at which massages are administered only
to the scalp, face, neck or shoulders. This definition also shall exclude
E.
§ 260-7 WALTON CODE § 260-7
1:290
AESTHETIC RESOURCES — Natural resources, such as open vistas, woods,
scenic view sheds, and attractive man-made settings, whose appearance is
an important ingredient in the quality of life in a community.
AGENCY — As defined by the State Environmental Quality Review Act, any
state or local agency, including zoning boards of appeals, local legislatures,
Planning Boards, and, under certain circumstances, Code Enforcement
Officials, that makes discretionary decisions that may affect the
environment.
AGGRIEVED PARTY — A person or persons who may appeal an
administrative body or local legislature's land use decision to the courts.
The decisions must result in some demonstrable harm to the party that is
different from the impact of the decision on the community as a whole.
AGRICULTURE — The use of lands for agricultural or farming purposes,
including tilling of the soil, dairying, pasturing, apiculture, arboriculture,
horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, forestry, animal and poultry husbandry
and the necessary accessory uses for the packing or storing of products,
provided that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary
health clubs, hotels, motels or inns that have facilities for physical
exercise, such as tennis courts, racquetball courts or exercise rooms,
which do not receive their primary source of revenue through the
administration of massages.
ADULT MODEL STUDIO — Any establishment where, for any form of
consideration or gratuity, figure models are provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by a person other than the proprietor, paying such
consideration or gratuity and which is not open to the public generally,
but excludes any minor by reason of age. This provision shall not
apply to any school of art, which is operated by an individual, firm,
association, partnership, corporation or institution, that meets the
requirements established by the New York State Education Law for
the issuance of diplomas and is in fact authorized to issue and confer
diplomas.
F.
ADULT MOTEL/HOTEL — A motel/hotel which is not open to the public
generally, but excludes minors by reason of age, or which makes
available to its patrons, in their rooms, films, slide shows or videotapes
that if presented in a public movie theater would not be open to the
public generally, but would exclude any minor by reason of age.
G.
ADULT PEEP SHOWS — A theater or other establishment which
presents material in the form of live shows, films or videotapes, viewed
from an individual enclosure or private room for which a fee is charged,
and which is not open to the public generally, but excludes any minor
by reason of age.
H.
ADULT THEATER — A theater that customarily presents motion
pictures, films, videotapes or slide shows that are not open to the public
generally, but excludes any minor by reason of age.
I.
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:291
to that of normal agricultural activities, and provided further that such uses
shall not include the commercial feeding of garbage and offal to swine or
other animals.
AIRPORT — Any area of land or water, or both, designed and set aside for
the landing and takeoff of fixed-wing aircraft and includes its buildings and
associated facilities, if any. This includes private and public-use airfields
with turf or paved runways.
AIRPORT APPROACH ZONE — The area that is required for the landing or
takeoff of an aircraft outside of the parameters of the airport. This area is
often subject to height restrictions that may cause an unsafe obstruction to
pilots.
ANIMAL KENNEL, COMMERCIAL — A place prepared to house, board, and
breed, handle or otherwise keep or care for animals for sale or in return for
compensation.
ANIMAL KENNEL, PRIVATE — Any residence housing more than three dogs
over four months in age and for more than a one-month period of time.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A multifamily dwelling containing three or more
dwelling units.
ARTICLE 78 PROCEEDING — Refers to an article in the Civil Practices
Law and Rules that allows aggrieved persons to bring an action against a
government body or officer in a court of law.
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD — The use of any land more than 200 square
feet in area in any location for the storage, keeping, reduction or
abandonment of two or more unregistered, old or secondhand motor
vehicles, no longer intended or in condition for legal use on the public
highways, whether for the purpose of reclaiming for use some or all of the
materials therein, whether metal, glass, fabric or otherwise, for the purpose
of disposing of the same or for any other purpose. Such term shall include
any place of storage or deposit for any such purposes of used parts or waste
materials from motor vehicles which, taken together, equal in bulk two or
more such vehicles; provided, however, that the term "junkyard" shall not
be construed to mean an establishment having facilities for processing iron,
steel or nonferrous scrap for sale or remelting purposes only.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION (or FILLING STATION) — Any building,
land area, or other premises, or portion thereof, used for the retail
dispensing or sale of vehicular fuels.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR SERVICES AND GARAGES — Establishments
primarily engaged in furnishing automotive repair, rental, leasing, and
parking services to the public.
BANK — See "financial institutions."
BASEMENT — A story party underground and having at least 1/2 of its
height above the ground.
§ 260-7 WALTON CODE § 260-7
1:292
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — Overnight accommodations and a morning meal
in a dwelling unit provided to transients for compensation in an owneroccupied
dwelling unit.
BILLBOARD — See "sign, general advertising."
BLOCK — That property fronting on one side of a street and lying between
two intersecting streets or otherwise limited by a railroad right-of-way, a
live stream or unsubdivided tract or other physical barrier of such nature as
to interrupt the continuity of development.
BOARDINGHOUSE (ROOMING or LODGING HOUSE) — A dwelling unit
or part thereof, other than a hotel or motel, in which, for compensation,
lodging and meals are provided for three or more persons.
BUILDABLE AREA — The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard
and open space requirements of this Zoning Code have been met.
BUILDABLE WIDTH — The width of that part of a lot not included within
the open space requirements of this Zoning Code.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for
the housing or enclosure of persons, animals, processes, equipment, goods,
or materials of any kind.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance from the average finished
grade at the front building line to the highest point of the coping of a
flat roof, or to the deckline of the highest point of coping or parapet of
a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip, shed and gambrel roofs. When the highest wall of a building with
a shed roof is within 35 feet of a street, the height of such building shall be
measured to the highest point of the coping or parapet.
BUILDING, MAIN — The principal building or one of the principal buildings
on a lot, or the building or one of the principal buildings housing the
principal use on the lot.
CAMOUFLAGE — A means of concealing a building or other man-made
structure which creates the effect that the camouflaged object is part of the
natural surroundings.
CAMOUFLAGING — The construction of facilities to house or support
telecommunication towers or antennas so that the towers or antennas
blend readily with the landscape, neighborhood, and adjacent architectural
features. Examples of camouflaging that could be used are silo and barn,
windmill, simulated tree and flagpole.
CELL TOWER — Any type of structure or building used for signaling or for
any other form of communications.
CELLAR — A story entirely underground or partly underground, with at
least 1/2 of its height below-grade.
CHILD DAY NURSERY AND CHILD-CARE CENTER — An establishment
providing for the care, supervision, and protection of children.
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:293
CLINIC — An establishment where physicians or dentists admit patients
who are not lodged overnight for examination or treatment.
CLUB, PRIVATE — Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a
corporation, association, person or persons for a social, educational or
recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit and not primarily to render
a service that is customarily carried on as a business.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development design technique that
concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining
land to be used for recreation, common open space, and preservation of
environmentally sensitive areas.
COLLOCATED ANTENNAS — Telecommunications facilities which utilize
existing towers, buildings or other structures for placement of antenna(s)
and which do not require construction of a new tower.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — Materials, written and/or graphic, including
but not limited to maps, charts, studies, resolutions, reports, and other
descriptive materials, that identify the goals, objectives, principles,
guidelines, policies, standards, devices and instruments for the immediate
and long-range protection, enhancement, growth and development of the
Village.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use listed as such in this Zoning chapter and
which may be permitted in a specified district under certain conditions,
such conditions to be determined in each case by the terms of this Zoning
chapter after public hearing in accordance with the procedures specified by
this Zoning chapter and applicable state law.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — The grant of a property right stipulating
that the described land will remain in its natural state and precluding future
or additional development.
CONVALESCENT HOME — See "nursing home."
CONVENIENCE STORE — Any retail establishment offering for sale
prepackaged food products, household items, newspapers and magazines
and sandwiches and other freshly prepared foods, such as salads, pizza and
hot dogs, for off-site consumption.
DEBRIS — Includes all materials resulting from the construction,
excavation, renovation, equipping, remodeling, repair or demolition of
structures, property or roads as well as materials consisting of vegetation
resulting from land clearing and grubbing, utility line maintenance and
seasonal and storm-related cleanup. Such materials include but are not
limited to bricks, concrete and other masonry material, soil, rock, wood,
wall coverings, plaster, drywall, plumbing fixtures, nonasbestos insulation,
roofing shingles, asphalt pavement, glass, window frames, electrical wiring,
and components, plastics, carpeting, foam padding, linoleum, metals, or
any combination thereof which is incidental to construction, excavation,
renovation, equipping, remodeling, repair or demolition.
DISH ANTENNA, LARGE — A dish antenna larger than two feet in diameter.
§ 260-7 WALTON CODE § 260-7
1:294
DISH ANTENNA, SMALL — A dish antenna with a diameter of two feet or
less.
DOMESTICATED PETS — Any dog, cat ferret or other small animal or
fish customarily kept in or about the home or place of residence which is
kept according to the applicable state and local laws regarding the keeping
thereof.
DRIVE-IN — A term used to describe an establishment designed or operated
to serve a patron while seated in an automobile parked in an off-street
parking space or service facility.[Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
DWELLING — A building containing one or more rooms with provision
for living, cooking, and sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for the
permanent occupancy of one family and used exclusively therefor, but not
including trailers, mobile homes, hotels, motels, motor lodges,
boardinghouses and lodging houses, tourist courts or tourist houses.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms designed, occupied or
intended to be occupied as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping,
and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use
by a single family or other group of persons living together as a household
or by a person living alone.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by three or more families living independently of each other and
having separate housekeeping facilities.
DWELLING, SEASONAL — A dwelling used as a secondary place of
residence for seasonal vacations and/or recreational purposes and not as
a principal residence of the owner or occupant thereof. This definition
includes, but is not limited to, hunting cabins, summer cottages and cabins.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by one family and equipped with housekeeping facilities.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by two families living independently of each other and having
separate housekeeping facilities.
EASEMENT — The right granted by a private landowner to another private
landowner, government agency, or public utility company for a specific
purpose.
EXPOSITION CENTER — A large building or facility used for public events,
trade shows, banquets, meetings, sporting events and conventions.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling as a single
housekeeping unit with single culinary facilities.
FARMERS MARKET — Open-air or partially enclosed seasonal market in
which locally produced commodities are sold to the public.
FILLING STATION — See "automobile service station."
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:295
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS — Establishments including but not limited
to banks, savings and loans, credit unions, credit agencies, investment
companies, brokers and dealers of securities and commodities and security
and commodity exchanges.
FLOODPLAIN — Area adjacent to streams, rivers, watercourses and other
bodies of water that is subject to periodic flooding and has an elevation at
or below the one-hundred-year flood frequency.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — Determined by dividing the gross floor area
of all buildings on a lot by the area of that lot.
FRONTAGE —
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A garage used for storage purposes only and having
a capacity of not more than four automobiles and a floor area of not more
than 900 square feet or not more than two automobiles per family housed
in the building to which the garage is accessory, whichever is greater.
GARBAGE — Includes all putrescent animal and vegetable waste resulting
from growing, processing, marketing and preparation of food items,
including the container in which packaged.
GOLF COURSE — A tract of land laid out for at least nine holes for playing
the game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards and
that may include a clubhouse and shelter.
GOVERNMENT AGENCY — Any department, commission, independent
agency, or instrumentality of the United States or of a state, county,
incorporated or unincorporated municipality, township, authority, district,
or other governmental unit.
GRADE — Grade elevation shall be determined by averaging the elevations
of the finished ground at all the corners and/or other principal points in the
perimeter wall of the building.
GREENHOUSE — A building whose roof and sides are largely made of glass
or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature
and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-ofseason
plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment.
GROUP HOME — A nonprofit or for-profit boarding home for the sheltered
care of persons with special needs which, in addition to providing food
and shelter, may also provide some combination of personal care, social or
counseling services, and transportation.
STREET FRONTAGE — All of the property on one side of a street
between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), measured
along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended, then all of the
property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the
dead end of the street.
A.
LOT FRONTAGE — The distance for which the front boundary line of
the lot and the street line are coincident.
B.
§ 260-7 WALTON CODE § 260-7
1:296
GUESTHOUSE — Living quarters within a detached accessory building
located on the same premises with the main building for use by temporary
guests of the occupants of the premises, such quarters having no kitchen
facilities or separate utility meters and not rented or otherwise used as a
separate dwelling.
HELIPORT/HELIPAD — An area of land, water or structure used or intended
to be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters.
HOME OCCUPATION —
HOME OCCUPATION, MAJOR — A home occupation as defined in this
chapter that meets all the criteria as listed in Article IX, § 260-27 of this
Zoning chapter.
HOME OCCUPATION, MINOR — A home occupation as defined in this
chapter that meets all of the criteria as listed in Article IX, § 260-27 of this
Zoning chapter.
Any occupation, profession, enterprise or activity conducted solely by
one or more members of a family on the premises which is incidental
and secondary to the use of the premises for dwelling, provided that:
Not more than the equivalent area of 1/4 of one floor shall be used
for such purpose.
(1)
Such occupation shall not require external or internal alterations
or the use of machinery or equipment not customary for purely
domestic household purposes.
(2)
No commodity is stored or sold, except such as are made on the
premises.
(3)
There shall be no group instruction, assembly or activity or no
display that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling. When
within the above requirement, a home occupation includes but is
not limited to the following:
(a) Art studio.
(b) Dressmaking.
(c) Professional office of a physician or dentist.
Teaching, with musical instruction, limited to one or two pupils
at a time.
(d)
(4)
A.
However, a home occupation shall not be interpreted to include the
conduct of bed-and-breakfasts, breakfasts, barbershops, nursing
homes, convalescent homes, rest homes, restaurants, tearooms, tourist
homes, massage parlors or similar establishments offering services to
the public.
B.
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:297
HOSPITAL — A building, or group of buildings, having room facilities for
overnight patients, used for providing services for the in-patient medical
or surgical care of sick or injured humans and which may include related
facilities, central service facilities and staff offices; provided, however, that
such related facility must be incidental and subordinate to the main use and
must be an integral part of the hospital operations.
HOSPITAL, ANIMAL — A place where animals are given medical care and
the Boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the
hospital use.
HOTEL — A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are provided
for more than 20 persons, primarily transient, and offered to the public for
compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is
made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at
all hours.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building or structure, or group of buildings
or structures, that by design and construction is primarily intended for
conducting organized religious services and associated accessory uses.
JUNK — Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or
not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage,
storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition, including but not
limited to vehicles, tires, vehicle parts, equipment, paper, rags, metal, glass,
building materials, household appliances, brush, wood and lumber.
JUNKYARD — Any area, lot, land, parcel, building or structure or part
thereof used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale or
abandonment of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or other scrap or discarded
goods, materials, machinery or two or more unregistered, inoperable motor
vehicles or other type of junk.
LANDSCAPE SCREEN — A completely planted visual barrier composed of
evergreen plants and trees arranged to form both a low-level and a highlevel
screen. The high-level screen shall consist of evergreen trees planted
at an initial height of not less than five feet and planted at intervals of not
more than two feet.
LAUNDROMAT — A building, or part thereof, where clothes or other
household articles are washed in selfservice machines with a capacity for
washing not exceeding 20 pounds dry weight and where such washed
clothes and articles may also be dried or ironed and no delivery service is
provided in connection therewith.
LAUNDRY — A building, or part thereof, other than a laundromat, where
clothes and other articles are washed, dried and ironed.
LINE OF SIGHT — An area within the direct line between the land-based
antenna and the orbiting satellites; also known as the "reception window."
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a main building or
group of main buildings and accessory buildings, together with such yards,
open spaces, lot widths and lot areas as are required by this Zoning chapter,
§ 260-7 WALTON CODE § 260-7
1:298
and having frontage upon a street, either shown on a plat of record or
considered as a unit of property and described by metes and bounds.
LOT CORNER — A lot bordering on two streets that intersect at an angle
not greater than 135°.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line separating the lot from a street on which it
fronts. On a corner lot, the front shall be deemed to be along the shorter
dimension of the lot, and where the dimensions are equal, the front shall be
on that street on which a predominance of the other lots in the block front.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot shown upon a plan of subdivision or upon a plat
attached or referred to in a deed described by metes and bounds in a deed
recorded in the County Clerk's office.
LOT WIDTH — The shortest horizontal distance between the points where
the minimum required front yard line intersects the side lot lines measured
along the building setback line.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The average horizontal distance between the front and
the rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot, other than a corner lot, which has
frontage on two streets.
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot other than a corner lot.
MANUFACTURED HOME, RESIDENTIAL DESIGNED — A single-family
dwelling built according to the federal Manufactured Home Construction
and Safety Standards (24 CFR 3280) HUD Code, which meets or exceeds
the following criteria:
MANUFACTURED HOME, STANDARD DESIGNED — A single-family
dwelling built according to the federal Manufactured Home Construction
and Safety Standards (24 CFR 3280) HUD Code, which does not meet the
criteria of a residential designed manufactured home.
The manufactured home has a minimum width of over 20 feet (multi
section).
A.
The manufactured home has a minimum of 900 square feet of enclosed
living area.
B.
The pitch of the roof has a minimum nominal 3/12 pitch and has a type
of shingle commonly used in standard residential construction.
C.
The exterior siding consists of vinyl or aluminum lap siding, wood,
masonite, or other materials similar to the exterior siding commonly
used in standard residential construction.
D.
E. All towing devices, wheels, axles, and hitches must be removed.
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:299
MOBILE HOME (HOUSE TRAILER) — A movable or portable dwelling over
32 feet in length and over eight feet wide, constructed to be towed on
its own chassis, connected to utilities and designed without a permanent
foundation for year-round occupancy, which can consist of one or more
components that can be retracted for towing purposes and subsequently
expanded for additional capacity or of two or more units separately towable
but designed to be joined into one integral unit.
MOBILE HOME PARK (TRAILER PARK) — A lot on which are located or
which is arranged or equipped for the accommodation of two or more
mobile homes occupied for living purposes and not accessory to a farm.
MODULAR HOME — A single-family dwelling which is constructed
according to the standards set forth in local or state building codes and may
consist of two or more sections transported to the site in a manner similar
to a manufactured home, or a series of panels or room sections transported
on a truck and erected or joined together on a site. Modular homes may or
may not have an integrated chassis.
MOTEL, MOTOR COURT, TOURIST COURT, or MOTOR LODGE — A
building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are provided and offered
to the public for compensation. As such, it is open to the public in
contradistinction to a boardinghouse or lodging house or a multiple
dwelling; same as hotel, except that the buildings are usually designed to
serve tourists traveling by automobile, ingress and egress to rooms need not
be through a lobby or office, and parking usually is adjacent to the dwelling
unit.
NONCONFORMING LOT — An otherwise legally platted lot that does not
conform to the minimum area or width requirements of this Zoning chapter
for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this
Zoning chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments to this Zoning
chapter.
NONCONFORMING USE — The otherwise legal use of a building or
structure or of a tract of land that does not conform to the use regulations
of this Zoning chapter for the district in which it is located, either at
the effective date of this Zoning chapter or as a result of subsequent
amendments to this Zoning chapter.
NURSING HOME, CONVALESCENT HOME OR REST HOME — An
establishment used as a dwelling place for the aged, infirm, chronically ill
or incurably afflicted persons, in which not less than three persons live or
are kept or provided for on the premises for compensation, excluding clinics
and hospitals and similar institutions devoted to the diagnosis, treatment or
care of the sick or injured.
NYCDEP — New York City Department of Environmental Protection.
NYCRR — New York Codes, Rules and Regulations.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
NYSDEC — New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
NYSDOH — New York State Department of Health.
§ 260-7 WALTON CODE § 260-7
1:300
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET — An all-weather surfaced area not in
a street or alley and having an area of not less than 200 square feet,
exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of
one vehicle and connected with a street or alley by a surfaced driveway
that affords ingress and egress for an automobile without requiring another
automobile to be moved.
PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES —
Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services and common
carrier exchange access services.
PLANNING BOARD — The designated body appointed by the Village Board
for the purpose of reviewing and approving applications and preparation of
a Comprehensive Plan.
PUBLIC BUILDING — A building, or part thereof, owned or leased and
occupied and used by an agency or political subdivision of the United States
of America, the state, the county or the municipality.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A closely regulated enterprise with a franchise for
providing to the public a utility service deemed necessary for public health,
safety, and welfare.
PUBLIC WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS — A water or sewer system owned
and operated by a municipality or county, or owned and operated by a
private individual or a corporation approved by the governing body and
properly chartered and certified by the appropriate state agency, and
subject to special regulations as herein set forth for the collection,
treatment, and disposal of wastes and the furnishing of potable water.
REGULATIONS — The whole body of regulations, text, charts, tables,
diagrams, maps, notations, references and symbols contained or referred to
in this chapter.
RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit intended for rental to transients on a
day-to-day or week-to-week basis but not intended for use or used as a
permanent dwelling and not including culinary facilities.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS — Any R-R, R-S, and R-M Districts as
enumerated in this chapter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PRIVATE — Generally, the right of one to pass over the
property of another through legal means, including deeds and property
conveyances.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC — A strip of land acquired by reservation,
dedication, forced dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended
to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil
or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, and other similar uses for
the interest of public health and safety.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building other than a hotel, motel or motor lodge
where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods,
lodging, meals, or lodging and meals are provided for three or more persons
but containing no more than five sleeping rooms.
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:301
RUBBISH — Includes all discarded or nonputrescent solid wastes consisting
of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, including but not limited
to paper and paper products, rags, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, cans,
yard clippings, wood, glass, metals, machinery, plastics, rubber, leather,
tires, bedding, cloth, crockery, furniture, appliances and similar items.
SEQRA — New York State Environmental Quality Review Act.
SETBACK — The required minimum horizontal distance between the lot
or property line and the nearest front, side, or rear line of the building,
including terraces or any covered projection thereof, excluding steps.
SIGN — An identification, description, illustration, or device which is affixed
to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or land
and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution
or business.
SIGN AREA — That area within a line including the outer extremities of all
letters, figures, characters and delineations or within a line including the
outer extremities of the framework or background of the sign, whichever
line includes the larger area. The support for the sign background, whether
it is columns, a pylon or a building, or part thereof, shall not be included
in the sign area. Only one side of a double-faced sign shall be included in a
computation of sign area. The area of a cylindrical sign shall be computed
by multiplying 1/2 of the circumference by the height of the sign.
SIGN, ACCESSORY — A sign relating only to uses on the premises on which
the sign is located or products sold on the premises on which the sign is
located or indicating the name or address of a building or the occupants or
management of a building on the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, BANNER — Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
mounted to a pole, building or other permanent structure either advertising
an event, sale or announcement or as a decorative display. National flags,
state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution of business
shall not be considered as banners.
SIGN, DETACHED (GROUND SIGN) — A sign not attached to or painted
on a building but which is affixed to the ground. A sign attached to a flat
surface such as a fence or wall not a part of a building shall be considered
a detached sign.
SIGN, DOUBLE-FACED — A sign with two parallel, or nearly parallel, faces,
back to back, and located not more than 24 inches from each other.
SIGN, FLASHING — An illuminated sign on which the artificial or reflected
light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all
times when in use. Any sign that revolves or moves, whether illuminated or
not, shall be considered a flashing sign.
SIGN, FLAT (WALL SIGN) — Any sign attached to, and erected parallel to
the face of, or erected or painted on the outside wall of, a building and
supported throughout its length by such wall or building and not extending
more than 18 inches from the building wall.
§ 260-7 WALTON CODE § 260-7
1:302
SIGN, GENERAL ADVERTISING — Any sign that is not an accessory sign or
that is not specifically limited to a special purpose by these regulations. A
billboard shall be considered a large general advertising sign.
SIGN, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance from the street grade or the
average lot grade at the front setback line, whichever is greater, to the
highest point of the sign.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — Any sign designed to give forth artificial light or
designed to reflect light from one or more sources of artificial light erected
for the purpose of providing light from the sign.
SIGN, INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED — A sign which does not produce
artificial light from within itself but which is opaque and back-lighted or
illuminated by spotlights or floodlights not a part of or attached to the sign
itself, or a sign of translucent nontransparent material illuminated from
within but with no exposed or exterior bulbs, tubes or other light source.
SIGN, MARQUEE — Any sign attached to or hung from a marquee. For
the purpose of the article, a "marquee" is a covered structure projecting
from and supported by the building with independent roof and drainage
provisions and which is erected over a doorway or doorways as protection
against the weather.
SIGN, NEON — A sign composed of discharge lamps which contains large
amounts of the colorless and odorless inert gaseous element known as
"neon."
SIGN, PORTABLE — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including
but not limited to signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons
used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or
painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless
said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign that is attached to and projects more than
18 inches from the face of a wall of a building. The term "projecting sign"
includes a marquee sign.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — Any sign that is used only provisionally and is not
permanently mounted.
SOLAR COLLECTOR — A device or structure designed to absorb incident
solar radiation to convert the solar radiation to thermal, chemical or
electrical energy and to transfer the converted energy to a medium passing
through or in contact with it.
SOLAR ENERGY — Radiant energy (direct, diffuse and reflected) received
from the sun.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — An arrangement or combination of
components and structures designed to provide heating, cooling, hot water
or electricity through the process of collecting, converting, storing,
protecting against unnecessary dissipation and distributing solar energy.
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:303
SOLID WASTE — Includes all putrescent and nonputrescent material and
substances discarded or rejected as having served their original intended
use or as being spent, useless, worthless or in excess to the owner at the
time of such discard or rejection, including but not limited to household and
commercial garbage, industrial waste, rubbish, debris, litter and ashes.
STABLE, PRIVATE — An accessory building, not related to the ordinary
operation of a farm, for the housing of not more than four horses or mules
owned by a person or persons living on the premises and which horses or
mules are not for hire or sale.
STABLE, PUBLIC — Any stable for the housing of horses or mules, operated
for remuneration, hire, sale or stabling, or any stable, not related to the
ordinary operation of a farm, with a capacity of more than four horses or
mules, whether or not such stable is operated for remuneration, hire, sale
or stabling.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor
above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. A
basement shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement
if its ceiling is over five feet above the level from which the height of
the building is measured or if it is used for business purposes other than
storage, or if it is used as a separate dwelling unit by other than a janitor or
other employee and his family.
STORY, HALF — A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two opposite exterior sides are not more than two
feet above the floor of such story; provided, however, that any such story
used as a separate dwelling unit, by other than a janitor or other employee
and his family, shall be counted as a full story.
STREET (ROAD) — A public or private thoroughfare that affords the
principal means of access to abutting properties, whether designated as a
freeway, expressway, highway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle,
or however otherwise designated.
STREET CENTER LINE — The center line of a street as shown in any of the
official records of the county or of the municipality or as established by the
Municipal Engineer or by the State Department of Highways. If no center
line has been established, the center line of the street shall be a line lying
midway between the side lines of the right-of-way thereof.
STREET LINE — The line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a
contiguous street.
SWIMMING POOL — Any portable pool or permanent structure containing
a body of water 18 inches or more in depth and 250 square feet or more of
water surface area, intended for recreational purposes, including a wading
pool, but not including an ornamental reflecting pool or fish pond or other
type of pool, located and designed so as not to create a hazard or be used
for swimming or wading.
§ 260-7 WALTON CODE § 260-7
1:304
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Accessory
buildings and structures, including base stations, designed and used to
shelter telecommunications equipment and/or to support personal wireless
telecommunications facilities and located on the same lot as a
telecommunications facility or tower.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — An antenna designed to transmit
or receive communications as authorized by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), including but not limited to radio, television, cellular,
paging, PCS and microwave communications. Design examples of a
telecommunications antenna are described as follows: a) whip; b) panel;
and c) dish. The term "telecommunications antenna" shall not include an
amateur radio operator's equipment as licensed by the FCC or private,
residential reception equipment.
TOURIST HOME — A dwelling with a family in residence containing more
than two and fewer than 10 rooms rented for lodging.
TOWNHOUSE — A single-family dwelling designed to be sold as a unit but
forming one of a group or series of three or more attached single-family
dwellings separated from one another by walls without doors, windows or
other provisions for human passage or visibility through such walls from
basement to roof and having roofs that may extend from one of the dwelling
units to another.
TRAILER (CAMPER) — A structure that is:
USABLE SATELLITE SIGNAL — A satellite signal that, when viewed on
a conventional television set, is at least equal in picture quality to that
received from local commercial television stations or by way of cable
television.
VEHICLE, CLASSIC/ANTIQUE — A vehicle that is more than 25 years old
and not abandoned.
VEHICLE, MOTOR — A self-propelled device used for transportation of
people or goods over land surfaces and licensed as a motor vehicle.
YARD — An open space, other than a court, on a lot and unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this
Zoning chapter.
YARD MEASUREMENT — In measuring a yard, the "building line" shall be
deemed to mean a line parallel to the nearest lot line drawn through the
point of a building or the point of a group of buildings nearest to such lot
line, and the measurement shall be taken at right angles from the building
line to the nearest lot line.
Intended to be transported over the streets and highways (either as a
motor vehicle or attached to or hauled by a motor vehicle); and
A.
Designed for temporary use as a sleeping quarters but does not satisfy
one or more of the definition criteria of a manufactured or mobile home
as defined in this chapter.
B.
§ 260-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:305
YARD, FRONT — A yard lying between the front lot line and the nearest part
of the building or use not hereinafter excepted and extending across the full
width of the lot. The "front yard depth" shall mean the distance, measured
horizontally, between any part of the building or use not specifically
excepted and the front lot line.
YARD, REAR — A yard lying between the rear lot line and the nearest part
of the building not hereinafter excepted and extending across the full width
of the lot. The "rear yard" shall mean the distance, measured horizontally,
between any part of the building not specifically excepted and the rear lot
line.
YARD, SIDE — A yard lying between a side lot line and the nearest part
of the building or use not hereinafter excepted and extending from the
front yard to the rear yard. "Side yard width" shall mean the shortest
distance, measured horizontally, between any part of the building or use not
specifically excepted and the nearest side lot line.
ZONING — The delineation of districts and the establishment of regulations
governing the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS (ZBA) — An officially constituted body whose
principal duties are to hear appeals and, where appropriate, grant variances
for the strict application of the Zoning chapter. The ZBA is also the
responsible body for interpreting the meaning of the Zoning chapter and
the Zoning Map.
ZONING MAP — The map or maps that are a part of the Zoning chapter and
delineate the boundaries of zone districts.
§ 260-7 WALTON CODE § 260-7
1:306
ARTICLE III
Districts and Maps
§ 260-8. Enumeration of districts. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Village of Walton is hereby divided into six classes of districts, which
shall be known as:
§ 260-9. Boundaries; Zoning Map.
The location and boundaries of the previously mentioned districts are
hereby established by the designations, location and boundaries thereof as
set forth and indicated on the map entitled "Zoning Map for the Village of
Walton, New York."22 Where uncertainty exists as to any of said boundaries
as shown on said Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Residential Recreational (R-R).
B. Single-Family Residential (R-S).
C. Multiple-Family Residential (R-M).
D. General Business (B-G).
E. Mixed Use District (M-U).
F. General Industry (I-G).
A. Boundary on street, railroad right-of-way, stream, lot or property line.
Where the designation on said map indicates a district boundary line
approximately on a street, railroad right-of-way, stream, lot, or property
line on plots of record at the time of passage of this Zoning chapter
shall be construed to be the boundary of the district.
B. Any aggrieved person(s) may request an interpretation of the Zoning
Map and boundaries from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
22.Editor's Note: Said Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer and
may be examined there during regular office hours.
§ 260-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:307

ARTICLE IV
District Regulations
§ 260-10. R-R Residential Recreational District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for the full range of
recreational activities and to protect recreational land, as one of the
municipality's most valuable natural resources, from the depreciating
effect of objectionable, hazardous and unsightly uses. The district is
also intended for protection of watersheds, water resources, wooded
areas and aesthetic resources and at the same time to provide for
spacious residential development for those who choose this
environment and to prevent untimely scattering of more dense urban
uses, which should be confined to areas planned for efficient extension
of public services.
B. Permitted uses. A building or land shall be used only for the following
purposes:
(1) Detached single-family dwellings, including detached
manufactured homes and modular homes, provided that
manufactured and modular homes shall be anchored to a
permanent foundation and shall be subject to the same restrictions
required for detached single-family dwellings that are not of
manufactured or modular construction.
(2) Detached mobile homes on individual lots, provided that the
requirements of Article X, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks,
of this chapter are complied with.
(3) Churches, rectories, parish houses, convents and monasteries,
temples, synagogues and any house of worship of a group that has
formally received tax-exempt status as a religious organization
from the United States Internal Revenue Service.
(4) Golf courses and accessory uses, including but not limited to a
building for a golf shop, locker room and snack bar, provided that
no such building is located closer than 100 feet to adjoining
property lines. A permitted golf course shall not be lighted for night
play and does not include miniature golf courses, putting greens,
driving ranges and similar activities operated as a separate
business.
(5) A greenhouse, private and commercial.
(6) A hospital or clinic for small animals (dogs, cats, birds, and the
like), provided that such hospital or clinic and any treatment
rooms, cages, pens and kennels be maintained within a completely
enclosed, soundproof building and that such hospital or clinic be
operated in such a way as to produce no objectionable odors
outside its walls; also provided that any buildings, structures, pens
§ 260-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-10
1:309
or open kennels and runs shall be located at least 200 feet from any
lot line.
(7) Military bases and appurtenances and parks operated by the
United States government or agencies of the State of New York or
of Delaware County.
(8) Public and private forests, wildlife reservations, New York State or
New York City land conservations, agricultural easements or other
similar land conservation projects.
(9) Recreational uses or facilities, commercially operated or for private
membership, such as game courts, swimming pools, tennis clubs,
archery ranges, fishing or boating lakes, camping areas, picnic
grounds, dude ranches or similar activities, and accessory
facilities, including the sale of food, beverages, bait, incidentals,
supplies and equipment, provided that no such use, structure or
accessory use is located closer than 100 feet to any adjoining
property lines.
(10) A stable, private, for the keeping of horses, ponies or other
livestock for personal enjoyment and not as a business, provided
that any building for the keeping of animals shall be located at least
100 feet from any side or rear lot lines and that there shall be
housed or kept on the premises no more than one horse, pony or
livestock for each acre of land.
C. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows:
(1) Garage, private.
(2) Garden house, toolhouse, playhouse or greenhouse, incidental to
residential use.
(3) Guesthouses.
(4) Minor home occupations in a main building.
(5) Radio or television transmission or receiving tower not more than
50 feet in height.
(6) Storage of a boat trailer or camp trailer or a boat, but not in the
front yard.
(7) Swimming pool and game courts, lighted or unlighted, for use of
occupants or their guests.
(8) Accessory off-street parking and loading spaces, including parking
of not more than two school buses.
(9) Solar energy systems and equipment.
D. Permitted conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as
conditional uses if approved by the Village Board in accordance with
§ 260-10 WALTON CODE § 260-10
1:310
the procedures, guidelines and standards of Article XIV, Site Plan
Review, and any requirements specified in this Zoning chapter:
(1) Cemetery.
(a) May include a crematorium, if such building is located at least
200 feet from the boundaries of the cemetery.
(b) The minimum area of the cemetery shall be 10 acres. No
minimum area is required for cemeteries associated with a
church or limited to use by a family.
(c) Location of the cemetery and crematorium is approved by the
Village Planning Board and the Public Health Officer.
(2) Cemetery for pets, provided that the lot area of the proposed use is
approved by the Village Planning Board and Public Health Officer.
(3) Excavation or filling; borrow pits; extraction, processing and
removal of sand, gravel or stone; and other major excavations other
than for construction of swimming pools and foundations for
buildings and other than those approved in connection with a
street, subdivision or planned residential development, provided
that:
(a) No material may be brought from off the site for processing,
mixing or similar purposes.
(b) The excavating, extraction or filling operation shall be
controlled to offer reasonable protection to surrounding
properties and the neighborhood, particularly in regards to the
use of any residential streets for access to the site.
(c) All mining operations impacting public highways may be
required to post a bond in an amount to be set by the Village
Board for damages the streets may incur from additional heavy
traffic.
(d) The location of the excavation, extraction or filling with respect
to property lines, the depth of excavation or filling and relation
to the water table or flood criteria, and the slope of the sides of
the excavation shall be controlled to prevent a continuing,
unsightly, hazardous or wasteful condition of the land.
(e) A plan shall be approved to ensure the restoration of the land
or water area to a safe and usable condition upon termination
of the excavation work by regrading, draining, refilling or other
treatment suitable to the particular situation. The reclamation
plan shall be developed in accordance with the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation criteria.
§ 260-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-10
1:311
(f) All mining applications shall comply with the criteria
established by 6 NYCRR Part 617. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(4) Circus or carnival grounds, fairgrounds, amusement park, zoo or
midway, permanent or temporary for a specified time period,
provided that:
(a) The land area is of sufficient size, shape and topography to
accommodate the facilities proposed without serious
detrimental effect on the natural landscape or on the existing
or future use of adjacent properties.
(b) The external and internal access patterns and circulation and
parking areas are adequate for the uses proposed.
(c) Structures, access points, drives, parking and use areas, signs
or lights are designed and located to minimize the adverse
effect on surrounding residential development, existing or
future, and that any accessory sales uses are clearly incidental
to operation of the recreation facility.
(5) Exposition center.
(6) Public or governmental buildings and uses, including schools, fire
stations (volunteer or otherwise), parks, parkways and
playgrounds.
(7) Public utilities or public service uses, buildings, generating or
treatment plants, pumping or regulator stations, substations or
transmission lines.
(8) Fraternal, society or club buildings, provided that they are not used
chiefly for a service customarily carried on as a gainful business,
and further provided that the applicant files with the Village Board
of Trustees the written consents, duly acknowledged, of the owners
of at least 75% of all land, other than public streets, within the
Village which lies outside of and within 600 feet of each boundary
line of the lot or lots to be used for such a building.
(9) Major home occupations.
(10) Mobile home parks in accordance with Article XIV of this chapter.
(11) Animal kennels, commercial, providing proof of license and rabies
vaccinations for each animal and provided that any building for the
keeping of animals shall be located at least 50 feet from any
property lines and that no outside runs, tie-outs or exercise arenas
are located within 100 feet of any property line.
(12) Airports, airfields, heliports, helipads and airstrips.
(13) Sand and gravel mines.
§ 260-10 WALTON CODE § 260-10
1:312
(14) Animal kennels, private, provided that any open pens, runs, cages
or kennels shall be located at least 200 feet from any lot lines.
(15) Stable, commercial, provided that any buildings for the keeping of
animals shall be located at least 200 feet from any side or rear lot
lines and that there be housed on the premises no more than one
horse or pony for each acre of land.
E. Prohibited uses. In the R-R District, the following buildings and uses are
strictly prohibited:
(1) Any junk, junkyard or automobile graveyard.
(2) Scientific research labs.
(3) Industrial uses, including light industry.
(4) Trucking facilities.
(5) Any hazardous use as defined in the General Industry (I-G) District.
(6) Rental storage units for domestic use and/or pod units.
(7) Keeping animals or fowl. Keeping animals or fowl is prohibited
unless otherwise permitted:
(a) No person shall breed, raise, harbor or maintain any bees,
poultry, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese or any other fowl, any
swine, pigs, horses, cows, mules or goats or any other animals
or reptiles except domestic pets within the Village unless
specifically authorized in any other provision of the Code of the
Village of Walton.
(b) Further prohibited will be any animal that is vicious,
dangerous, obnoxious, objectionable or offensive or that has, in
the absence of intentional provocation, repeatedly chased,
menaced, attacked or inflicted bodily injury to a person or
domestic animal, excluding birds, rodents and reptiles.
F. Lot coverage. Lot coverage cannot exceed 75% of the total lot size. The
floor area ratio (FAR) is used to determine lot coverage requirements.
G. Lot size requirements. Lot size requirements are as follows:
Minimum
Type
Lot Width
(feet)
Lot Depth
(feet)
Single-family dwelling1 100 125
Church, temple, synagogue or other
house of worship
200 200
Animal hospital, large animals 300 300
§ 260-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-10
1:313
Minimum
Type
Lot Width
(feet)
Lot Depth
(feet)
Animal hospital, small animals, open
pens or kennels
300 300
Extraction of sand, gravel or stone 300 300
NOTES:
Lot width is measured at the building line.
The minimum street frontage is 40 feet.
1 In subdivision of five or more dwellings, the minimum area of each
lot may be reduced to as little as 16,000 square feet, so long as
common or public space is provided in an amount sufficient to
maintain an average of at least 25,000 square feet per dwelling,
and further provided that the Planning Board has indicated in
writing that it is satisfied that adequate provision for the
permanent maintenance and upkeep of the open space has been
made.
H. Yard requirements. Yard requirements are as follows:
Type
Front Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
Aggregate
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Single-family
dwelling*
Street 50 feet
or greater in
width
30 20 50 40
Other
structures
The same or as required in the district regulations
NOTES:
If the street is less than 50 feet in width, the front yard shall be at least
55 feet measured from the center line.
See Article V, Supplementary Regulations, for other yard
requirements.
I. Height requirements. Height requirements are as follows:
§ 260-10 WALTON CODE § 260-10
1:314
§ 260-11. R-S Single-Family Residential District.
Type Maximum Height
Single-family dwellings and all
other structures not specifically
exempted in Article V, § 260-16B
2 stories, but not to exceed 25
feet
J. Off-street parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading requirements are contained in Article VI.
K. Sign regulations. Sign regulations are contained in Article VII.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for low-density singlefamily
residential development on smaller lots where water and sewer
facilities generally are provided, or will be provided in the near future,
together with such religious institutions, recreational facilities and
accessory uses as may be necessary or are normally compatible with
residential surroundings.
B. Permitted uses. A building or land shall be used only for the following
purposes:
(1) Detached single-family dwellings, including detached modular
homes, but not mobile homes or mobile home parks. Modular
homes shall be anchored to a permanent foundation and shall be
subject to the same restrictions required for detached single-family
dwellings that are not of modular construction.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Churches, rectories, parish houses, convents and monasteries,
temples, synagogues and other houses of worship.
(4) Facilities and structures necessary for rendering public utility
service, including poles, wires, transformers, telephone, booths
and the like for normal electrical power distribution or
communications service, and pipelines or conduits for electrical,
gas, sewer or water service, but not including buildings, treatment
plants, pumping or regulator stations, substations and power
transmission lines which are permitted as conditional uses.
(5) Public and private parks, playgrounds, forests, wildlife
reservations, New York State or New York City land conservations,
agricultural easements or other similar land conservation projects.
(6) Railroad right-of-way, including a strip of land with tracks and
auxiliary facilities for track operations, but not including passenger
stations, freight terminals, switching and classification yards,
repair shops, roundhouses, power houses, interlocking towers, and
fueling, sanding and watering stations.
§ 260-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-11
1:315
(7) Group homes, provided that they do not exceed the thresholds for
more than one family or a single, independent household facility.
C. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows:
(1) Domestic storage in a main building or in an accessory building.
(2) Garage, private.
(3) Garden house, toolhouse, playhouse or greenhouse incidental to
residential use.
(4) Guesthouses.
(5) Minor home occupations in a main building and in compliance with
the requirements of Article IX of this chapter.
(6) Storage of a boat trailer or camp trailer or a boat, but not in a front
yard.
(7) Swimming pool and game courts, lighted or unlighted, for use of
occupants or their guests.
(8) Temporary buildings, the uses of which are incidental to
construction or sale or rental operations during development being
conducted on the same or adjoining tract or subdivision and which
shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of such
construction or the expiration of a period of two years from the
time of erection of such temporary buildings, whichever is sooner.
(9) Solar energy systems and equipment.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses if approved by the Village Board in accordance with the
procedures, guidelines and standards of Article XIV, Site Plan Review,
and any requirements specified in this Zoning chapter:
(1) Hospitals and sanitariums, but not animal hospitals.
(2) Animal kennels, private, providing proof of license and rabies
vaccinations for each dog and provided that any building for the
keeping of dogs shall be located at least 50 feet from any property
lines and that no outside runs, tie-outs or exercise arenas are
located within 50 feet of any property line.
(3) Institutions, educational or philanthropic buildings or sites,
including museums, art galleries and libraries.
(4) A private garage with a floor area of more than 900 square feet, but
not more than 2,000 square feet, and capable of housing up to four
automobiles.
(5) Commercial greenhouses, wholesale or retail.
(6) Convalescent homes, nursing homes or homes for the aged.
§ 260-11 WALTON CODE § 260-11
1:316
(7) Adult day-care centers, child day nurseries or childcare centers,
including but not limited to babysitting facilities.
(8) Group homes exceeding the thresholds for a single-family
residence.
(9) Public or governmental buildings and uses, including schools, fire
stations (volunteer or otherwise), parks, parkways, playgrounds
and public boat landings, except those which have been approved
as a part of a subdivision plan.
(10) Public utilities or public service uses, buildings, generating or
treatment plants, pumping or regulator stations, substations and
transmission lines.
(11) Recreation facility, privately or commercially operated, such as
fishing or boating lakes, camping areas, picnic grounds, dude
ranches or similar activities, and accessory facilities, including the
sale of food, beverages, bait, supplies and equipment.
(12) Swimming or tennis club, private, nonprofit, or commercially
operated.
(13)Radio or television transmission or receiving tower not more than
50 feet in height, provided that measures are established to
prevent accidents and the tower will not be used as part of a
business activity.
(14) Fraternal, society or club buildings, provided that they are not used
chiefly for a service customarily carried on as a gainful business,
and further provided that the applicant files with the Village Board
of Trustees the written consents, duly acknowledged, of the owners
of at least 75% of all land, other than public streets, within the
Village which lies outside of and within 200 feet of each boundary
line of the lot or lots to be used for such a building.
(15) Conversion of a single-family dwelling to two-or-more-family
dwelling, provided that:
(a) The minimum floor area for room sizes meet the current NYS
Uniform Building Code Minimum Property Standards for
multifamily housing for structures containing more than two
dwelling units. [Amended 11-5-2007 by L.L. No. 7-2007]
(b) A dwelling unit complies with the NYS Uniform Building Code
definition: "A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation."
[Amended 11-5-2007 by L.L. No. 7-2007]
(c) All reconstruction complies with the New York State accepted
Building Code.
§ 260-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-11
1:317
(d) All other regulations concerning off-street parking indicated in
this Zoning chapter shall be observed.
(e) The design for the proposed conversion shall preserve the
character of a single-family house (e.g., common entranceway
to the building).
(f) There is compliance with all other regulations and codes of the
Village of Walton.
(16) Townhouse and/or garden apartments, provided that:
(a) All such units meet the current NYS Uniform Building Code
minimum property standards for multifamily housing for
structures containing more than two units. [Amended
11-5-2007 by L.L. No. 7-2007]
(b) All other regulations concerning off-street parking indicated in
this Zoning chapter shall be observed.
(c) Density of such housing shall not exceed 14 units per acre.
(d) Lot size shall be a minimum of one acre.
(e) There is compliance with Article XIV, Site Plan Review, of this
Zoning chapter.
(f) There is compliance with all other regulations and codes of the
Village of Walton.
E. Prohibited uses. In the R-S District, the following buildings and uses are
strictly prohibited:
(1) Any junk, junkyard or automobile graveyard.
(2) Scientific research labs.
(3) Industrial uses, including light industry.
(4) Trucking facilities.
(5) Any hazardous use as defined in the General Industry (I-G) District.
(6) Rental storage units for domestic use and/or pod units.
(7) Keeping animals or fowl. Keeping animals or fowl is prohibited
unless otherwise permitted.
(a) No person shall breed, raise, harbor or maintain any bees,
poultry, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese or any other fowl, any
swine, pigs, horses, cows, mules or goats or any other animals
or reptiles except domestic pets within the Village unless
specifically authorized in any other provision of the Code of the
Village of Walton.
§ 260-11 WALTON CODE § 260-11
1:318
(b) Further prohibited will be any animal that is vicious,
dangerous, obnoxious, objectionable or offensive or that has, in
the absence of intentional provocation, repeatedly chased,
menaced, attacked or inflicted bodily injury to a person or
domestic animal, excluding birds, rodents and reptiles.
F. Lot size requirements. Lot size requirements are as follows (NOTE: If
the minimum lot width cannot be met, then all other minimum lot
setbacks must be met for possible project approval in this district.):
Minimum in Feet
Type Lot Width Lot Depth
Single-or two-family dwelling
With public water and public
sewerage
70 100
With public water but individual
sewerage
90 100
With private individual water system
and individual sewerage
100 100
Church, temple, synagogue or other
house of worship
200 200
NOTES:
Lot width is measured at the building line.
The minimum street frontage is 40 feet.
Averaging lot area for single-or two-family dwellings is permitted only
in subdivision of two or more lots.
G. Yard requirements. Yard requirements are as follows:
Minimum
Type
Front Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
Aggregate
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Single- or twofamily
dwelling
Street 50 feet
or greater in
width
25 10 20 25
Other
structures
The same or as required in the district regulations
§ 260-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-11
1:319
§ 260-12. R-M Multiple-Family Residential District.
NOTES:
If the street is less than 50 feet in width, the front yard shall be at least
50 feet measured from the center line.
See Article V, Supplementary Regulations, for additional yard
requirements.
H. Height requirements. Height requirements are as follows:
Type Maximum Height
Single-family dwellings and all other
structures not specifically exempted
in Article V, § 260-16B
2 1/2 stories, but not to exceed
35 feet
I. Off-street parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading requirements are contained in Article VI of this Zoning chapter.
J. Sign regulations. Sign regulations are contained in Article VII of this
Zoning chapter.
K. Special regulations for two-family dwellings. The dwelling units and
individual lots of a two-family dwelling may be sold separately if
separate utilities systems are provided for each building and all other
Village regulatory provisions are met.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to encourage variety in housing
types and provide for residential densities as might be appropriate for
relatively spacious garden apartments or townhouse developments in
areas approximately located for such use, which areas are served by
sanitary sewers and public water systems and which are well located
with respect to major thoroughfares, shopping facilities, and centers of
employment. Population density and height of buildings are low enough
to be generally compatible with single-family residential development
in the same general neighborhood.
B. Permitted uses. A building or land shall be used only for the following
purposes:
(1) Any use permitted in the R-S Single-Family Residential District.
(2) Townhouses or garden apartments. (See Subsection K below.)
(3) Multiple-family housing.
(4) Apartment buildings/houses/complexes.
C. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows:
(1) Any accessory use permitted in the R-S Single-Family Residential
District.
§ 260-11 WALTON CODE § 260-12
1:320
(2) An office located in a main building for administration of a multiplefamily
development containing 10 or more dwelling units.
(3) A laundry room for use of occupants of a multiple-family dwelling
development.
(4) Coin-operated vending machines for candy, tobacco, ice, soft drinks
and sundries, inside a building and for the use of occupants of a
multiple-family dwelling development.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses if approved by the Village Board in accordance with the
procedures, guidelines and standards of Article XIV, Site Plan Review,
and any requirements specified in this Zoning chapter:
(1) Business or professional office buildings.
(2) Clinic or medical office buildings.
(3) Minor home occupations, provided that they comply with the rules
established in Article IX, Home Occupations, of this chapter and
the Village of Walton Planning Board, in accordance with Article
XIV, Site Plan Review, of this chapter, approves them.
(4) Hospitals and sanitariums, excluding animal hospitals.
(5) Private garages as part of a multiple-family dwelling, provided that
the garage is attached to the dwelling or provides space for no
more than two vehicles per dwelling and is less than 500 square
feet in size per unit.
(6) Convalescent homes, nursing homes or homes for the aged.
(7) Adult day-care centers, child day nurseries or childcare centers,
including but not limited to commercial babysitting facilities.
(8) Institutions, educational or philanthropic buildings or sites,
including museums, art galleries and libraries.
(9) Public or governmental buildings and uses, including schools, fire
stations (volunteer or otherwise), parks, parkways and
playgrounds.
(10) Public utilities or public service uses, buildings, generating or
treatment plants, pumping or regulator stations, substations and
transmission lines.
(11) A store for the sale of food, tobacco and sundries, not exceeding
1,000 square feet of the total floor area inside a multiple-family
dwelling and primarily for the convenience of residents of a
multiple-family development containing 100 or more dwelling
units.
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:321
(12) Swimming or tennis club, private, nonprofit, or commercially
operated.
(13) Fraternal, society or club buildings, provided that they are not used
chiefly for a service customarily carried on as a gainful business,
and further provided that the applicant files with the Village Board
of Trustees the written consents, duly acknowledged, of the owners
of at least 75% of all land, other than public streets, within the
Village which lies outside of and within 600 feet of each boundary
line of the lot or lots to be used for such a building.
E. Prohibited uses. In the R-S District, the following buildings and uses are
strictly prohibited:
(1) Any junk, junkyard or automobile graveyard.
(2) Scientific research labs.
(3) Industrial uses, including light industry.
(4) Trucking facilities.
(5) Any hazardous use as defined in the General Industry (I-G) District.
(6) Rental storage units for domestic use and/or pod units.
(7) Keeping animals or fowl. Keeping animals or fowl is prohibited
unless otherwise permitted.
(a) No person shall breed, raise, harbor or maintain any bees,
poultry, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese or any other fowl, any
swine, pigs, horses, cows, mules or goats or any other animals
or reptiles except domestic pets within the Village unless
specifically authorized in any other provision of the Code of the
Village of Walton.
(b) Further prohibited will be any animal that is vicious,
dangerous, obnoxious, objectionable or offensive or that has, in
the absence of intentional provocation, repeatedly chased,
menaced, attacked or inflicted bodily injury to a person or
domestic animal, excluding birds, rodents and reptiles.
F. Lot size requirements. Lot size requirements are as follows:
Minimum in Feet
Type Lot Width Lot Depth
Single-family two-family dwelling
With public water and public
sewerage
60 100
With public water but with individual
sewerage
100 125
§ 260-12 WALTON CODE § 260-12
1:322
Minimum in Feet
Type Lot Width Lot Depth
With individual water system and
individual sewerage
100 125
Lot width is measured at the building
line. Minimum street frontage is 40
feet.
Three-family dwelling, which must have
public water and public sewerage
70 100
Four-family dwelling or more, which
must have public water and public
sewerage, per dwelling unit
80 100
Townhouses, which must have public
water and public sewerage
18 80
Church, temple, synagogue or other
house of worship
100 100
G. Yard requirements. Yard requirements are as follows:
Minimum
Type
Front Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
Aggregate
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Single-family,
two-family and
multiple-family
dwelling
25 1-, 2-, 2 1/
2-story: 10;
3-story: 15
20 40
Other
structures
Same or as required in the district regulations
Townhouses
and garden
apartments
25 20 40 50
NOTES:
If the street is less than 50 feet in width, the front yard shall be at least
50 feet measured from the center line.
See Article V, Supplementary Regulations, for other yard
requirements.
H. Height requirements. Height requirements are as follows:
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:323
Type Maximum Height
Single-family dwellings and all
other structures not specifically
exempted in Article V, § 260-16B
3 stories, but not to exceed 40
feet
I. Off-street parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading requirements are contained in Article VI.
J. Sign regulations. Sign regulations are contained in Article VII.
K. Special regulations for townhouses.
(1) The dwelling units and individual lots of a townhouse may be sold
separately if separate utilities systems are provided and if separate
lots for all dwelling units in a building are created at the same time
and in conformance with local laws governing subdivision.
(2) The townhouse building shall comply with minimum lot
requirements contained in the district regulations of Article IV, but
each dwelling unit of a townhouse need not be located on a lot
complying with minimum lot area and lot area per family
requirements in the regulations, provided that the average for all
dwelling units in the building equals or exceeds the minimum
requirements and provided that no lot is created with a lot area less
than 2,000 square feet.
(3) Lot frontage may be waived in accordance with an approved site
plan, and lot width measured at the building line for individual
dwelling units of a townhouse may be reduced to not less than 18
feet. Lot width for end units shall be adequate to provide the
required front and side yards.
(4) For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a townhouse building
shall be considered as one building on one lot with side yards
required for end units only, in accordance with the district
regulations of Article IV. Any side yard adjacent to the line of a lot
occupied by a detached single-family dwelling or a lot in a singlefamily
residential district shall not be less than 25 feet.
(5) No detached garage or carport or other detached accessory
building shall be permitted on a lot occupied by a townhouse.
(6) Provision satisfactory to the Village Board and approved by the
municipality's Attorney shall be made to assure that nonpublic
areas for the common use and enjoyment of occupants of
townhouses, but not individual ownership by such occupants, shall
be maintained in a satisfactory manner without expense to the
general taxpayer.
§ 260-12 WALTON CODE § 260-12
1:324
§ 260-13. B-G General Business District.
(7) A site plan complying with the requirements of this article shall
accompany an application for approval of a townhouse
development.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide sufficient space in
appropriate locations for a wide variety of commercial and
miscellaneous service activities, generally serving a wide area and
located particularly along certain existing major thoroughfares where a
general mixture of commercial and service activity now exists but
which uses are not characterized by extensive warehousing, frequent
heavy trucking activity, open storage of material or the nuisance factors
of dust, odor and noise associated with manufacturing.
B. Permitted uses. A building or land shall be used only for the following
purposes:
(1) Any use permitted in the M-U Mixed Use and R-M Multiple-Family
Residential Districts, except single-family, two-family and multiplefamily
dwellings as follows. A single-family dwelling or mobile
home may be permitted in association with a permitted office,
business or commercial use in the same building or on the same
premises for use by the proprietor or an employee of said business.
A two-family or multiple-family dwelling is permitted on any floor
above the first in accordance with the minimum lot size and side
and rear yard requirements of the R-M Multiple-Family Residential
District. [Amended 5-2-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
(2) Amusement places or theaters, except open-air drive-in theaters.
Amusement places include bowling alleys, dance halls, skating
rinks, swimming pools, miniature golf, billiard or pool parlors,
indoor model-racing tracks and similar activities.
(3) An animal hospital or commercial kennel, with any open pens, runs
and cages at least 200 feet from a residential district.
(4) Automobile, truck or bus sales, service, storage or repair, but not
auto salvage or junk, and any major repair or storage of equipment
or materials or damaged vehicles shall be inside a completely
enclosed building.
(5) Bakeries occupying not more than 3,000 square feet of floor area.
(6) Banks, drive-in or otherwise, so long as at least five driveway
waiting spaces shall be provided off the street for each drive-in
teller's window.
(7) Barbershops, beauty parlors or salons.
(8) Bicycle sales, rental and repair shops.
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-13
1:325
(9) Bottling works, dyeing and cleaning works or laundry, plumbing
and heating shop, painting shop, upholstering shop not involving
furniture manufacture, tinsmithing shop, tire sales and service
(including vulcanizing and recapping, but no manufacturing),
appliance repairs, and general service and repair establishments
similar in character to those listed in this subsection, provided that
no outside storage of material is permitted, except as provided in
this section, and further provided that no use permitted is this
subsection shall occupy more than 5,000 square feet of floor area.
(10) Bus station.
(11) Car wash or automobile laundry, automatic or otherwise, providing
reservoir space for not less than 10 vehicles for each washing lane
of an employee-operated facility.
(12) Catering or delicatessen business.
(13) Clinics.
(14) Data processing center.
(15) Dry cleaning or pressing pickup stations or shops occupying not
more than 2,500 square feet of floor area and using no cleaning
fluid whose base is petroleum or one of its derivatives.
(16) Filling stations, as long as bulk storage of inflammable liquids is
underground.
(17) Flower shops and greenhouses incidental thereto.
(18) Frozen-food lockers for individual or family use.
(19) Garages, parking or storage.
(20) Hotels, motels, motor lodges or tourist homes.
(21) Lawn mower and yard and garden equipment rental, sales and
services.
(22) Lumber and building materials store, but not a lumberyard.
(23) Material storage yards, in connection with a permitted use where
storage is incidental to the approved occupancy of the building,
provided that all products and materials used or stored are
enclosed by a masonry wall, screening, fence or hedge not less than
six feet in height. Storage of all materials and equipment shall not
exceed the height of the wall. Storage of cars and trucks used in
connection with the permitted trade or business is permitted within
the walls or screen, but not including storage of heavy equipment,
such as road-building or excavating equipment.
(24) Mobile homes sales, display and storage or sales, display and
storage of travel trailers and campers, provided that all units shall
§ 260-13 WALTON CODE § 260-13
1:326
be in usable condition, none shall be placed in a front yard, the
minimum parcel area shall be 1/2 acre, the storage area shall
be separated from the display area by a continuous visual screen
with a minimum height of eight feet, such screen consisting of a
compact evergreen hedge or foliage screening or louvered fence
or wall, and the entire area shall be similarly screened from any
contiguous residential district or existing residence.
(25) Monument sales establishments with incidental processing to
order, but not including the shaping of headstones.
(26) Nurseries for growing plants, trees and shrubs.
(27) Offices, general, business or professional.
(28) Parking lots, parking spaces, parking areas, and storage lots.
(29) Pet shop or dog beauty parlor, provided that any workrooms, cages,
pens or kennels shall be maintained within a completely enclosed,
soundproof building and that such shop or parlor shall be operated
in such a way as to produce no objectionable noise or odors outside
its walls.
(30) Printing, publishing and engraving establishments.
(31) Club, lodge, social center, recreation center or meeting hall.
(32)Radio and television stations and studios or recording studios, but
no towers more than 125 feet in height.
(33) Rental of luggage trailers, but not including truck trailer bodies,
except campers and travel trailers.
(34) Restaurants, drive-in or otherwise.
(35) Schools for industrial training, trade or business.
(36) Shoe-repairing shops occupying not more than 2,500 square feet of
floor area.
(37) Shops for the sale, service or repair of home appliances, office
machines, electrical and television and radio equipment occupying
not more than 5,000 square feet of floor area.
(38) Stores or shops for the conduct of retail business, including the
sale of accessories, antiques, appliances, beverages, carpets,
clothing, drugs, fabrics, food, furniture, garden supplies, groceries,
hardware, hobby supplies, office supplies, paint, sporting goods
and stationary and similar stores and shops.
(39) Studios for artists, photographers, teachers, sculptors or
musicians.
§ 260-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-13
1:327
(40) A telephone station or booth, including drive-in or talk-from-car
stations.
(41) Undertaking businesses or establishments or funeral homes.
(42) Vending machine stations, automatic. Groups of vending machines
shall be contained in a building.
(43) Wholesale establishments with not more than 2,500 square feet of
accessory storage per establishment.
C. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows:
(1) Any accessory use permitted in the R-M Multiple-Family
Residential District.
(2) Storage of office supplies or merchandise normally carried in stock
in connection with a permitted office, business or commercial use.
(3) Solar energy systems and equipment.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses if approved by the Village Board in accordance with the
procedures, guidelines and standards of Article XIV, Site Plan Review,
and any requirements specified in this Zoning chapter:
(1) Any conditional use in the R-R Residential Recreational District.
(2) A drive-in theater, including extension into an adjoining residential
district.
(3) A wholesale establishment or warehouse with up to 15,000 square
feet of floor area.
(4) A business or commercial building greater in height than three
stories of 40 feet.
(5) Adult entertainment establishment as defined by this Zoning
chapter and in accordance with Article VIII of this Zoning chapter.
(6) Rental storage units for domestic use and/or pod units.
E. Prohibited uses. In the B-G District, the following buildings and uses
are strictly prohibited:
(1) Any junk, junkyard or automobile graveyard.
(2) Any hazardous use as defined in the General Industry (I-G) District.
(3) Keeping animals or fowl. Keeping animals or fowl is prohibited
unless otherwise permitted.
(a) No person shall breed, raise, harbor or maintain any bees,
poultry, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese or any other fowl, any
swine, pigs, horses, cows, mules or goats or any other animals
§ 260-13 WALTON CODE § 260-13
1:328
or reptiles except domestic pets within the Village unless
specifically authorized in any other provision of the Code of the
Village of Walton.
(b) Further prohibited will be any animal that is vicious,
dangerous, obnoxious, objectionable or offensive or that has, in
the absence of intentional provocation, repeatedly chased,
menaced, attacked or inflicted bodily injury to a person or
domestic animal, excluding birds, rodents and reptiles.
F. Lot size requirements. Lot size requirements are as follows:
(1) For a church, temple, synagogue or other house of worship: one
acre.
(2) For other permitted uses, there are no minimum lot size
requirements, except as may be required by the municipality's
Engineer to meet sanitary standards.
G. Yard requirements. Yard requirements are as follows:
Minimum
Type
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side
Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
Aggregate
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Street 50 feet or greater
in width
50 25 — 50
NOTES:
Side and rear yards are required only if adjacent to a residential
district or to an existing residence.
If the street is less than 50 feet in width, the front yard shall be at least
75 feet, measured from the center line.
See Article V, Supplementary Regulations, for additional yard
requirements.
H. Height requirements. Height requirements are as follows:
Type Maximum Height
Dwellings, business buildings and all
other structure not specifically
exempted in Article V, § 260-16B
3 stories, but not to exceed
40 feet
I. Off-street parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading requirements are contained in Article VI.
J. Sign regulations. Sign regulations are contained in Article VII.
§ 260-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-14
1:329
§ 260-14. M-U Mixed Use District. [Added 5-2-2016 by L.L. No.
2-2016]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to designate those areas where
predominantly residential and commercial businesses have developed
or areas that are well-suited for future residential and commercial
business development. To allow for multiple uses of larger buildings,
lots and tracts of land and protect the integrity of the area by restricting
the development of incompatible land uses as may be allowed in other
districts.
B. Permitted uses. Any building or land area shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(1) Any use permitted in the R-S, Single-Family Residential District.
(2) Hospital or clinic for small animals (dogs, cats, birds, and the like),
provided that such hospital or clinic and any treatment rooms,
cages, pens and kennels be maintained within a completely
enclosed soundproof building, and that such hospital or clinic be
operated in such a way as to produce no objectionable odors
outside its walls.
(3) Apartment buildings/houses/complexes.
(4) Townhouses and garden apartments that comply with § 260-12K of
this chapter.
(5) Major and minor home occupations in accordance with Article IX of
this chapter.
(6) Professional, business, municipal or other governmental agency
offices.
(7) Antique, gift, novelty, and souvenir shops.
(8) Hotels, motels, motor lodges or tourist homes.
(9) Bed-and-breakfasts.
(10) Banks and other financial institutions.
(11) Barber shop, beauty parlor and salons.
(12) Funeral parlors.
(13) Group homes, including boarding homes for sheltered care, senior
housing, nursing, and convalescent homes, assisted living facilities,
community residences for the developmentally disabled and
community shelters for victims of domestic violence.
(14) Adult day-care centers and child day nurseries or child-care
centers, including, but not limited to, babysitting facilities.
§ 260-14 WALTON CODE § 260-14
1:330
(15) Churches and other places of worship, including temples,
synagogues and mosques.
C. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows:
(1) Domestic storage in the main building or an accessory structure.
(2) Garage, private.
(3) Garden house, tool house, playhouse or greenhouse incidental to a
residential use.
(4) Storage of a boat trailer or camp trailer or a boat, but not in a front
yard.
(5) Swimming pool and game courts, lighted or unlighted, for use of
occupants or their guests.
(6) Temporary buildings, the uses of which are incidental to
construction or sale or rental operations during development being
conducted on the same or adjoining tract or subdivision and which
shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of such
construction, or the expiration of a period of two years from the
time of erection of such temporary buildings, whichever is sooner.
(7) Accessory apartments, including, but not limited to, apartments in
the primary residence and living quarters above garages or barns.
D. Conditional uses. In any Mixed Use District (M-U), the following
buildings and uses are permitted as conditional uses if approved by the
Village Board in accordance with the procedures, guidelines and
standards of Article XIV, Site Plan Review, and any requirements
specified in this chapter:
(1) Farmers markets.
(2) Convenience stores.
(3) Public parks or playgrounds.
(4) Club, lodge, social center, recreation center or meeting hall.
(5) Public bowling alleys, recreation halls, dance halls, skating rinks,
and any other place for public gathering and entertainment.
(6) Laundromat.
(7) Plant nurseries and greenhouses.
(8) Eating and drinking places, not including fast food restaurants.
(9) Cultural facilities, museums, botanical gardens and art galleries.
§ 260-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-14
1:331
(10) Parking lots, parking spaces, parking areas, and storage lots.
Theater, excluding open-air drive-in theaters and adult use
theaters.
(11) General retail business in existing buildings.
(12) Hospitals and sanitariums.
(13) Veterinary offices and animal hospitals.
(14) Public utilities or public service uses, buildings, generating or
treatment plants, pumping or regulator stations, substations or
transmission lines.
(15) Animal kennels, private or commercial, providing proof of license
and rabies vaccinations for each animal and providing that any
building for keeping of animals shall be located at least 50 feet
from any property lines and that no outside runs, tie-outs or
exercise arenas are located within 100 feet of any property line.
E. Prohibited uses. In any Mixed Use (M-U) District, the following
buildings and uses are strictly prohibited:
(1) Storage/warehouse and/or rental storage units for domestic use
and/or pod units.
(2) Light industry.
(3) Gas/fuel distributors.
(4) Auto repair shops.
(5) Lumber yard.
(6) Trucking facility.
(7) Scientific research lab.
(8) Sand/gravel mining.
(9) Any hazardous use as defined in the I-G District.
(10)Keeping animals or fowl.
(a) Prohibited unless otherwise permitted.
[1] No person shall breed, raise, harbor or maintain any bees,
poultry, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese or any other fowl,
any swine, pigs, horses, cows, mules, goats or any other
animals or reptiles except domestic pets within the Village
unless specifically authorized in any other provision of the
Code of the Village of Walton.
[2] Further prohibited will be any animal that is vicious,
dangerous, obnoxious, objectionable or offensive or that
§ 260-14 WALTON CODE § 260-14
1:332
§ 260-15. I-G General Industry District.
has, in the absence of intentional provocation, repeatedly
chased, menaced, attacked or inflicted bodily injury to a
person or domestic animal, excluding birds, rodents and
reptiles.
F. Lot size requirements. Lot size requirements are as follows:
(1) For a church, temple, synagogue or other house of worship: one
acre.
(2) For other permitted uses there are no minimum lot size
requirements, except as may be required by the municipality's
engineer to meet sanitary standards.
G. Yard requirements. Yard requirements are as follows:
Type
Front
Yard
Side Yard
Minimum
Side Yard
Aggregate Rear Yard
Street 50 feet or
greater in width
50 25 — 50
NOTES:
Side and rear yards required only if adjacent to a residential district or
to an existing residence.
If street is less than 50 feet in width, the front yard shall be at least 75
feet, measured from the center line.
NOTE: See Article V for other yard requirements.
H. Height requirements. Height requirements are as follows:
Type Maximum Height
Dwellings, business buildings and all
other structures not specifically
exempted in Article V, § 260-16B
3 stories but not to exceed 40
feet.
I. Off-street parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading requirements are contained in Article VI of this chapter.
J. Sign regulations. Sign regulations are contained in Article VII of this
chapter.
K. All uses in this district other than residential dwellings shall be subject
to site plan approval as defined in Article XIV of this chapter before
development.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for a wide variety of
manufacturing, fabricating, processing, wholesale distributing and
warehousing uses appropriately located for access by major
§ 260-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-15
1:333
thoroughfares but to restrict or prohibit those industries that have
characteristics likely to produce serious adverse effects within or
beyond the limits of the district. Certain potentially hazardous
industries are permitted only after public hearings and review to assure
protection of the public interest and surrounding property and persons.
Commercial uses and open storage of materials are permitted.
B. Permitted uses. A building or land shall be used only for the following
purposes, consisting of business, commercial and general industrial,
warehousing, and storage uses, including certain open or enclosed
storage of products, materials and vehicles and including the following
uses and any similar uses that are not likely to create any more
offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke, odor, glare, water
pollution or other objectionable influences than the minimum amount
normally resulting from other uses listed, and the manufacture,
compounding, processing, packaging or treatment, as specified, of the
following products or similar products. Whereas any doubt exists as to
the nature of a proposed use, products or process, the proposal shall be
considered as a potentially hazardous use and referred to the Village
Board after public hearing. (See Subsection C below.)
(1) Any agricultural, business, commercial or office uses permitted in a
B-G General Business District.
(2) Dwellings for resident watchmen and caretakers employed on the
premises.
(3) Abrasive wheels or stones, abrasive paper, cloth and related
products.
(4) Agricultural or farm implements: manufacture, sale, storage or
repair.
(5) Aluminum extrusion, rolling, fabrication and forming foundry
products (electrical only); blacksmith's shop.
(6) Animal hospital or animal pound.
(7) Automobiles, tractors, trucks, buses, truck trailers, motorcycles
and bicycles: repair, assembly, transmission repair and cleaning,
tire recapping and vulcanizing.
(8) Bolts, buttons, nuts, screws and rivets, ornamental iron products,
firearms, tools, dyes, machinery and hardware products, sheet
metal products, and vitreous enameled metal products.
(9) Boxes, containers, furniture, cabinets, baskets and other wood,
metal, fiber or plastic products of a similar nature.
(10) Building materials (cement, lime in bags or containers, sand,
gravel, stone, lumber, structural or reinforcing steel pipe and the
like): storage and sales, open or enclosed, but not manufacture or
steel fabricating.
§ 260-15 WALTON CODE § 260-15
1:334
(11) Carpets, rugs, mats, bedding, mattresses, pillows, quilts, millinery,
hosiery, clothing and fabrics; the printing and finishing of textiles
and fibers into fabric goods.
(12) The cleaning and dyeing of garments, hats, carpets and rugs.
(13) Coal and wood yards, coke storage and sales.
(14) Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant or rental of
equipment commonly used by contractors.
(15) Cosmetics and toiletries, perfumes, drugs and pharmaceutical
products (compounding only).
(16) Electrical appliances or electronic instruments and devices,
medical, optical or drafting equipment, toys, novelties, games,
stamps, musical instruments: manufacture and assembly.
(17) Excelsior, wood fiber.
(18) Exterminating establishment.
(19) Facilities and structures necessary or rendering utility service,
including poles, wires, transformers and the like for normal
electrical power distribution or communications service and
pipelines or conduits for electrical, gas, sewer or water service, but
not including buildings, treatment plants, pumping or regulator
stations, substations and power transmission lines which are
permitted as conditional uses. (See Subsection E below.)
(20) Fertilizer storage in bags or bulk storage of liquid or dry fertilizer
in tanks or in a completely enclosed building, but not manufacture
or processing.
(21) Flour: storage, blending and packaging, but not milling.
(22) Food products, candy, chewing gum, cocoa, coffee, tea and spices,
beverage blending or bottling, bakery products, dairy products,
cheese and ice cream, oleomargarine, fruit and vegetable
processing and canning, cider and vinegar, pickles and vegetable
relishes, the packing and processing of fish, seafood, meat and
poultry products, but not the distilling of beverages or slaughtering
of animals.
(23) Grain storage, blending and packaging, but not milling.
(24) Greenhouses, commercial, wholesale or retail.
(25) Heating, ventilating, cooking and refrigeration supplies and
appliances.
(26) Ice manufacture, including dry ice.
§ 260-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-15
1:335
(27) Insecticides, fungicides, disinfectants and related industrial and
household chemical elements (blending only).
(28)Kennels, boarding or otherwise.
(29) Laboratories, research, experimental or testing, but not including
combustion engine testing.
(30) Laundries, linen service.
(31) Leather goods manufacture, but not including tanning operations.
(32) Lumberyard, planing and millwork.
(33) Monuments and architectural stone.
(34) Paper and paperboard (from paper machine only), but not pulp
mills.
(35) Plating, electrolytic process.
(36) Plumbing supplies: manufacture, sale or storage.
(37) Pottery and figurines or similar ceramic products and kilns (fired
by electricity or gas only).
(38) Printing, publishing and engraving, photographic processing or
blueprinting.
(39) Pulp goods, pressed or molded (including papier-mâché) products,
paper products, but not the manufacture of paper.
(40)Radio or television broadcasting stations, studios, offices, towers.
(41) Rubber products and rubber and synthetic treated fabrics
(excluding all rubber and synthetic processing).
(42) Sawmill (including cooperage stock mill), stationary and planing
mill.
(43) Sign fabrication and painting shop.
(44) Soap products, but not soap manufacture.
(45) Stone products, sand and gravel, but not crushing or grinding.
(46) Structural iron and steel fabrication.
(47) Theaters, including open-air drive-in theaters.
(48) Truck terminal, freight.
(49)Wallboard and plaster, building insulation and composition
flooring.
(50)Warehouses, wholesale houses and distributors, wholesale market.
§ 260-15 WALTON CODE § 260-15
1:336
(51)Welding or soldering shops.
(52)Wire rope and cable.
(53)Wood chip and fiberboard.
(54) Rental storage units for domestic use and/or pod units.
C. Potentially hazardous uses. The following uses or the manufacture,
compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of products not
specifically listed above or below but which may, in the opinion of the
municipality's Engineer, have accompanying hazards, such as fire,
explosion, noise, vibration, dust or the emission of smoke, odor, toxic
gases or other pollutants, may, if not in conflict with any state or county
law, be located in the I-G General Industry District, only after the
location and nature of such use shall have been approved by the Village
Board after public hearing. The Board shall review the plans and
statements and shall not permit such building, structures or uses until
there has been shown that the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare will be properly protected and that necessary safeguards will
be provided for the protection of beaches, wetlands, and streams or
other water areas or surrounding property and persons. The Board, in
reviewing the plans and statements, shall consult with other agencies
created for the promotion of public health and safety and shall pay
particular attention to protection of the municipality and its neighbors
from the harmful effects of the air or water pollution of any type.
(1) Acetylene, generation and storage.
(2) Adhesives, glue.
(3) Alcohol, industrial.
(4) Ammunition and explosives storage.
(5) Asbestos products.
(6) Asphalt or asphalt products, or central asphalt mixing or batching.
(7) Automobile wrecking yard.
(8) Candles, including wax or tallow manufacture.
(9) Concrete products or central mixing and proportioning plant, but
not cement manufacture.
(10) Flour, feed and grain milling.
(11) Galvanizing or plating (hot dip).
(12) Glass and glass products.
(13) Hides and raw fur: curing, tanning, dyeing and storage.
§ 260-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-15
1:337
(14) Insecticides, fungicides, disinfectants, or related industrial or
household chemical compounds.
(15) Junkyards, automobile graveyards, open or enclosed storage of
junk or scrap metal.
(16) Leather tanning and curing.
(17) Linoleum and other hard surface floor coverings, except wood.
(18) Match manufacture.
(19) Meat and fish products, including the slaughtering of animals or
poultry or preparation of fish for packing.
(20) Oils, shortening and fats (edible): manufacture and storage.
(21) Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish.
(22) Petroleum storage.
(23) Plastic material and synthetic resins: processing only.
D. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses are as follows:
(1) The storage of goods or materials used in or produced by permitted
commercial and industrial uses or related activities.
(2) Accessory uses as follows on a farm of 10 acres or more:
(a) Accessory structures for the sale or processing of farm
products raised on the premises.
(b) Accessory, open or enclosed storage of farm materials,
products or equipment.
(c) Accessory farm buildings, including barns, stables, sheds,
toolrooms, shops, bins, tanks and silos.
(d) Dwellings for persons permanently employed on the premises.
(3) Solar energy systems and equipment.
E. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as conditional
uses if approved by the Village Board in accordance with the
procedures, guidelines and standards of Article XIV, Site Plan Review,
and any requirements specified in this Zoning chapter:
(1) Any conditional use permitted in the R-R Residential Recreational
District.
(2) Airports, airfields, heliports, helipads and airstrips.
(3) Incinerator, industrial or public.
§ 260-15 WALTON CODE § 260-15
1:338
(4) The rendering and storage of dead animals, offal, garbage and
waste products; fat rendering.
(5) Adult entertainment establishments as defined by this chapter and
in accordance with Article VIII, Adult Uses, of this chapter.
F. Prohibited uses.
(1) Keeping animals or fowl. Keeping animals or fowl is prohibited
unless otherwise permitted.
(a) No person shall breed, raise, harbor or maintain any bees,
poultry, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese or any other fowl, any
swine, pigs, horses, cows, mules or goats or any other animals
or reptiles except domestic pets within the Village unless
specifically authorized in any other provision of the Code of the
Village of Walton.
(b) Further prohibited will be any animal that is vicious,
dangerous, obnoxious, objectionable or offensive or that has, in
the absence of intentional provocation, repeatedly chased,
menaced, attacked or inflicted bodily injury to a person or
domestic animal, excluding birds, rodents and reptiles.
(2) There are no other uses strictly prohibited in this district.
G. Lot size requirements. Lot size requirements for all users: none, except
as may be required by the municipality's Engineer to meet sanitary
standards.
H. Yard requirements. Yard requirements are as follows:
Minimum
Type
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
Aggregate
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
All uses
Street 50 feet or
greater in width
50 25 — 50
NOTES:
Side and rear yards are required only if adjacent to a residential
district or to an existing residence.
If the street is less than 50 feet in width, the front yard shall be at least
75 feet measured from the center line.
See Article V, Supplementary Regulations, for other yard
requirements.
I. Height requirements. Height requirements are as follows:
§ 260-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-15
1:339
Type Maximum Height
All structures not specifically
exempted in Article V,
§ 260-16B
3 stories, but not to exceed 45 feet
unless approved by the Board of
Appeals
J. Off-street parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading requirements are contained in Article VI.
K. Sign regulations. Sign regulations are contained in Article VII.
§ 260-15 WALTON CODE § 260-15
1:340
ARTICLE V
Supplementary Regulations
§ 260-16. Height, area and bulk.
A. Purpose; area requirements.
(1) The purpose of this section is to establish area requirements,
including height and bulk for development, to protect the public
safety and wellbeing.
(2) Where more than 25% of the total floor area of any building in a
commercial district is used for dwelling purposes in a building that
may also contain nonresidential uses, the minimum height, area
and bulk requirements for residential development applicable in
the district in which such building is located shall apply, subject to
the side yard modification for mixed uses contained elsewhere in
this article. Where 25% or less of the total floor area of such
building is used for dwelling, the building shall be subject to the
height, area and bulk requirements applicable to nonresidential
buildings in the district.
B. Modification of height regulations.
(1) Except within an Airport Approach Zone, the height limitations of
this Zoning chapter shall not apply to:
(a) Belfries.
(b) Chimneys.
(c) Church spires.
(d) Conveyors.
(e) Cooling towers.
(f) Elevator bulkheads.
(g) Fire towers.
(h) Water towers and standpipes.
(i) Flagpoles.
(j) Public monuments.
(k) Ornamental towers and spires.
(l) Commercial radio and television towers less than 125 feet in
height.
(m) Silos and grain driers or elevators.
(n) Smokestacks.
§ 260-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-16
1:341
(o) Solar collectors and the equipment used for the mounting or
operation of such collectors.
(p) Stage towers or scenery lofts.
(q) Tanks.
(2) Except within an Airport Approach Zone, public and semipublic, or
public-service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, when
permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 60
feet, and churches and other houses of worship may be erected to a
height not exceeding 75 feet when the required side and rear yards
are each increased by at least one foot for each one foot of
additional building height above the height regulations for the
district in which the building is located.
(3) Notwithstanding other provisions of these regulations, the height
of all structures and natural growth shall be limited by the
requirements of the Federal Aviation Agency (FAA) and any airport
zoning regulations applicable to such structures and natural
growth.
(4) Notwithstanding any provisions of this Zoning chapter, no places of
public assembly, including, but without limitation, schools,
churches, hospitals, theaters and assembly halls, shall be erected
or otherwise located within any area that would be classified as an
Airport Approach Zone within a distance of 11,000 feet from the
end of any airport runway.
C. Lot area.
(1) Requirements for lot area per family do not apply to dormitories,
fraternities, sororities and other similar living quarters which are
accessory to a permitted use and which have no cooking facilities in
individual rooms or apartments.
(2) Requirements for lot area per family do not apply to rental units in
a hotel, motel, motor lodge or tourist home or rooms in a rooming
house, boardinghouse or lodging house.
D. Yards and open space generally.
(1) Whenever a lot abuts upon a public alley, 1/2 of the alley width may
be considered as a portion of the required yard.
(2) Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, except as
authorized by this article and except ordinary projections of sills,
belt courses, window air-conditioning units, chimneys, cornices
and ornamental features, which may project to a distance not to
exceed 24 inches into a required yard.
(3) More than one main building may be located upon a lot or tract in
the following instances; the provisions of this exception shall be
§ 260-16 WALTON CODE § 260-16
1:342
construed to allow the location or erection of any building or
portion of a building outside the buildable area of the lot:
(a) Institutional buildings.
(b) Public or semipublic buildings.
(c) Multiple-family dwellings.
(d) Commercial or industrial buildings.
(4) In the event that a lot is to be occupied by a group of two or more
related buildings to be used for residential purposes, there may be
more than one main building on the lot when such buildings are
arranged around a court, provided that said court between
buildings that are parallel or within 45° of being parallel shall have
a minimum width of 30 feet for one-story buildings, 40 feet for twostory
buildings and 50 feet for buildings of three stories or more,
and in no case may such buildings be closer to each other than 15
feet.
(5) Where a court is more than 50% surrounded by a building, the
minimum width of the court shall be at least 30 feet for one-story
buildings, 40 feet for two story buildings and 50 feet for three-story
buildings.
E. Front yards.
(1) Where an official line has been established for the future widening
or opening of a street or major thoroughfare upon which a lot
abuts, then the depth of a front or side yard shall be measured from
such official line to the nearest line of the building. Where no
official line is established, the right-of-way of any major
thoroughfare shall be assumed to extend at least 30 feet on each
side of the center line of the existing right-of-way for the purpose of
measuring front yards required by the Zoning chapter.
(2) On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on each
street.
(3) There shall be a front yard on each side of a corner lot in any
district; provided, however, that the buildable width of a lot of
record at the time of passage of this Zoning chapter shall not be
reduced to less than 30 feet.
(4) Open, unenclosed porches, platforms or paved terraces not
covered by a roof or canopy and which do not extend above the
level of the first floor of the building may extend beyond the
minimum setback for that zone.
(5) Where the street frontage in a block, or within 400 feet of the lot in
question, is partially built up, the minimum front yard for a new
building shall be the average of the existing front yards on either
§ 260-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-16
1:343
side thereof in the same block with a variation of five feet
permitted; provided, however, that no front yard in a residential
district shall be less than 20 feet or need more than 75 feet. Where
40% or more of the street frontage is improved with buildings
that have no front yard, no front yard shall be required for the
remainder of the street frontage.
F. Side yards.
(1) Open, unenclosed porches, platforms or paved terraces not
covered by a roof or canopy and which do not extend above the
level of the first floor of the building may extend or project into the
side yard not more than six feet.
(2) Where a building in a commercial district is subject to the height,
area and bulk requirements applicable to residential development
under § 260-13, the side yard requirements for residential
development shall be applied only to the lowest floor (and all floors
above it) which contains more than 25% of its area used for
dwelling. All floors shall be subject to side yards required by these
regulations for commercial buildings adjacent to residential
districts.
(3) For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a group of business or
industrial buildings separated by common or party walls shall be
considered as one building occupying one lot.
(4) The minimum depth of the side yards for schools, libraries,
churches, community houses and other public and semipublic
buildings in residential districts shall be 25 feet, except where a
side yard is adjacent to a business or industrial district, in which
case the depth of that yard shall be as required in the district
regulations for the district in which the building is located.
G. Rear yards. Open fire escapes, outside stairways and balconies and the
ordinary projections of chimneys and flues may project into the
required rear yard for a distance of not more than five feet, but only
where the same are so placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation.
H. Corner visibility. No sign, telephone booth, bus shelter, fence, wall,
hedge, planting or other obstruction to vision extending to a height in
excess of three feet above the established street grade shall be erected,
planted or maintained within the area of a corner lot that is adjacent to
the lines of the intersecting street lines whose tangent lengths measure
20 feet from the point of intersection.
I. Accessory buildings and structures.
(1) Except as herein provided, no accessory building shall project
beyond a required yard line along any street.
§ 260-16 WALTON CODE § 260-16
1:344
(2) Filing station pumps and pump islands may occupy the required
yards; provided, however, that they are no less than 15 feet from
street lines.
(3) Fences and walls. [Amended 7-12-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
(a) A fence or wall not more than 3 1/2 feet in height from the
ground may be constructed for any required front and side
yard. After a distance of no less than 20 feet from the sidewalk
or curb, if a sidewalk is not available, the fence or wall,
including the structural members, may increase to a maximum
of seven feet front ground level. If 20 feet of space from the
sidewalk or curb is not available, the Code Enforcement
Official has the discretion to allow an increase to occur within
the twenty-foot requirement. The maximum vertical clearance
between the ground level and the bottom of the fence or wall
shall be no more than two inches, measured on the side of the
fence or wall which faces away from the applicant's property.
(b) All fences or walls must be erected within the property line of
the applicant/owner and not within any public right-of-way.
(c) No fence or wall shall be erected so as to encroach on public
property or encroach upon property owned by any person or
entity other than the applicant/owner.
(d) No fence or wall shall be erected so as to encroach on a public
right-of-way or interfere with vehicular or pedestrian property
or visibility by pedestrians or operators of motor vehicles at
corner lots or where any vehicle enters a roadway.
(e) Any fence or wall which the Code Enforcement Official
reasonably determines may cause a nuisance, a fire hazard, a
dangerous condition or any obstruction to persons and
equipment in combating fires or may endanger public safety is
hereby prohibited.
(f) A fence or wall shall be constructed and installed so as to have
the good side facing the public or private property adjoining
that of the applicant/owner. Fence or wall posts shall be placed
on the owner's side of the fence.
(g) All fences must follow the natural contour of the ground. If
there is a drop or rise in the land along the fence line, the
ground can be raised or lowered to maintain the level of the
fence. The first and last section must remain level.
(h) The following types of fences are expressly prohibited: barbed
wire and electrically charged fences, except underground
fences used to confine animals.
§ 260-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-16
1:345
§ 260-17. Satellite dish antennas. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(4) Accessory swimming pools, open and unenclosed may occupy a
required rear or side yard if they are not located closer than five
feet to a rear or side lot line. A walk space at least three feet wide
shall be provided between pool walls and protective fences or
barrier walls. Every swimming pool shall be protected by a safety
fence or barrier and shall have provisions for adequate discharge of
water when a pool is drained or damaged. The Code Enforcement
Official must approve all fences, barriers and water discharge
systems.
(5) Permitted accessory storage of a boat, boat trailer or camp trailer
shall not be conducted in a front yard, and when not in use each
shall be covered appropriately with protective covers or tarps.
(6) Accessory buildings, including aboveground swimming pools, that
are not part of a main building, although they be connected to an
open breezeway, may be constructed in a rear yard, provided that
such accessory building or aboveground swimming pool does not
occupy more than 30% of the area of the required rear yard and
provided that it is not located closer than five feet to any lot line.
(7) Solar energy systems and equipment may occupy a required rear or
side yard, provided that they are approved by the Code
Enforcement Official and are not located closer than five feet to any
lot line.
A. The proliferation of the construction and installation within the Village
of Walton of satellite antennas, satellite dishes, parabolic dishes and
other similar equipment and devices must be controlled so as to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Village of Walton
and, to the maximum degree possible, coordinate and control the same
so as to preserve and protect the aesthetic qualities of the Village of
Walton and its environs. Accordingly, this section is enacted to
accomplish this stated purpose and intent.
B. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SATELLITE DISH — Any parabolic dish, satellite dish, antenna or other
device or equipment of whatever nature or kind, the purpose of which is
to receive television, radio, microwave or other electronic signals from
space satellites.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — Any concave, circular or dish-shaped
device designed for receiving communication or television signals from
space, but does not include conventional television, radio and amateur
radio antennas.
§ 260-16 WALTON CODE § 260-17
1:346
C. No person shall cause, suffer or permit the erection and/or maintenance
of any satellite dish upon any lands within the Village of Walton unless
in conformity with the provisions as set forth in this section.
D. Limitations.
(1) Dimensions.
(a) The diameter of the satellite dish shall not exceed nine feet.
(b) When separately supported, the total height of the satellite
dish shall not exceed 12 feet, unless approved as a special
exception by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(c) The satellite dish shall be located only in the rear yard, and no
portion of the dish shall be closer than 10 feet to any property
line.
(d) When roof-mounted, the satellite dish shall be located on a
portion of the roof sloping away from the front of the lot, unless
approved as a special exception by the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if no adequate signal
can be received by the satellite antenna in a location permitted
by this chapter, the antenna may be sited where otherwise
prohibited.
(e) No more than one satellite dish shall be permitted on any lot.
(f) When not roof-mounted, the satellite dish shall be completely
screened from adjoining lots by the installation and
maintenance of a planted visual barrier to consist of evergreen
plantings.
(g) Before erection of any such satellite dish, a permit application
shall be made to the Village of Walton Codes Enforcement
Officer, which permit shall be issued in accordance with this
section and with the other provisions of the Code of the Village
of Walton.
(2) General regulations. Each satellite dish located within the Village
of Walton shall be subject to the following additional general
regulations:
(a) No satellite dish may be erected in any district or any location
within a district which is prohibited by regulation of the
Federal Communications Commission or other regulatory
agency having jurisdiction.
(b) Each satellite dish shall be properly anchored and installed to
resist a minimum wind load of 30 pounds per square foot of
projected horizontal area. Supports, anchors and foundations
shall take into account overturning movements and forces
§ 260-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-17
1:347
created by wind loading. The safety factor against overturning
or sliding for wind forces on satellite antennas shall be 2.0.
(c) In granting a special exception under Subsection D(1)(b) or (d)
of this section, the Zoning Board of Appeals:
[1] Shall not permit the erection of any satellite antenna
exceeding 10 feet in diameter or 15 feet in height.
[2] May require additional screening.
[3] May require additional setback from the property line to
that imposed by these regulations.
[4] Shall attach such additional reasonable conditions as it
shall require, consistent with the intent of these
regulations, that the essential character of the
neighborhood shall not be disturbed by the installation of
any such satellite dish.
(d) This section is not intended to and shall not be construed to
permit, authorize or allow the construction, installation or use
of a parabolic dish, satellite dish, antenna or other device or
equipment of whatever nature or kind used, intended to be
used or capable of being used for the propagation or
transmission of radio, microwave or electromagnetic waves.
E. This section shall not apply to satellite dishes that are 18 inches or less
in diameter.
§ 260-17 WALTON CODE § 260-17
1:348
ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading
§ 260-18. Off-street parking.
A. Specific requirements by use. Except as otherwise provided in this
Zoning chapter, when any building or structure is hereafter erected or
structurally altered or any building or structure hereafter erected is
converted, accessory off-street parking spaces shall be provided as
follows:
Use or Use Category
Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces
Required
One- or two-family
dwelling
2 per dwelling unit
Three-family, townhouse
or multifamily dwelling:
number of bedrooms
per dwelling unit:
1
2
3 or more
2 per dwelling unit
2 per dwelling unit
2.3 for bedrooms plus 0.3 spaces for each
additional bedroom; 1 per each resident
permanent employee and 1 garage stall for
each service vehicle kept on the premises
Church, temple,
synagogue, auditorium
or place of assembly
1 per 4 seats or bench seating spaces (seats
in main auditorium only)
College or high school 1 per 4 seats or bench seating spaces (seats
in main auditorium only)
Elementary, junior high
or nursery school
1 per 10 seats in main assembly room or 2
per classroom, whichever is greater
Country club or golf
club
1 per 5 members or 1 for each 400 square
feet of floor area, whichever is greater
Public library, museum,
art gallery or
community center
10 per use, plus 1 additional space for each
300 square feet of floor area in excess of
1,000 square feet
Sanitarium,
convalescent home,
home for the aged or
similar institution
1 per 3 patient beds
Tourist court, motel,
motor lodge or hotel
5 spaces, plus 1 per sleeping room or suite
§ 260-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-18
1:349
Use or Use Category
Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces
Required
Rooming house,
boardinghouse or
lodging house
1 per 2 sleeping rooms
Hospital 2 per patient bed
Office or office building,
post office, studio
1 per 400 square feet of floor area; 8 spaces
minimum for clinic
Funeral home 1 per 50 square feet of floor area, excluding
storage and work area; 30 spaces minimum
Restaurant or other
establishment for
consumption of food or
beverages inside a
building on the
premises
1 per 100 square feet of floor area; 25
spaces minimum
Retail store or personal
service establishment
and banks
1 per 200 square feet of floor area; retail
food stores over 4,000 square feet, 1 per
100 square feet of floor area
Furniture or appliance
store, machinery,
equipment, and
automobile and boat
sales and service
1 per 300 square feet of floor area, 2 spaces
minimum; automobile sales and service: 10
minimum
Auditorium, theater,
gymnasium, stadium,
arena or convention hall
1 per 4 seats or seating spaces
Bowling alley 4 per lane
Food-storage locker 1 per 200 square feet of customer service
area
Trailer sales 1 per 200 square feet of sales office area, 10
spaces minimum
Amusement place,
dance hall, skating rink,
swimming pool or
exhibition hall, without
fixed seats
1 per 100 square feet of floor area; does not
apply to accessory uses
General service or
repair establishment,
printing, publishing,
plumbing, heating,
broadcasting station
1 per 3 employees on the premises; an
auditorium for a broadcasting station
requires spaces as above
§ 260-18 WALTON CODE § 260-18
1:350
Use or Use Category
Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces
Required
Animal hospital 1 per 400 square feet of floor area; 4 spaces
minimum
Manufacturing or
industrial
establishment, research
or testing laboratory,
creamery, bottling plant,
wholesale, warehouse
or similar establishment
1 per 2 employees on maximum working
shift, plus adequate space for storage of
trucks or other vehicles used in connection
with the business or industry
Major home occupation 1 space per 200 square feet of customer
service area
Minor home occupation 1 space per 400 square feet of customer
service area
B. Interpretation of specific requirements.
(1) The parking requirements above are in addition to space for
storage of trucks or other vehicles used in connection with any use.
(2) The parking requirements in this article do not limit other parking
requirements contained in the district regulations.
(3) The parking requirements in this article do not limit special
requirements that may be imposed with conditional uses.
(4) Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall
be construed to the next highest whole number.
(5) Except as otherwise provided, the number of employees shall be
compiled on the basis of the maximum number of persons
employed on the premises at one time on an average workday or
night, whichever is greater.
(6) The parking space requirements for a use not specifically listed in
the chart shall be the same as for a listed use of similar
characteristics of parking demand generation.
C. Joint use and off-site facilities.
(1) All parking spaces required herein shall be located within 300 feet
of the building or use served.
(2) Up to 50% of the parking spaces required for theaters, public
auditoriums, bowling alleys, dance halls and night clubs, and up to
100% of the parking spaces required for a church auditorium, may
be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, retail stores, repair
shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally open,
used or operated during the same hours as those uses listed in
§ 260-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-18
1:351
Subsection A, and up to 100% of the parking spaces required for
schools may be provided and used jointly by a church auditorium;
provided, however, that written agreement thereto is properly
executed and recorded as specified below.
(3) In any case, where the required parking spaces are not located on
the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces
are collectively or jointly provided and used, such parking space
shall be established by a recorded covenant or agreement as
parking space to be used in conjunction with the principal use and
shall be reserved as such through an encumbrance on the title of
the property to be designated as "required parking space," such
encumbrance to be valid for the total period during which the use
or uses for which the parking is needed are in existence.
D. Design standards.
(1) Minimum area. For the purpose of these regulations, an off-street
parking space is an all-weather surfaced area not in a street or
alley and having an area of not less than 200 square feet, exclusive
of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of
one vehicle and connected with a street or alley by a paved
driveway that affords ingress and egress for an automobile without
requiring another automobile to be moved.
(2) Drainage and maintenance. Off-street parking facilities shall be
drained to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to
abutting property and/or public streets and alleys and surfaced
with erosion-resistant material in accordance with applicable
municipal specifications. Off-street parking areas shall be
maintained in a clean, orderly and dust-free condition at the
expense of the owner or lessee and not used for the sale, repair, or
dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or
supplies.
(3) Separation from walkways and streets. Off-street parking spaces
shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, streets or alleys by a
wall, fence or curbing or other approved protective device or by
distance so that vehicles cannot protrude over publicly owned
areas.
(4) Entrances and exits. Location and design of entrances and exits
shall be in accord with the requirements of applicable regulations
and standards. In general, there shall not be more than one
entrance and one exit, or one combined entrance and exit, along
any one street. Landscaping, curbing or appropriate barriers shall
be provided along lot boundaries to control the entrance and exit of
vehicles or pedestrians.
(5) Interior drives. Interior drives shall be of adequate width to serve
the particular design arrangement of parking spaces.
§ 260-18 WALTON CODE § 260-18
1:352
§ 260-19. Off-street loading.
(6) Marking. Painted lines or curbs or other means to indicate
individual spaces shall mark parking spaces in lots of more than 10
spaces. Signs or markers shall be used as necessary to ensure
efficient traffic operation of the lot.
(7) Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided if off-street parking
spaces are to be used at night. The lighting shall be arranged and
installed to minimize glare on property in a residential district.
(8) Screening. When off-street parking areas for 10 or more
automobiles are located closer than 50 feet to a lot in a residential
district, or to any lot upon which there is a dwelling as a permitted
use under these regulations, and where such parking areas are not
entirely screened visually from such lot by an intervening building
or structure, a continuous, visual screen with a minimum height of
six feet shall be provided between the parking area and said lot in a
residential district or upon which there is a dwelling. Such screen
may consist of a compact evergreen hedge or foliage screening or a
louvered wall or fence.
A. Specific requirements by use. Except as otherwise provided in this
Zoning chapter, when any building or structure is hereafter erected or
structurally altered to the extent of increasing the floor area by 25% or
more, or any building is hereafter converted, for the uses listed below,
when such buildings contain the floor areas specified, accessory offstreet
loading spaces shall be provided as required below or as required
in subsequent sections of this article. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Use or Use Category
Floor Area
(square feet)
Loading Space
Required
Retail store,
department store,
restaurant, wholesale
house, warehouse,
general service,
manufacturing or
industrial
establishment
2,000 to 10,000 1
10,001 to 20,000 2
20,001 to 40,000 3
40,001 to 60,000 4
Each 50,000 over
60,000
1 additional
§ 260-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-19
1:353
Use or Use Category
Floor Area
(square feet)
Loading Space
Required
Multifamily dwelling,
motel, hotel, offices or
office building, hospital
or similar institutions,
or places of public
assembly
5,000 to 10,000 1
10,001 to 100,000 2
100,001 to 200,000 3
Each 100,000 over
200,000
1 additional
Funeral home or
mortuary
2,500 to 4,000 1
4,001 to 6,000 2
Each 10,000 over 6,000 1 additional
B. Interpretation of specific requirements.
(1) The loading space requirements apply to all districts but do not
limit the special requirements that may be imposed in the district
regulations.
(2) The loading space requirements in this article do not limit special
requirements that may be imposed in connection with conditional
uses.
C. Design standards.
(1) Minimum size. For the purpose of these regulations, a loading
space is a space within the main building or on the same lot
providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, such
space having a minimum area of 540 square feet and a vertical
clearance of at least 14 1/2 feet.
(2) Loading space for funeral homes. Loading spaces for a funeral
home may be reduced in size to 10 feet by 25 feet and vertical
clearance reduced to eight feet.
(3) Drainage and maintenance. Off-street loading facilities shall be
drained to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to
abutting property and/or public streets and alleys and surfaced
with erosion-resistant material in accordance with applicable
specifications. Off-street loading areas shall be maintained in a
clean, orderly and dust-free condition at the expense of the owner
or lessee and not used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing
of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies.
§ 260-19 WALTON CODE § 260-19
1:354
(4) Entrances and exits. The location and design of entrances and exits
shall be in accord with applicable requirements of traffic
regulations and standards. Where an off-street loading space is to
be approached directly from a major thoroughfare, necessary
maneuvering space shall be provided on the lot. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I)]
§ 260-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-19
1:355

ARTICLE VII
Signs
§ 260-20. General provisions.
A. Permit required; application and approval; expiration.
(1) A sign permit is required for every external permanent sign or
other advertising structure erected, constructed, posted, altered or
relocated after the adoption of this chapter so as to allow the Code
Enforcement Official the ability to ensure that every external
permanent sign or other advertising structure erected,
constructed, posted, altered or relocated is in accordance with this
chapter.
(2) The Code Enforcement Official shall have five business days, upon
receipt of a permit application, to determine whether a filed sign
permit is approvable. If the proposed external permanent sign or
other advertising structure is in compliance with all such
requirements of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Official shall
approve the sign permit. If within five business days no
determination has been made, the permit application will be
deemed approved also. If the proposed external permanent sign or
other advertising structure is not in compliance with all such
requirements of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Official shall
deny the sign permit and provide the reason(s) for denial. Upon
meeting the reasons for permit denial, sign permit approval will be
granted.
(3) Should the approved external permanent sign or other advertising
structure not be erected, constructed, posted, altered or relocated
within one year after the date of approval, the approval shall
become null and void.
B. All external permanent signs or other advertising structures shall be
erected and constructed in a fashion so as not to jeopardize the safety
of the community or obstruct traffic. Structural, safety, and electrical
systems and features of all external permanent signs or other
advertising structures shall be in accordance with the requirements of
any and all applicable federal, state and local building codes and laws
(i.e., New York State Building Code).
C. Unsafe and unlawful signs are any signs that pose a threat to the safety
of the public or obstruct traffic.
(1) If the Code Enforcement Official shall find that any external
permanent sign or other advertising structure regulated herein is
unsafe or a menace to the public, has been constructed or erected
improperly, or is being maintained in violation of the provisions
established in this chapter, the Code Enforcement Official shall give
written notice to the owner of or the responsible party for the
§ 260-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-20
1:357
§ 260-21. Permitted signs for specific districts.
The following permitted external permanent signs are allowed as specified
for each zoning district within the Village. If a specific external permanent
sign is not listed within a district, it is not permitted. Permitted signs for
each district are as follows:
external permanent sign or other advertising structure to remedy
the situation.
(2) If the owner of or the responsible party for the external permanent
sign or other advertising structure fails to remedy the situation
within 30 days after such notice, the external permanent sign or
other advertising structure shall be removed or altered to comply
with the provisions of this chapter at the expense of the owner of or
the responsible party for the external permanent sign or other
advertising structure.
(3) The Code Enforcement Official, in addition to exercising any and all
other remedies provided for in this chapter for a violation hereof,
may have any external permanent sign or other advertising
structure removed immediately and without notice if it poses an
immediate threat to the public's safety or obstructs traffic. The
owner of or the responsible party for the external permanent sign
or other advertising structure shall pay any expenses incurred.
D. Any external permanent sign or other advertising structure that no
longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or product sold shall
be removed by the owner of or the responsible party for the sign or
other advertising structure within 90 days after written notification
from the Code Enforcement Official. The Code Enforcement Official has
the authority to have the external permanent sign or other advertising
structure removed at the expense of the owner of or the responsible
party for the external permanent sign or other advertising structure
upon failure to comply with the written notice. Businesses being
actively sold shall be exempt from the above provision.
E. Any external permanent sign or advertising structure lawfully erected
prior to the adoption of this chapter that does not conform to the
provisions and standards of this article shall be allowed to remain in
existence until such time as the external permanent sign or other
advertising structure is altered in any way or the business is
discontinued or sold.
A. Residential Recreational District (R-R). Subject to the general sign
provisions above and consisting of accessory nonilluminated or
indirectly illuminated signs, the following signs are allowed within this
district and may be erected or constructed in accordance with the
structural and safety requirements of the New York State Building
Code:
§ 260-20 WALTON CODE § 260-21
1:358
(1) A nameplate or directional sign, limited in area to two square feet,
to identify the owner or occupant, business and address of a
building being used for a permitted home occupation, or one
directional sign, limited in area to two square feet, indicating offstreet
parking areas directly related to allowed nonresidential
uses.
(2) One sign advertising a roadside stand selling agricultural produce,
flowers, maple products or other items grown on the premises,
providing that such sign does not exceed 20 square feet and is
seasonal, to be removed once sale items are sold.
(3) A sign, limited in area to 20 square feet, for a church bulletin board
or identification of permitted public or semipublic uses.
(4) A temporary, nonilluminated sign, limited in area to 20 square feet,
advertising real estate for sale or lease or announcing
contemplated improvements of real estate on which it is placed.
(5) A sign, limited in area to 20 square feet, for identification of a farm
or estate or a subdivision or its occupants.
(6) One sign for identification purposes not larger than 20 square feet
to identify recreational areas, wildlife preserves, golf clubs, game
courts, swimming pools, tennis clubs, archery ranges, fishing and
boating lakes, camping areas, picnic grounds, dude ranches, and
other similar facilities allowed in the R-R District.
(7) One sign for identification of nonresidential uses such as animal
clinics, kennels, stables and other nonresidential uses allowed as
principal uses in the R-R District, not to exceed 20 square feet.
(8) A freestanding sign necessary for the identification, operation or
production of a public utility may be erected on the premises of
such public utility, provided that the sign be limited to 20 square
feet.
B. Single-Family Residential District (R-S). Subject to the general sign
regulations above, and consisting of accessory nonilluminated or
indirectly illuminated signs, the following external permanent signs are
allowed within this district and may be erected or constructed in
accordance with the structural and safety requirements of the New
York State Building Code:
(1) One sign, limited in area to 20 square feet, for a church bulletin
board or identification of permitted public or semipublic uses.
(2) One sign, limited to 20 square feet, identifying public parks,
recreation areas and similar conservation projects.
(3) One sign, limited to 20 square feet, identifying institutions,
educational or philanthropic entities, museums, art galleries and
libraries.
§ 260-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-21
1:359
(4) One sign, limited to 20 square feet, identifying hospitals or health
clinics.
(5) One sign, limited to 10 square feet, identifying day nurseries, childcare
centers, nursing homes, convalescent homes or other similar
uses in the home.
C. Multiple-Family Residential District (R-M). Subject to the general sign
regulations above, and consisting of accessory nonilluminated or
indirectly illuminated signs, the following external permanent signs are
allowed within this district and may be erected or constructed in
accordance with the structural and safety requirements of the New
York State Building Code:
(1) One sign, limited in area to 20 square feet, for a church bulletin
board or identification of permitted public or semipublic uses.
(2) One sign, limited to 20 square feet, identifying public parks,
recreation areas and similar conservation projects.
(3) One sign, limited to 20 square feet, identifying institutions,
educational or philanthropic entities, museums, art galleries and
libraries.
(4) One sign, limited to 20 square feet, identifying hospitals or health
clinics.
(5) One sign, limited to 10 square feet, identifying day nurseries, childcare
centers, nursing homes, convalescent homes or other similar
uses in the home.
(6) A sign, limited in area to 10 square feet, giving the name and/or
address or management of a multiple-family dwelling or group of
multiple-family dwellings. If such sign is placed on a marquee,
awning or canopy, the height of letters shall not exceed one foot.
(7) For multiple residences or apartment developments, one sign
advertising the availability of residential units for rent, not
exceeding four square feet.
D. General Business District (B-G). Subject to the general sign regulations
above, any external permanent sign or other advertising structure is
permitted within this district and may be erected or constructed in
accordance with the structural and safety requirements of the New
York State Building Code so as not to jeopardize the safety of the
community or obstruct traffic.
E. General Industry District (I-G). Subject to the general sign regulations
above, any sign or other advertising structure is permitted within this
district and may be erected or constructed in accordance with the
structural and safety requirements of the New York State Building Code
so as not to jeopardize the safety of the community or obstruct traffic.
§ 260-21 WALTON CODE § 260-21
1:360
§ 260-22. Construction standards.
F. Mixed Use District (M-U). Subject to the general sign provisions above
and consisting of accessory non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated
signs not exceeding 20 square feet for any permitted of approved
conditional use. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. General provisions.
(1) All external permanent signs or other advertising structures shall
comply with any and all applicable regulations of the New York
State Building Code and the National Electric Code.
(2) All external permanent freestanding signs or other advertising
structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind
pressure of not less than 20 pounds per square foot or surface area,
and all signs, including wall-mounted signs, shall be securely
anchored. All external permanent signs or other advertising
structures, supports and electric work shall be kept clean and free
from all hazards, such as, but not limited to, faulty wiring, and
loose supports, braces, guys and anchors.
B. Specific external permanent sign type regulations for R-R, R-S, and R-M
Districts.
(1) Wall signs.
(a) Wall signs shall not extend beyond the ends or over the top of
the walls to which attached.
(b) Wall signs, except for certain electric signs, shall not extend
more than six inches from the face of the buildings to which
attached. Electric signs may extend a distance of up to 14
inches to accommodate a sign and a code-required transformer
box, but in no case shall this box extend more than eight inches
from the face of the building to which it is attached. Whenever
possible, the transformer box shall be concealed inside the
building.
(2) Freestanding signs.
(a) No freestanding sign shall be located less than 50 feet from
any other freestanding sign.
(b) No freestanding sign shall be more than 40 square feet per
side for a double-faced sign.
(c) No freestanding sign shall be more than 20 feet in height above
finished grade. Such height shall be measured vertically from
the established average grade directly below the sign or entry
level of the building or structure, whichever is lower, to the
highest point of the sign, including supporting structures.
§ 260-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-22
1:361
§ 260-23. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
(d) No freestanding sign shall extend over or into the public rightof-
way, nor shall it overhang the property lines.
(e) Freestanding signs under which a pedestrian walkway or
driveway passes must have a vertical clearance of 10 feet.
(3) Window signs.
(a) No window sign shall be affixed to the exterior of the window.
All exterior signs shall be classified as wall signs.
(b) The area of the window sign shall not exceed 25% or 100
square feet, whichever is less, of the area of the window.
(4) Roof signs. A roof sign must be installed in a plane parallel to the
wall of the facade of the building that the roof covers. In no case
shall a roof sign extend above the peak of the roof or above the
parapet wall of the building facade. The bottom portion of the roof
sign, except for certain electric signs, shall not extend a distance of
more than 14 inches to accommodate a sign and a code-required
transformer box, but in no case shall the bottom of this box extend
more than eight inches from the roof surface to which it is
attached. Whenever possible, the transformer box shall be
enclosed inside the building. All bracing for a roof sign shall be
enclosed in a structure.
(5) Backlit signs. All backlit signs shall have a dark background. Only
the letters and/or message area of the sign shall be illuminated.
Whenever possible, they shall be constructed flush with the
building facade.
A. Violations.
(1) Any of the following shall be a violation of this article and shall be
subject to enforcement and penalties provided by this article and
by applicable state regulations:
(a) To install, create, erect or maintain any external permanent
sign or other advertising structure in a way that is inconsistent
with any permit governing such sign or the zoning district in
which the sign is located.
(b) Failure to remove any external permanent sign or other
advertising structure that is installed, created, erected or
maintained in violation of this article.
(c) Continuance of a violation. Each day a violation is continued
shall be considered a separate violation when applying the
penalty portions of this article.
§ 260-22 WALTON CODE § 260-23
1:362
§ 260-24. Appeals.
(2) Each external permanent sign or other advertising structure
installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this article
shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty
portions of this article.
B. Any violation or attempted violation of this article or of any condition or
requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected, or
abated, as the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate
proceedings pursuant to state law. A violation of this chapter shall be
considered a violation of the Zoning Law of the Village of Walton. The
remedies of the Village shall include the following:
(1) Issuing a stop-work order for all work on any external permanent
signs or other advertising structures.
(2) Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that
requires the correction of the non conformance or the removal of
the external permanent sign or other advertising structure.
(3) Imposing any penalties that can be imposed directly by the Village
under this Zoning chapter.
(4) In the case of an external permanent sign or other advertising
structure that poses an immediate danger to the safety of the
community or obstructs traffic, measures can be taken that are
available to the Village under the applicable provisions of the
Zoning Law and New York State Building Code for such
circumstances.
C. The Village shall have such other remedies as are and as may from time
to time be provided for or allowed by state law for the violation of the
Zoning Law. This includes the imposition of a fine to the violator not to
exceed $250 for each violation sited by the Code Enforcement Official.
The Village of Walton Justice may impose fines as they pertain to this
chapter.
D. (Reserved)
E. All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent
that state law may limit the availability of a particular remedy set forth
herein for a certain violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall
remain available for other violations or other parts of the same
violation.
A. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Code Enforcement Official
relative to the provisions of this article may appeal such decision in
writing to the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) as provided in the Zoning
chapter.
§ 260-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-24
1:363
B. The ZBA, within 15 days of receiving the written grievance, will hold a
meeting to review the denial. The ZBA will then make a determination
on whether the denial will stand or not.
§ 260-24 WALTON CODE § 260-24
1:364
ARTICLE VIII
Adult Uses
§ 260-25. Purpose.
Adult uses, due to their nature, have serious objectionable characteristics
that can have a significant impact on the neighborhood and community
in which they are located, particularly when located in close proximity
to residential areas and recreational/commercial areas. The objectionable
characteristics of these areas are further heightened by their concentration
in any one area, thereby having deleterious effects on adjacent areas.
The uncontrolled proliferation of such uses would be inconsistent with the
Village as a primarily residential and family-oriented community as well
as a recreational destination. Such uses can contribute to the blighting or
downgrading of areas in which they are located because of their related
potential for an increase in crime and the undermining of the economic and
social welfare of the community. The special regulations deemed necessary
to control the undesirable secondary effects arising from adult uses are
set forth below. The primary purpose of these controls and regulations is
to preserve the integrity and character of the residential community. The
provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing
a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, or
to deny access by adults to adult uses.
§ 260-26. Conditional use approval; additional requirements.
A. No adult use shall be established except upon the receipt of a
conditional use approval from the Village Planning Board in accordance
with Article XVII of this chapter and the provisions herein. All adult
uses shall be allowed in the district(s) as identified in this Zoning
chapter.
B. Adult uses shall also conform to the following requirements:
(1) An adult use shall not be located within a radius of 500 feet of any
property currently in residential use.
(2) No adult use shall be located within a radius of 500 feet of another
adult use.
(3) No adult use shall be located within a radius of 500 feet of any
religious institution, educational institution, public park or
recreational facility, civic facility or day-care center.
(4) No more than one adult use shall be located on any lot.
(5) No adult use shall be located in any building that is used in whole
or in part for residential uses.
(6) The required setbacks shall be doubled for each district herein and
shall be measured from the property line of the premises, as the
same shall be appropriate for such purposes herein.
§ 260-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-26
1:365
(7) All building openings, including doors and windows, shall be
located, covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view
into the establishment from any public street, sidewalk or parking
area.
(8) As a condition of approval of any adult use, there shall be a
restriction that no person under the age of 18 years shall be
permitted into or on the premises.
(9) Any sign for an adult use shall conform to all signage requirements
of this chapter.
(10)No loud speakers or sound equipment shall be used by adult uses
that can be heard by the public from outside the establishment.
§ 260-26 WALTON CODE § 260-26
1:366
ARTICLE IX
Home Occupations
§ 260-27. Minor and major home occupations.
A. Minor home occupations.
(1) The occupations or activities shall be carried on wholly within the
principal building or within a building or structure accessory
thereto. An area equivalent to no more than 20% of the floor area of
the dwelling unit shall be used for the occupations. Such area shall
be within the dwelling or another structure accessory thereto. No
outdoor storage is permitted.
(2) The occupations shall be carried on by the occupant of the dwelling
and shall not employ any persons outside the resident household.
(3) There shall be no exterior display or sign except as permitted under
the requirements of the district, no exterior storage of materials
and no other exterior indication of the home occupations or
variation from the residential character of the lot or the
surrounding neighborhood.
(4) The occupations shall not produce any offensive odor, noise, smoke,
dust, heat, electrical interference, or glare detectable to normal
sensory perception outside the structure.
(5) Any need for parking generated by the occupations shall be met off
the street and in accordance with the regulations of this chapter.
(6) No more than one commercial-type vehicle shall be used in
connection with the occupations and/or be parked on the property.
B. Major home occupations. Major home occupations shall adhere to the
regulations for minor home occupations (Subsection A), except that:
(1) They shall require site plan review approval to operate; and
(2) The total floor area designed for and allotted to the major home
occupation shall not exceed 40% of total floor area; and
(3) No more than two persons who are not residents of the dwelling
unit shall be employed at the site of the major home occupation.
§ 260-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-27
1:367

ARTICLE X
Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
§ 260-28. Mobile homes not in mobile home park.
A mobile home located on a private lot and not in a mobile home park will
be permitted in the Village of Walton, in the R-R District only, when the
following standards have been met:
A. All mobile homes shall receive site plan approval in accordance with
Article XIV of this chapter before installation and issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
B. All of the area requirements (lot area, lot width, yards) have been
complied with. Expandable rooms, enclosed patios and garages, and
structural additions shall be included as part of the mobile home in
determining yard size.
C. The mobile home is provided with potable water and a safe and
adequate sewage disposal system. All NYCDEP and the NYSDOH
requirements for soil percolation, septic tank capacity and installation,
separations, well location and similar factors which apply to
conventional housing shall apply to all mobile homes that are not
utilizing municipal water and septic.
D. The mobile home is provided with a permanent foundation with footers
below the frost line or with a stand and support capable of providing a
firm base and containing the mobile home in a stable position. Such
stand shall have a dimension equal to the width and length of the home
and any expansions or extensions thereto and shall be a full-size
concrete slab at least six inches thick.
E. The mobile home shall be provided with anchors or tiedowns, at least at
the corners, attached to concrete footings installed below the frost line
or embedded in concrete runners or a concrete slab that may be
provided as the mobile home stand.
F. Tires and wheels shall be removed from the mobile home. If practical,
the hitch shall also be removed.
G. The mobile home will be provided with skirts to screen the space
between the mobile home and the stand. Such skirts shall be of
concrete block or permanent material similar to that used in the mobile
home and providing a finished exterior appearance and shall be
installed within 60 days from the date of issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the mobile home.
H. Any mobile home with its length as much as three times its width shall
be placed with the long axis perpendicular to the front lot line or, if
otherwise placed than to provide a side yard on each side, at least 1/2
as great as the length of the unit.
§ 260-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-28
1:369
§ 260-29. Issuance of permits.
§ 260-30. Certificate of occupancy.
Before any mobile home, for which a permit has been issued in accordance
with § 260-31 of this chapter, is occupied, a certificate of occupancy shall
be issued by the Code Enforcement Official certifying that the mobile home
has been installed in accordance with the provisions of Article X of this
chapter. A temporary certificate may be issued to allow occupancy while
nonessential improvements, such as skirting, are being made. Such
temporary certificate shall be valid for 60 days, after which time any
remaining noncompliance shall constitute a violation of this Zoning chapter.
§ 260-31. Mobile home parks.
I. Any construction of storage space, additional rooms, or enclosed patios
or carports shall have a finished exterior appearance. No exposed
building paper, wallboard or other impermanent and unfinished
material will be permitted.
J. The mobile home bears the seal required by the State of New York or an
equivalent acceptable to the State of New York.
K. Other appropriate environmental standards that may be imposed by the
Planning Board.
A. Upon receipt of a written application, the Code Enforcement Official
shall issue a building permit for the installation of a mobile home not
located in a mobile home park when it has been determined that the
standards set forth in § 260-31 have been complied with.
B. The application for a mobile home building permit shall provide:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The street and number where such mobile home is to be located.
(3) Evidence that mobile home bears the seal required by the State of
New York or an equivalent.
(4) A drawing showing placement of the mobile home on the lot and
location of the water supply and sewage disposal system.
(5) Evidence as needed to demonstrate that the standards in § 260-31
have been, or will be, complied with.
A. Location. A mobile home park shall be permitted conditionally in the
Village of Walton only in R-R and I-G Districts if the Village Planning
Board has approved an acceptable site plan and the Code Enforcement
Official has been authorized to issue a mobile home park permit.
§ 260-28 WALTON CODE § 260-31
1:370
B. Permit application. Application for a permit for a mobile home park
shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Official in triplicate and
shall include:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of land upon which the park is
to be located.
(3) A location map showing how the park relates to the existing road
system.
(4) A preliminary plan of the park showing how the overall design is in
accordance with the standards set forth in this article.
(5) Provisions for a hookup to the Village municipal water supply and
sewage disposal have been approved by the Superintendent of
Public Works, the NYCDEP and the NYSDOH.
(6) Topography and soils of the site, including all areas that are wet or
subject to flooding, are properly mitigated.
(7) Proposed cross-section design of park roadways to be designed to
the minimum Village road standards.
(8) A statement of all contemplated rules, regulations, restrictions and
covenants applying in the park, including requirements to get into
the park, management and tenant responsibilities, entrance or
departure fees, utility connection fees and security deposits.
(9) A long form environmental assessment form has been submitted.
(10) Any additional information that the developer feels will help the
Planning Board in its review of the proposed park.
C. Procedure.
(1) The Code Enforcement Official shall have 15 days to review the
complete application and site plan prior to submitting it to the
Village Planning Board.
(2) The Code Enforcement Official shall submit one copy of the
application to the Village Planning Board for site plan review at
least 10 days before the regular Planning Board meeting.
(3) Within 30 days from receipt of a complete application, the Planning
Board shall have a conference with the developer to discuss the
preliminary plan and the required environmental review applicable
thereto.
(4) Within 30 days of the conference with the developer, the Planning
Board shall hold a public hearing, complete the long form EAF and
make a SEQRA determination.
§ 260-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-31
1:371
(5) The public hearing shall be advertised in the official Village
newspaper at least 10 days prior to the hearing, and the applicant
shall notify all property owners within 500 feet of the parcel by
certified mail.
(6) Within 62 days of the public hearing, the Planning Board shall act
on the site plan application.
(7) Upon final site plan approval by the Village Planning Board, a
mobile home park permit shall be issued by the Code Enforcement
Official. Such permit shall be temporary and must be renewed
every two years after issuance.
(8) The site plan approval shall be valid for a period of six months. If
construction has not begun within six months, the approval shall
become null and void.
(9) When construction is completed in accordance with the final plan
as approved by the Village Planning Board, the Code Enforcement
Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy.
D. Environmental standards. In reviewing proposed mobile home park site
plans, the Planning Board shall use the following environmental
standards as guidelines:
(1) Density and lot size. The density of development in a mobile home
park shall not exceed five units per gross acre of site to be
developed. Mobile home lots shall have a minimum area of 7,000
square feet and a minimum width of 55 feet.
(2) Separation. Mobile home units may be positioned in a variety of
ways within a park if a separation of at least 30 feet is maintained
between the extremities of any two units.
(3) Setback. No mobile home shall be located less than 25 feet from the
pavement edge of a private street or 25 feet from the right-of-way
of any public street within the mobile home park. A minimum of 30
feet shall be maintained between mobile home units and all park
boundary lines, except that at least 60 feet shall be maintained
between all units and any park boundary abutting an existing
single-family residence, public road, highway or railroad.
(4) Road layout and construction. A drawing of the proposed park
layout, showing connections to be made to existing roads, shall be
included as part of the mobile home park plans. Attempts should be
made to avoid long straight stretches and gridiron systems when
possible. The paved surface of all private roads within a mobile
home park shall be at least 20 feet wide, and the Village
Superintendent of Public Works shall approve construction
specifications. Any public roads that may fall within the park shall
have a fifty-foot right-of-way and be constructed to Village road
specifications.
§ 260-31 WALTON CODE § 260-31
1:372
(5) Parking. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each
mobile home site. Such spaces may be located on the individual lot
or grouped to serve two or more mobile home sites. Off-street
parking spaces shall be constructed of at least a four-inch
compacted gravel base with a one-inch hard surface material.
(6) Recreation and open space. Usable and easily accessible recreation
areas shall be provided for park occupants. At least 400 square feet
of open space per mobile home unit shall be included in the plan,
with a total minimum requirement of 10,000 square feet.
(7) Mobile home stand. Each mobile home site shall be provided with a
permanent foundation with footers below the frost line or with a
stand and support capable of providing a firm base and containing
the mobile home in a stable position. Such stand shall have a
dimension equal to the width and length of the home and any
expansions or extensions thereto and shall be a full-size concrete
slab at least six inches thick.
(8) Tie-downs. Each mobile home stand shall be provided with anchors
or tie-downs, at least at the corners, attached to concrete footings
installed below the frost line or embedded in concrete runners or a
concrete slab that may be provided as the mobile home stand.
(9) Patio. Each mobile home site shall be provided with a concrete
patio with a minimum width of 10 feet and a total area of at least
120 square feet.
(10)Walkways. Each mobile home site shall be provided with a walkway
from the stand or patio to the street or to a driveway or to a parking
area connecting to the street. Such walkway shall be at least 18
inches wide and four inches deep constructed with a crushed-stone
base and a hard surface.
(11) Landscaping. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of a mobile
home park shall be paved, surfaced with crushed stone or other
solid material, or protected with grass or plant material to prevent
erosion and reduce dust. At least one tree shall be planted on each
mobile home lot if no such tree already exists. Planted trees shall
have a caliper of at least two inches three feet above the ground.
(12) Mobile home installation. At the time of installation, the mobile
home unit shall be securely blocked, leveled, tied down, and
connected to the required utility systems and support services. The
mobile home shall be completely skirted within 60 days of
occupancy. Materials used for skirting shall provide a finished
exterior appearance, and no exposed wallboard, building paper or
similar unfinished material will be permitted.
(13)Water supply. If public water is within 500 feet and available, the
mobile home park must be hooked to such system. When a public
water supply is not available, an approved private supply and
§ 260-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-31
1:373
system shall be established in accordance with the following
standards:
(a) A minimum rate of 200 gallons per day per mobile home site
shall be provided at a minimum pressure of 20 pounds per
square inch at peak demand.
(b) A water service connection consisting of a service box with a
shutoff valve installed below the frost line and a three-quarter
riser pipe shall be supplied to each mobile home site. Surface
drainage shall be diverted from the connection. The design and
construction of all components of such systems shall be subject
to the inspection and approval of the Code Enforcement
Official and the NYSDOH.
(14) Sewage disposal. If public sewerage is within 500 feet and
available, the mobile home park must be hooked to such system.
When public sewage disposal is not available, an approved private
system shall be established in accordance with the following
standards:
(a) Sewage disposal systems shall be designed to accommodate a
minimum flow of 200 gallons of wastewater per day per mobile
home site.
(b) Each mobile home site shall be provided with a four-inch sewer
line below the ground surface and a riser pipe. A
noncollapsible and semirigid connecting pipe shall be provided
from the riser pipe to the mobile home. All connections shall be
watertight. The design and construction of all components of
such system shall be subject to the inspection and approval of
the Code Enforcement Official, the NYCDEP and the NYSDOH.
(15) Solid waste disposal. Provisions shall be made and approved for the
storage, collection, and disposal of solid waste in a manner that will
cause no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas,
fire hazards or air pollution. Storage areas for solid waste
containers shall be enclosed or otherwise screened from public
view.
(16) Lighting. Mobile home parks shall be provided with lighting
sufficient to illuminate streets, driveways and walkways.
Decorative lighting fixtures shall be used wherever possible.
(17) Electricity and telephone. The distribution system for electrical and
telephone service shall be installed underground and shall comply
with the requirements of the utility and telephone companies.
(18) Fuel systems. Mobile home parks shall be provided with facilities
for the safe storage of necessary fuels. Natural gas installations, if
used, shall be planned and installed so that components and
workmanship comply with the requirements of the American Gas
§ 260-31 WALTON CODE § 260-31
1:374
Association, Inc. Fuel oil systems shall be designed, constructed,
inspected and maintained in conformance with the provisions of
National Fire Protection Association Standard 30. Liquefied
petroleum gas systems shall be selected, installed and maintained
in compliance with the requirements of National Fire Protection
Association Standard 58.
(19) Fire protection. If public water is available, fire hydrants shall be
installed in accordance with the requirements of the Village Board
and fire department of jurisdiction.
(20) Mail service. Mailbox location shall provide safe and easy access
for the pickup and delivery of mail. Mailboxes grouped for cluster
delivery shall be located so that stopping for pickup and delivery
will not occur on the public right-of-way.
(21) In reviewing the site plan for a mobile home park, the Planning
Board may approve changes in the environmental standards of this
section if the Board is satisfied that the spirit and intent of this
article is not being violated and that any proposed change is
equivalent to, or better than, the standards set forth herein.
E. Renewal of mobile home park permit. Renewal of the mobile home park
permit shall be applied for every two years from the date of first
issuance. Application for renewal shall be filed with the Village Clerk,
who shall renew such permit only if the Code Enforcement Official has
certified in writing that no violations of this article or the conditions of
said permit have been found. If such violations or unapproved changes
have occurred, the mobile home park permit will not be renewed until
said mobile home park has been brought into compliance. In such case,
the Code Enforcement Official shall serve an order upon the holder of
the mobile home park permit in accordance with the provisions of
§ 260-31G of this article.
F. Park operation and maintenance.
(1) Occupancy. No space shall be rented in any mobile home park for
placement of a travel or camping trailer or a recreation vehicle. No
mobile home shall be admitted to any park unless it bears the seal
required by the State of New York or an equivalent acceptable to
the State of New York.
(2) Responsibilities of park operator. The person to whom a mobile
home park permit is issued shall be responsible for operation of the
park in compliance with this article and shall provide adequate
supervision to maintain the park, its common grounds, streets,
facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary
condition. The park operator shall maintain a register containing
the following information for each mobile home in the park:
(a) The name of the occupant.
§ 260-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-31
1:375
(b) The name and address of the owner if different from the
occupant.
(c) The date of arrival of the mobile home and occupant.
(d) The date of departure of the mobile home and occupant.
(e) The make of the mobile home and evidence that it bears a New
York seal or equivalent the (serial number, etc.).
(3) Such register shall be available to any authorized person
inspecting the park.
(4) Responsibility of park occupants. Each park occupant shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the mobile home occupied and
any appurtenances thereto and shall keep all yard space on the
rented site in a neat and sanitary condition.
(5) A list of owner and occupant responsibilities shall be posted in the
park rental office.
G. Inspection and enforcement.
(1) Inspection. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Official to
make the inspections required for a certificate of occupancy and for
renewal of the mobile home park permit every two years. Such
inspection shall be carried out at reasonable times, after prior
notice to the park operator, and in emergencies, whenever
necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare.
(2) Order. Upon determination by the Code Enforcement Official that
there has been a violation of any provision of this article, he shall
serve upon the holder of the mobile home park permit an initial
order, in writing, directing that the conditions therein specified be
corrected within a time period to be specified by the Code
Enforcement Official but in no case more than 90 days after the
date of delivery of such order. The order shall also contain an
outline of remedial action that, if taken, will effect compliance. A
copy of such order shall be transmitted to the Village Board.
(3) Notice. If, after the expiration of such ninety-day or other relevant
time period, such violations are not corrected, the Code
Enforcement Official, if so authorized by the Village Board, shall
serve notice in writing upon such mobile home park operator
requiring the holder of the mobile home park permit to appear
before the Village Board, at a time to be specified in such notice, to
show cause why the mobile home park permit should not be
revoked. Such hearing before the Village Board shall occur not less
than 72 hours, or more than 10 days, after the date of service of
said notice by the Code Enforcement Official.
(4) Within 30 days after the hearing at which the testimony of the Code
Enforcement Official and the holder of the mobile home park
§ 260-31 WALTON CODE § 260-31
1:376
§ 260-32. Health Department approval.
Any provision of this article to the contrary notwithstanding, no building
permit for a mobile home park or a single mobile home not in a mobile
home park will be issued until NYSDOH and NYCDEP approvals have been
obtained for the design of any private water system or sewage disposal
system involved.
permit shall be heard, the Village Board shall make a determination
sustaining, modifying, or withdrawing the order issued by the Code
Enforcement Official. Failure to abide by any Village Board
determination to sustain or modify the initial order and to take
corrective action accordingly shall be cause for the revocation
of the mobile home park permit affected by such order and
determination and the closing of the mobile home park.
§ 260-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-32
1:377

ARTICLE XI
Junk, Junkyards and Automobile Graveyards
§ 260-33. Purpose.
This article shall include all properties within the Village limits that are in
use or intended for use as a junkyard, automobile graveyard, or automobile
reclamation center. Junk, junkyards, automobile graveyards and automobile
reclamation centers shall be as defined in Article II of this chapter.
§ 260-34. Screening.
A. All junkyards shall be licensed and pay an annual registration fee to the
Village of Walton.
B. All junkyards shall comply with Article XIV, Site Plan Review, before the
Code Enforcement Official issues a Village of Walton junkyard license.
C. No junk shall be located so as to be visible from any public roadways.
D. No junk shall be stored within:
(1) One hundred feet of any adjoining property line.
(2) Five hundred feet of any public park, church, educational facility,
nursing home, public building or other place of public gathering.
(3) Two hundred fifty feet of any stream, lake, pond, wetland or other
body of water.
(4) One hundred feet from the right-of-way line of any public street,
road, or highway.
A. Where a junkyard is or would be visible from a public roadway or from
neighboring properties, there shall be erected and maintained an eightfoot-
high opaque fence to screen the junk storage area. All junkyard
items dealt with by the operation of the junkyard shall be kept within
such screening at all times so that the junkyard items are not visible
from the public highway or from neighboring properties.
B. The fence shall be made of wood or other acceptable materials as
approved by the Village of Walton Planning Board, and they shall screen
the totality of the junk storage area from view.
C. At the discretion of the Planning Board, a screening of natural materials
such as trees, berms and shrubs may be allowed, provided that the
screening method obtains a height of at least eight feet and it screens
all junk in totality from public highways and neighboring properties.
§ 260-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-35
1:379
§ 260-35. Burning. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
No materials shall be burned in a junkyard except in compliance with the
New York State Outdoor Burning Law (6 NYCRR 215).
§ 260-36. Burying.
No junk items shall be buried in the Village as part of the operation of a
junkyard.
§ 260-37. Approved junkyard items.
No junkyard items shall be stored on any junk storage area other than those
items specified on a junkyard license approved by the Village of Walton
pursuant to this chapter.
§ 260-38. License required.
§ 260-39. Application procedure.
A. No person shall establish or maintain a junkyard within the Village of
Walton unless a license has first been issued for such junkyard pursuant
to this chapter.
B. No person owning, having any right to, or any interest in any real
property within the Village shall license, rent, lease, or otherwise
permit the use of such real property to any part thereof for a junkyard
unless a license has first been issued for such junkyard pursuant to this
chapter.
C. All licenses shall be issued for a period of one year, after which time
renewal shall be required.
D. Any properties currently being used as a junkyard shall comply with the
requirements of these regulations within six months of the adoption of
this chapter.
A. Application. The applicant for a junkyard license shall obtain
application forms from the Village Clerk. The completed forms, along
with one copy of the proposed site plan, and the appropriate fees shall
be returned to the Village Clerk-Treasurer for submission to the Village
of Walton Planning Board.
B. Site plan contents.
(1) All site plans shall be drawn to scale and indicate all dimensions as
shown.
(2) All site plans for a junkyard shall include all requirements listed in
Article XIV, Site Plan Review, as well as the following:
(a) All existing and proposed structures, including fencing.
§ 260-35 WALTON CODE § 260-39
1:380
§ 260-40. Planning Board action.
The Planning Board must render a decision to approve, approve with
conditions or disapprove the application within 62 days of the public
hearing. The sixty-two-day period may be extended by mutual consent
of the Board and the applicant. A final decision must be filed with the
Village Clerk-Treasurer within 10 days of the final decision, and the Code
Enforcement Official shall issue a license within 30 days of the decision.
§ 260-41. License renewal.
The Code Enforcement Official shall approve applications for renewal after
an inspection to ensure the conditions of the original license and site plan
have been adhered to. Any changes to the original license will result in a
new application to the Village Planning Board.
§ 260-42. Revocation of license.
The Village Planning Board may revoke a junkyard license upon reasonable
cause if the applicant fails to comply with all of the provisions of this
article. A public hearing must be held before revocation, and the license
holder shall be notified of such hearing by certified mail at least 10 days in
advance. If the Planning Board revokes a license for cause, it must be filed
(b) All property lines, including the names of the owners of
adjacent property.
(c) All streams, lakes, wetlands, floodplains, and other water
bodies.
(d) All wells and sanitary facilities.
(e) All roads and easements.
(f) All existing and proposed junk storage areas.
(3) All existing and proposed accessways and parking and loading
areas.
C. Environmental review. An environmental assessment form (EAF)
pursuant to SEQRA (6 NYCRR 617) shall be completed and submitted
with the completed application before action by the Village of Walton
Planning Board.
D. Application fee. The application fee shall be a minimum of $50 and set
by the Village of Walton Board. The fee must accompany the application
before action by the Planning Board.
E. Public hearing. The Planning Board must conduct a public hearing
within 62 days of receiving a completed application. Notice of the
hearing shall be posted in the official Village newspaper, and the
applicant must notify all adjoining property owners by certified mail at
least 10 days before the hearing.
§ 260-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-42
1:381
with the Village Clerk, and all reasons shall be stated. After such time, the
license holder has a minimum of 30 days and a maximum of 90 days to clean
up all junk and bring the property into compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 260-43. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to any property owner who is in the process of
restoring, storing or utilizing a classic or antique car as defined in Article II
of this chapter.
§ 260-44. Outdoor storage.
A. No person, as owner, occupant, lessee or agent, or in any capacity, shall
store, deposit, place, maintain or cause or permit to be stored,
deposited, placed or maintained outdoors any solid waste, rubbish or
debris upon any private property within the Village.
B. The placement of garbage for collection shall not be deemed a violation
of this article.
C. Whenever it shall appear that the provisions of this article are violated,
the Code Enforcement Official shall make an inspection of the property
involved and shall prepare a written report of the conditions found,
which report shall be filed with the Village Board.
D. A written notice shall be sent by certified mail to the owner or owner's
agent and the lessee or occupant of the premises. The notice must
include the following:
(1) Names of the owner and lessee or occupant of the property in
violation.
(2) The address or location of the premises.
(3) Identification of the premises as the same that appears on the
current assessment role.
(4) A statement of the conditions on the property deemed upon
inspection to be in violation of this article.
(5) A statement requiring the property to be brought into compliance
and all waste, rubbish, motor vehicles and debris to be removed
within 10 days after receipt of the certified mailing.
(6) A statement that a failure to comply with the request may result in
authorized Village personnel entering the property for removal and
disposal of all waste, debris, rubbish and/or motor vehicles.
(7) The notice shall also include a date, time and location in which the
Village Board will hold a public hearing to determine if the
conditions of the property constitute a public nuisance. The hearing
must be held before action of authorized Village personnel, and the
§ 260-42 WALTON CODE § 260-44
1:382
§ 260-45. Penalties for offenses.
Any person(s) who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of an offense and subject to a fine of not more than $250 for each
offense. Every such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for
each week such violation, disobedience, omission, neglect, or refusal shall
continue.
owner, lessee or owner's agent shall have an opportunity to speak
at said hearing in their defense.
E. After a public hearing, the Village Board may deem the property in
question as a public nuisance and order the removal of all solid waste,
rubbish, debris and/or motor vehicles from the property at the owner's
expense to be billed by the requirements of this article.
§ 260-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-45
1:383

ARTICLE XII
Nonconforming Uses
§ 260-46. Existing uses.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the lawful use of a building or
structure or the lawful use of any land existing and lawful at the effective
date of this Zoning chapter, or in the case of a change of regulations, then
at the time of such change, may be continued, although such use does
not conform to the provisions hereof. Except as provided in this article,
such nonconforming use may not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or
structurally altered, except in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning
chapter.
§ 260-47. Change of uses.
Whenever a nonconforming use of land or buildings has been changed to a
more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be
changed to a less restricted use.
§ 260-48. Extension of use.
The nonconforming use of a building may not be further extended through
the same building.
§ 260-49. Discontinuance.
No building or portion thereof used in whole or in part for a nonconforming
use in any district which remains idle or unused for a continuous period of
one year, whether or not the equipment or fixtures are removed, shall again
be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which
such building or land is located.
§ 260-50. Municipal acquisition of tax-delinquent property.
If the municipality acquires title to any property by reason of tax
delinquency and such property is not redeemed as provided by law, the
future use of such property shall be in conformity with the then existing
provisions of the zoning regulations of the municipality.
§ 260-51. Destruction of nonconforming use.
No building that has been damaged by any cause whatsoever to the extent
of more than 50% of the fair market value of the building, as measured
immediately prior to damage, shall be restored, except in conformity with
the regulations of this Zoning chapter, and all rights as a nonconforming use
are terminated. If a building is damaged by less than 50% of its fair market
value, it may be repaired or reconstructed and used as before the time
of damage, provided that such repairs or reconstruction be substantially
completed with 12 months of the date of such damage.
§ 260-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-52
1:385
§ 260-52. Nonconforming lots.
If the owner of a lot in any district does not own a parcel or tract of
land immediately adjacent to such lot, and if the deed or instrument under
which such owner acquired title to such lot was lawfully of record prior
to the application of zoning regulations and restrictions to the premises,
and if such lot does not conform to the requirements of such regulations
and restrictions as to area and dimensions of lots, the provisions of such
lot area and dimension regulations and restrictions shall not prevent the
owner of such lot from erecting a single-family dwelling or making other
improvements on the lot, provided that such improvements conform in all
other respects to applicable zoning and health regulations and restrictions.
§ 260-53. Nonconforming signs.
In a residential district where any sign does not comply with the provisions
of this Zoning chapter, such sign and any supporting structures may be
maintained but shall not be replaced, reconstructed, moved, structurally
altered or relighted, except in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning
chapter, and may continue in use unless subject to removal under other
provisions of this Zoning chapter. Removal, replacement, reconstruction,
moving or structural alteration for any cause whatsoever shall be
considered as loss of nonconforming status. Supporting structures for
nonconforming signs may continue in use for a conforming sign if said
support structures comply in all respects to the applicable requirements of
these regulations and other codes and laws. No permits for additional signs
shall be issued for any premises on which there are any nonconforming
signs.
§ 260-54. Nonconforming dwellings in business and industrial
districts.
A dwelling nonconforming as to use in a business or industrial district shall
be required to comply with the otherwise applicable height, area and bulk
requirements of this Zoning chapter.
§ 260-52 WALTON CODE § 260-54
1:386
ARTICLE XIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 260-55. Enforcement.
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Official to enforce the
provisions of this Zoning chapter and to refuse to issue any permit for
any building or for the use of any premises that would violate any of the
provisions of said Zoning chapter. It shall also be the duty of all officers
and employees of the municipality to assist the Code Enforcement
Official by reporting to him any seeming violation in new construction,
reconstruction or land uses.
B. If the Code Enforcement Official finds that any of the provisions of this
Zoning chapter are being violated, then the Code Enforcement Official
shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation,
indicating the nature of the violation. Upon receipt of said notice, the
person responsible for the violation shall have seven days to remove the
violation. The Code Enforcement Official may meet with the person
responsible for the violation to review the issue within the seven-day
period.
C. The Code Enforcement Official shall issue a written notice to stop work
to a landowner of a property in which there is a violation of this Zoning
chapter while construction is under way.
D. If a building permit has been denied or if a stop-work notice has been
issued, the landowner may seek administrative relief in accordance
with the procedures outlined in this Zoning chapter.
E. If the landowner continues the violation in contravention to the
procedures of this Zoning chapter, the Code Enforcement Official shall
notify the Village Board of Trustees in writing that the violation is
continuing, and if the Village Board of Trustees, upon review of the
facts, finds that the violation is so continuing, it shall order the Code
Enforcement Official to commence court proceedings in accordance
with applicable statutes.
F. Administrative costs and charges. If any person shall fail to comply with
the provisions of this chapter after reasonable notice to that person, the
Code Enforcement Official or the Village Board may authorize and take
such action as may be necessary to correct the violation. Thereafter the
costs of such action, repair, vacation or demolition, together with an
additional charge of 50% thereof for administration and supervision,
shall be charged against the land on which the building exists (or
existed) as a municipal lien, or cause such costs to be added to the tax
rolls as an assessment, or to be levied as a special tax against the land
upon which the building stands or did stand, or to be recovered in a suit
at law against the owner. In cases where such procedure is desirable
and any delay thereby caused will not be dangerous to the health,
morals, safety or general welfare of the people of the Village, the
§ 260-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-55
1:387
§ 260-56. Certificate of occupancy.23
§ 260-57. Building permits.24
Village Board may authorize the Village Attorney to take legal action
on its behalf to force the owner to make all necessary corrections and/
or to enforce all of the charges or fees made herein together with all
reasonable attorneys' fees, and filing fees as may be incurred in such
enforcement action. [Added 10-1-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007]
G. Adoption of fee schedule. The Village Board may adopt a fee schedule,
billing procedures and other matters necessary for the administration
of this section and may amend such schedule and procedures from time
to time as may be necessary. [Added 10-1-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007]
A. No vacant land shall be occupied or used, except for agricultural uses,
until the Code Enforcement Official shall have issued a certificate of
occupancy.
B. No premises shall be used, and no buildings hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be used, occupied or changed in use, until a
certificate of occupancy and compliance shall have been issued by the
Code Enforcement Official, following an inspection of the premises or
building, stating that the building or proposed use of a building or
premises complies with the building laws and the provisions of these
regulations.
C. Certificates of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for
coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued
within 10 days after erection or structural alteration of such buildings
shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of these
regulations. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office
of the Code Enforcement Official.
D. No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before
application has been made for a certificate of occupancy and
compliance.
A. Any application for a building permit shall first be submitted to the
Code Enforcement Official, who shall review said application to
determine if it is complete and conforms to the provisions of this Zoning
chapter.
B. No building shall be erected, constructed, altered, moved, converted,
extended or enlarged without the owner or owners first having obtained
a building permit therefore from the Code Enforcement Official. Such
permit shall require conformity with the provisions of this Zoning
chapter and any other applicable federal, state, county or local law or
23.Editor's Note: See also § 117-7, Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance.
24.Editor's Note: See also § 117-4, Building permits.
§ 260-55 WALTON CODE § 260-57
1:388
§ 260-58. Special regulations for protection of banks and
waterways. [Amended 11-5-2007 by L.L. No. 8-2007]
code. When issued, such permit shall be valid for the period specified
thereon.
C. No mobile home shall be placed for occupancy at any location without
the owner or owners first having obtained a placement permit therefor
from the Code Enforcement Official.
D. No building permit by the Code Enforcement Official, lawfully issued
prior to the effective date of this Zoning chapter, or of any amendments
hereto, and which permit, by its own terms and provisions, is in full
force and effect at said date, shall be invalidated by the passage of this
Zoning chapter, or any such amendment, but shall remain a valid and
subsisting permit, subject only to its own terms and provisions and
laws, rules and regulations pertaining thereto, and in effect at the time
of the issuance of such permit, provided that all such permits shall
expire not later than 60 days from the effective date of this Zoning
chapter, unless actual construction shall have therefore begun and
continued pursuant to the terms of said permit.
A. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, approval by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be required if the lot or lots included within the
application for a permit abut one or more banks of a waterway.
B. Any application for a permit or development shall include evidence that
the proposed action will not cause deterioration of the bank of a
waterway, that proper conservation methods will be employed to
protect the bank and that the bank of any waterway will be restored to
an acceptable condition and maintained in a proper manner. In
considering and approving the application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall take into consideration the following:
(1) Satisfactory approval of any proposal by the State Department of
Environmental Conservation, specifically that state's review
process under Article 5 of the Stream Protection Law. The
Department of Environmental Conservation will advise the
applicant of measures that can be taken to protect the banks.
(2) Compliance with the State Environmental Quality Review Act
(SEQRA), Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq., which
provides that all applications shall be reviewed to determine
whether there will be a significant environmental impact caused by
the development. If a significant impact is expected, an
environmental impact statement shall be required. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I)]
(3) The applicant shall submit evidence that the bank shall be
maintained in a natural condition or improved to a natural
§ 260-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-58
1:389
§ 260-59. Special regulations for solar energy systems and
equipment.
All solar energy systems and equipment that are incorporated into a
building or are detached collectors adjacent to the building shall meet
the applicable local and/or state specifications, standards and regulations
governing construction and operations. Information shall be supplied on
a plan along with the application for a building permit showing the
dimensions and location of the solar energy systems and equipment and
that the location of the same will assure proper operation. If trees or other
vegetation on the lot in question prevent's the proper operation of the
equipment, then the applicant shall provide a written plan, prepared by a
duly licensed tree surgeon or other qualified professional, for the trimming
of trees or vegetation to assure proper operation of the equipment. The
expense of maintaining continuing solar access and operation of the
systems or equipment shall be borne by the applicant.
§ 260-60. Plot plans.
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by written
approval from the Village Board of Trustees or, if such approval is not
required, by a drawing or plot plan in duplicate or as required by the
Code Enforcement Official showing, with dimensions, the lot lines, the
building or buildings, the location of buildings on the lot and such other
information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these
regulations, including, if necessary, a boundary survey and a staking of the
lot by a competent surveyor and complete construction plans. The drawings
shall contain suitable notations indicating the proposed use of all land
and buildings. A careful record of the original copy of such applications
and plats shall be kept in the offices of the Code Enforcement Official,
and a duplicate copy shall be kept at the building at all times during
construction. In a particular case, the Code Enforcement Official may waive
the requirement for plot plans when such plan is clearly unnecessary to a
decision or the record on the case.25
condition suitable to the Floodplain Administrator to include
sloping of the bank, seeding and mulching of the bank, adding
stone to the lower portion of the bank to prevent erosion and
planting vegetation on the bank to enhance it as a wooded area.
An application for a building permit shall include the proposal for
treatment on a drawing required by the Floodplain Administrator
or shall submit along with the application for a permit a statement
prepared by a licensed engineer or other appropriate professional
the action to be taken by the applicant to protect or restore the
banks.
(4) The Floodplain Administrator may conduct public hearings before
issuing a decision.
25.Editor's Note: Original § 53-60 of the 1973 Code, Fees, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 260-58 WALTON CODE § 260-61
1:390
§ 260-61. Penalties for offenses. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250, imprisonment for not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 260-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-61
1:391

ARTICLE XIV
Site Plan Review
§ 260-62. Approval required for certain types of site development
plans.
The Village of Walton Planning Board is hereby authorized to review and
approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove site plans prepared to the
specifications set forth in this article. Before the issuance of a building
permit, approval by the Planning Board shall be required of site
development plans for all of the following:
§ 260-63. General content of site plans.
In general, a site plan shall comprise a development plan for an entire
project on a single parcel of land, showing the use or uses, dimensions and
locations of proposed and existing structures and of areas to be reserved for
vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking, signs, landscaping, screening
and other spaces, and architectural sketches and drawings demonstrating
the design and character of the proposed uses and the physical relationship
of such uses.
§ 260-64. Filing date; review of application.
The site plan is to be submitted to the Code Enforcement Official at least
14 days before the regularly scheduled meeting of the Village Planning
Board, but the Code Enforcement Official may waive this provision in his
discretion. The Code Enforcement Official shall review said application to
determine whether it is complete and conforms to the provisions of the
Zoning chapter. A complete application includes all data listed below in
§ 260-70. Upon request of the applicant, the Code Enforcement Official may
A. All new buildings and accessory uses, other than one-family and twofamily
dwellings, in all districts.
B. Parking areas for four or more vehicles.
C. Off-street loading facilities.
D. Required screening or buffer treatment.
E. Building alterations which significantly affect exterior appearance as
determined by the Code Enforcement Official or which require
additional parking.
F. Conditional uses for all zoning districts.
G. Extension, enlargement or expansion of existing structures, other than
one-or two-family dwellings, exceeding 10% of the existing square
footage, provided that there have been no more than three expansions
and that said building or structure can meet all other requirements of
this chapter.
§ 260-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-64
1:393
waive certain requirements as listed in § 260-70 when in his discretion
such information is not material to the project under review. The Code
Enforcement Official should notify the applicant in writing within 14 days
of receipt of the application if the application is incomplete or not in
conformance with applicable zoning requirements. However, in no case
shall an application be processed if it is incomplete or does not comply
with zoning requirements. When the application is deemed complete and
complies with zoning requirements, the Code Enforcement Official shall
submit seven copies of the application to the Clerk-Treasurer of the Village
Planning Board at least seven days before the regularly scheduled Village
Planning Board meeting.
§ 260-65. Referral to other agencies.
§ 260-66. Application fees.
Upon receipt of a site plan application by the Village Planning Board,
the application fees, if any, shall be paid. Application fees shall be set by
resolution of the Village Board of Trustees.
§ 260-67. Review by Planning Board.
A. In addition to referral of site plans to other agencies as required by law,
the Planning Board may refer site plans to other federal, state, county,
local, private or quasi-public agencies for their recommendations
within their particular fields of expertise. The Planning Board shall
receive written reports by other agencies that have been requested to
submit a report, provided that such agencies shall report within 30 days
from the submission to said agency to review and comment on same.
Failure of any agency to respond within the prescribed time period shall
constitute approval of said application by the agency.
B. When required by § 239-m of General Municipal Law, copies of the
application will be sent to the Delaware County Planning Board for
review. In the event that a public hearing is scheduled, the Planning
Board shall mail notices to the Delaware County Planning Board as
required by § 239-m of the General Municipal Law. The Delaware
County Planning Board must be sent notice of the public hearing at
least 10 days before the public hearing. The notice shall be
accompanied by a full statement of the matter under consideration, as
defined in § 239-m of the General Municipal Law. If the Delaware
County Planning Board submits a report that recommends disapproval
or conditional approval, then the Village Planning Board may override
that agency's decision by a vote of a majority plus one. If the Village
Planning Board votes to override the Delaware County Planning Board
recommendation, the Village Planning Board shall provide a written
statement explaining the reasons for the overriding vote. The Delaware
County Planning Board must be notified of the final action taken by the
Village Planning Board within seven days.
§ 260-64 WALTON CODE § 260-67
1:394
§ 260-68. Compliance with site plan approval.
All proposed improvements or development indicated on the approved site
plan map shall meet the requirements of all applicable codes and laws of
the Village, county, state or federal governments and other agencies with
jurisdiction over matters pertaining to site development.
A. The Planning Board may overrule any waivers so granted by the Code
Enforcement Official as provided for in § 260-65 and require full
compliance with the requirements set forth in § 260-70 before
accepting a site plan application.
B. The review timetable commences the day the site plan application is
accepted at the official Planning Board meeting. Within 62 days of
receipt of all required reports and applications, the Planning Board may
hold a public hearing on the proposal. Within 62 days of the public
hearing, the Planning Board shall render a decision. If no public
hearing is held, the Planning Board shall render a decision within 62
days of receipt of an application for site plan approval. The time period
in which the Planning Board must render a decision may be extended by
written consent of the applicant and the Planning Board.
C. Public hearing.
(1) If a public hearing is required, the Clerk of the Planning Board shall
mail notice of said hearing to the applicant at least 14 days before
the hearing and shall give public notice of the hearing in the official
newspaper. The public notice shall be published at least five days
before the public hearing.
(2) In addition to the public notice of hearings, the applicant shall give
notice, in writing, by certified mail, within 10 days of the public
hearing, to all property owners of land adjacent to the property.
Adjacent properties shall be all properties that directly abut the
property on which the action for site plan review is being proposed.
This includes all properties directly across a street, watercourse or
right-of-way.
(3) The Planning Board shall have the power to waive Subsection C(2)
above when, in its discretion, this requirements would be
unnecessary in terms of the size and location of the proposed action
and its visibility from neighboring properties.
D. The reasons for action taken on the application shall be set forth in the
written minutes of the Planning Board. The Planning Board decision
shall be filed within five business days after such decision is rendered in
the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer and a copy mailed to the
applicant.
§ 260-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-69
1:395
§ 260-69. Site plan to be binding.
The site plan, as approved by the Planning Board, shall be binding upon the
applicant. Any changes from the approved plan shall require resubmission
and reapproval by the Planning Board. Site plan approval shall remain in
effect for a period of one year following the date of approval. The Planning
Board, upon request from the applicant, may, for good and sufficient reason,
extend this period for not more than one additional year.
§ 260-70. Information required.
A. Plans submitted to the Code Enforcement Official shall be considered as
being ready for review if the following data and information are
submitted at the appropriate scale:
(1) Name and address of the owner of the plot.
(2) Lot and block number of the assessment map.
(3) Name(s) of owners of record of all adjacent property.
(4) Existing zoning.
(5) Boundaries of property.
(6) Building and setback lines.
(7) Location of existing buildings.
(8) Type and location of easements.
(9) Copy of covenants and deed restrictions.
(10) Contours with five-foot intervals or less.
(11) Location of existing watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded
areas.
(12) Single trees eight inches or more as measured three feet above the
base of the trunk.
(13) Location of features on property or beyond which affect property,
i.e., watercourse, wooded areas, easements, rights-of-way, streets,
road, highway, freeways, railroads, canals, rivers, buildings and
structures.
(14) Name of development.
(15) Date.
(16) North arrow.
(17) Scale.
§ 260-69 WALTON CODE § 260-70
1:396
(18)Name and address of record owner, engineer, architect, land
planner or surveyor responsible for the preparation of the plan.
(19) Proposed use(s) for land and buildings.
(20) Proposed location of buildings and accessory structures.
(21) Dimensions of buildings(s).
(22) Location and treatment of all entrances and exits.
(23) Finished grades of all open spaces.
(24) Proposed grades of interior walks and sidewalks, walkways and all
others for pedestrian use.
(25) Driveways and parking or other paved areas.
(26) Buildings shall indicate type of construction.
(27) Floor area and height.
(28) Access and egress onto public streets.
(29) Traffic signals, channelization, acceleration and deceleration lanes,
additional width.
(30)Off-street loading and/or parking areas.
(31) Parking spaces, number of spaces provided.
(32) Aisles, spaces and driveways with dimensions.
(33) Lighting: location, color, direction, type of fixture, power, and
timing.
(34) Signs: location, dimension, elevation, and drawings of all signs.
(35) Utilities: location on plan of existing and/or proposed public and
private utilities.
(36) Stormwater drainage: location, size, and type of temporary and
permanent facilities.
(37) Sanitary sewer lines located.
(38) Open spaces and recreation: location and identification.
(39) Existing landscaping and forestry features.
(40) Buffer areas and screening; if a wall, indicate material to be used.
(41) Floor plans, elevations, heights, general design and styling.
(42)SEQRA (State Environmental Quality Review): environmental
assessment form or environmental impact statement.
§ 260-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-70
1:397
§ 260-71. Considerations, conditions and standards.
(43) Plans for the control of soil erosion.
(44) Other documents required by the Planning Board.
A. Standards generally. In considering and approving the site development
plan, the Planning Board shall take into consideration the public health,
safety and general welfare, comfort and convenience of the public in
general and of the residents of the immediate neighborhood in
particular, and it may attach such conditions and safeguards as a
precondition to approval of such plan as, in its opinion, will further the
general purpose and intent of this Zoning chapter and be in harmony
therewith.
B. Conditions and standards. The Planning Board may impose appropriate
conditions and safeguards with respect to the following aspects of the
proposed development but shall not be limited solely to these aspects:
(1) Traffic and circulation.
(a) Adequacy of the location and design of driveways providing
vehicular ingress to and egress from the site, in relation to
streets giving access to the site and traffic patterns thereon
and in relation to pedestrian traffic.
(b) That all proposed traffic accessways to and from the public
street are adequate in width, grade, alignment and visibility;
not located too near street corners, schools or other places of
public assembly; and other similar safety considerations.
(c) That the interior circulation system is adequate to provide safe
accessibility to all required off-street parking and for fire
apparatus and police vehicles, and the adequacy of the location
and design of automobile parking areas and of loading areas.
(2) Layout and screening.
(a) Harmonious location of main and accessory buildings in
relation to the site and in relation to one another.
(b) Satisfactory and harmonious relations between the
development on the site and existing and prospective
development of contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods.
(c) That all playground, parking and service areas are reasonably
screened, at all seasons of the year, from the view of adjacent
residential lots and streets; that the general landscaping of the
site is in character with that generally prevailing in the
neighborhood; and that all other required screening or
buffering is adequate to fulfill its function.
(3) Removal of trees.
§ 260-70 WALTON CODE § 260-71
1:398
(a) That the development of any residential site does not
contemplate the removal of trees over 24 inches in
circumference, measured three feet above grade, except in the
area of the building and in the marginal area surrounding the
building to a distance of 15 feet from exterior walls or eaves of
porches, and except for the purpose of creating an improved
landscape plan, opening vistas, the installing of site structures
such as walks, driveways, parking areas, swimming pools,
courts for games and sports and other such structures, and
except for reasons of safety, sanitation and the general welfare.
Trees to be removed to create an improved grading and
landscaping plan shall be indicated on grading or site
development plans submitted in conjunction with the site plan.
Removal of diseased and dead trees is not prohibited, except
that girdling or poisoning of trees in order to avoid compliance
with approval plans shall constitute a violation. The removal of
any trees over 24 inches in circumference measured three feet
above grade for any reason, except safety, sanitation, control of
disease or the general welfare, prior to approval of the site
plan shall constitute a violation.
(b) Violations of this section shall be subject to a fine of $250 plus
$5 for each increment of one inch in circumference that the
circumference exceeds 24 inches.
(4) Capital improvements: that drainage, sewer lines, relating walls,
culverts and other capital improvements are adequate, measured
by normal engineering design standards.
(5) Maintenance: adequacy of plans for and likelihood of maintenance
of the foregoing.
(6) In all R-R Districts, all development shall be designed so as to
prevent soil erosion, deterioration of the banks of public waterways
and to ensure that there is no major outside storage of vehicles
(snowmobiles, used cars, etc.).
(7) Drainage certification. The Planning Board shall approve no site
plan until it has been certified by the Village Engineer with respect
to the adequacy of proposed facilities for sewerage and for
drainage of stormwater.
(8) Environmental quality. The Planning Board shall approve no site
plan until the application has met the requirements of the state's
Environmental Quality Review Act.26
(9) Flooding: that the site meets the requirements for development in
the state's flood hazard zone.
26.Editor's Note: See Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 260-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-71
1:399
§ 260-72. Effect on other laws and regulations.
This article in no way affects the provisions or requirements of any other
federal, state or local law or regulations. Where this article is in conflict
with any other such law or regulation, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 260-73. Court review.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Board with respect to
site plan review may apply to the Supreme Court for review by a proceeding
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Such proceedings shall
be instituted within 30 days after the filing of a decision by such Board in
the office of the Village Clerk.
(10) Solar access: that the applicable codes and laws governing the
installation and operation of solar energy systems and equipment
be met.
(11) Large dish antenna in residential districts. The proposed dish
antenna will have a harmonious relationship with surrounding
property uses and shall be located so as not to diminish the value or
use of surrounding properties. Among other things, the Board of
Trustees shall consider the criteria listed below:
(a) The dish antenna shall be located on the ground and must be
screened from the roadway and adjoining property owners by
foliage of such height and density so as to adequately screen
said satellite antenna from the road and adjoining property
owners during the entire year. The Board may condition any
approval on receipt and approval of a landscaping plan.
(b) The dish antenna shall be located in the rear yard only and
shall be an accessory structure requiring compliance with all
minimum yard requirements as per the Zoning chapter. When a
backyard is not accessible or does not meet building
specifications and a side yard meets the Building Code, a dish
antenna may be located there. If said side yard borders on a
street, a screen of foliage shall be provided to adequately
shield said satellite antenna from the street and adjoining
properties during the entire year.
(c) The dish antenna shall not be connected to or placed upon any
roof, and no part of the antenna shall at any point be elevated
to or reach a height more than 15 feet above the natural grade
of the subject premises. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(d) Each lot may have a maximum number of one dish antenna.
(e) The dish antenna shall not be located on any portable device.
§ 260-71 WALTON CODE § 260-74
1:400
§ 260-74. Referral to adjacent municipalities.
Whenever any part of a proposed development is located within 1,000 feet
of a border of the municipality and if there is in existence a Planning
Board in the adjacent municipality, then the developer must notify that
Planning Board of his plans and submit its written comments as part of
the application for site plan review. This requirement applies only to
commercial and industrial developments and residential developments of
more than 25 units.
§ 260-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-74
1:401

ARTICLE XV
Board of Appeals
§ 260-75. Organization.
§ 260-76. Appeals procedure.
A. A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby created, which shall be organized
by the Village Board of Trustees in accordance with New York State
Village Law § 7-712, as amended from time to time.
B. The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members appointed by the
Mayor subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, each to serve
for a term of five years. Vacancies for the unexpired term of any
member shall be filled for such unexpired period only. The appointment
of members to the Board shall be of terms so fixed that one member's
term shall expire at the end of each Village official year. At the
expiration of each member's appointment, the replacement member
shall be appointed for a term of five years.
C. The Mayor shall appoint the Chairperson, subject to the approval of the
Board of Trustees. In the absence of a Chairperson, the Board of
Appeals may designate a member to serve as Acting Chairperson. All
meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and/or Acting Chairperson and at such other times as a
majority of the Board may determine.
D. Such Chairperson, or, in his absence, the Acting Chairperson, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
E. All meetings of such Board shall be open to the public, and public notice
shall be given of all hearings to be held by the Board of Appeals. Such
notice shall include a brief description of each case and the location of
the property involved. Such notice shall be published in the official
paper of the Village at least 10 days before the date fixed for such
hearing, and notices of such hearing shall be posted in six public places
at least 10 days before the hearing.
F. The Village office shall be the office of the Board, and the Village Clerk-
Treasurer shall be the Clerk of the Board.
G. All records of the Board shall be public records and shall be filed with
the Village Clerk-Treasurer in the Village office. Such Board shall keep
minutes and records of its proceedings showing the vote of each
member on any question.
H. If any member is absent or failed to vote, the minutes shall indicate
such fact.
I. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board shall be
necessary to decide in favor of the applicant any matter that the Board
is required to pass upon under the provisions of this Zoning chapter.
§ 260-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-76
1:403
§ 260-77. Powers.
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
A. Appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved
or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the Village.
B. Such appeal shall be taken within 60 days after any officer or body of
the Village, empowered to administer and enforce this Zoning Law, has
acted or failed to act upon any matter set forth within this chapter, by
filing with the Village Clerk-Treasurer and with the Clerk of the Board
of Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof and the
relief sought. The administrative official from whom the appeal is taken
shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Appeals all papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. [Amended
9-8-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
C. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the
Board of Appeals, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with
him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which
may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by a court of record on
application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and
on due cause shown.
D. The Board of Appeals shall schedule a hearing within 60 days of receipt
of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the applicant at least 14
days before the hearing and shall give public notice of the hearing in
the official newspaper. In addition to the public notice of hearing, the
applicant shall give notice, in writing, by certified mail, at least 10 days
before the public hearing, to all property owners of land adjacent to the
property. Adjacent properties shall be all properties that directly abut
the property on which the variance is being proposed. This includes all
properties directly across a street, watercourse or right-of-way. The
public notice shall be published at least five days before the public
hearing. The Board of Appeals shall make a decision within 62 days
after the final hearing. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by agent or by attorney. The reasons for action taken on the
appeal shall be set forth in writing or in written minutes of the Board of
Appeals. A copy of the decision of the Board of Appeals on the appeal
shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk-Treasurer within five
business days after the day such decision is rendered, and a copy
mailed to the applicant. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
§ 260-76 WALTON CODE § 260-77
1:404
§ 260-78. Findings required for variances. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Board of Appeals may grant use and area variances in accordance with
the provisions of Village Law § 7-712-b.
§ 260-79. Conditions attached to approvals.
Where, in these regulations, the Board is authorized to approve variances
or decide appeals, such approval, decision or authorization shall be limited
by such conditions as the case may require, including the imposition of any
of the following specifications:
administrative official in the administration or enforcement of this
Zoning chapter.
B. To hear and decide on applications for special questions upon which the
Board is specifically authorized to pass under this Zoning chapter.
C. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the
specific terms of this Zoning chapter as will not be contrary to the
public interest, when, owing to special conditions, a strict application of
the provisions of this Zoning chapter will result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties or exceptional and undue hardship,
provided that the spirit of the Zoning chapter shall be observed, public
safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done as hereinafter
provided.
A. No outside sign or advertising structures, except professional or
directional signs.
B. Limitation of signs as to size, type, color, location or illumination.
C. Amount, direction and location of outdoor lighting.
D. Amount and location of off-street parking and loading space.
E. Cleaning or painting.
F. Gable roof or other type.
G. Construction of materials.
H. Connected or disconnected with other buildings.
I. Exits or entrances, doors and windows.
J. Paving, shrubbery, landscaping, ornamental or screening fences, walls
or hedges.
K. Time of day or night for operating.
L. No storefronts.
§ 260-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-79
1:405
§ 260-80. Lapse of variance.
After the Board of Appeals has granted a variance, the variance granted
shall lapse after the expiration of one year if no substantial construction or
change of use has taken place in accordance with the plans for which the
variance was granted, or if the Board does not specify some longer period
than one year for good cause shown, and the provisions of these regulations
shall thereafter govern.
§ 260-81. Amendment of variance.
The procedure for amendment of a variance already approved, or a request
for a change of conditions attached to an approval, shall be the same as
for a new application, except that where the Clerk of the Board determines
the change to be minor relative to the original approval, he may transmit
the same to the Board with the original record without requiring a new
application to be filed.
§ 260-82. Appeals.
Appeals to courts from a decision of the Board may be filed in the manner
prescribed by law.
M. No structural changes.
N. Control or elimination of smoke, dust, gas, noise or vibration caused by
operations.
O. Requirements for termination of a use based on lapse of time or such
other conditions as the Board may specify.
P. Such other conditions as are necessary.
§ 260-79 WALTON CODE § 260-82
1:406
ARTICLE XVI
Amendments; Severability
§ 260-83. Amendments.
All amendments to this Zoning chapter shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the Village Law applicable thereto.
§ 260-84. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be decided by the courts to
be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so decided to
be unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 260-85. When effective.
This Zoning chapter shall take effect immediately, subject to the provisions
of the Village Law.
§ 260-86. Repealer.
Any law of said Village inconsistent with the foregoing is hereby repealed.
§ 260-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-86
1:407

ARTICLE XVII
Conditional Uses
§ 260-87. Administration.
The Village of Walton Board of Trustees is hereby authorized to review and
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove conditional uses. All requests
for a conditional use shall also undergo site plan review by the Village
Planning Board.
§ 260-88. Purpose.
The purpose of the conditional use procedure is to provide for certain uses
that cannot be well adjusted to their environment in particular locations
with full protection offered to surrounding properties by rigid application
of the district regulations. These uses either have unusual character or
are essential and desirable for the general convenience and welfare but,
because of the nature of the use and possible impact, not only on
neighboring properties but on a large section of the municipality, require
the exercise of planning judgment on location and site plan. The Village
Board should approve a conditional use only if it is found that the proposal
meets the standards listed below. Unless otherwise specified as a condition
of approval, the height limits, yard spaces, lot area and sign requirements
shall be the same as for other uses in the district in which the conditional
use is located.
§ 260-89. Standards.
A. The proposed development is compatible with nearby properties and
will not discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent
properties or substantially impair their value.
B. Traffic generated by the proposed development can be adequately and
safely served by the existing and proposed roads. Adequate off-street
parking is required.
C. The proposed development will not adversely affect the community
appearance.
D. The proposed development can be served by necessary community
facilities and will not overtax such facilities. This includes providing
adequate access for emergency vehicles as required by New York State
Village Law § 7-736.
E. Operation of any conditional use shall not be more objectionable to
nearby properties due to dust, odor, noise, fumes, vibration, excessive
lighting, or water pollution than would the operation of any permitted
use.
F. All state environmental quality review requirements have been met.
§ 260-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-89
1:409
§ 260-90. Procedure.
§ 260-91. Conditions.
The Village Board, in granting conditional uses, may impose such
conditions, safeguards and restrictions upon the proposed development as
may be deemed necessary in the public interest to secure compliance with
the provisions of the Zoning chapter. Conditions may include, but are not
limited to, the following:
G. No conditional use permit shall be issued for a property where there is
a violation of this Zoning chapter or other Village law or regulation.
H. The proposed development will conform to the provisions of the local
laws of the Village, the Village Law of New York State, and all
applicable rules and regulations of state and federal agencies and the
current New York State Building Code.
A. Upon receipt by the Board of Trustees of an application for a
conditional use, it shall be immediately referred to the Planning Board
for site plan review. Upon completion of the site plan review by the
Planning Board, the decision shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
B. The Village Board shall conduct a public hearing within 62 days from
the date an application is received. Public notice of said hearing shall
be printed in the official newspaper at least five days before the date
thereof. Notice of said hearing shall be mailed to the applicant at least
14 days prior to the hearing, and the applicant shall give notice, in
writing, by certified mail, within 10 days of the public hearing, to all
property owners of land adjacent to the property. Adjacent properties
shall be all properties that directly abut the property on which the
action for site plan review is being proposed. This includes all
properties directly across a street, watercourse or right-of-way.
C. The Village Board shall decide upon the application within 62 days after
the hearing. The time within which the Village Board must render its
decision may be extended by written consent of the applicant and the
Board. The decision of the Village Board on the application after the
holding of a public hearing shall be filed in the office of the Village
Clerk-Treasurer within five business days after such decision is
rendered and a copy mailed to the applicant.
A. The hours of operation.
B. Access to the subject property.
C. Protection of surface water and groundwater.
D. Lighting of the site, to include intensity and shield, so as not to
adversely affect adjacent or nearby property owners.
E. Adequate sewage disposal and water supplies.
§ 260-89 WALTON CODE § 260-91
1:410
§ 260-92. Period of validity.
Approval of a conditional use under this article shall be valid for a period
of one year after the date of approval and thereafter shall become null and
void unless construction or use is substantially under way, as determined by
the Code Enforcement Official, during said one year, or unless an extension
of time, not exceeding one year, is approved by the Village Board, and for
good cause shown, before the expiration of said one-year period.
F. Sound limitations as needed to ensure peaceful enjoyment of neighbors.
G. The location, size, height, design of building(s), walls, fences,
landscaping and buffer yards.
H. Covenants, easements and/or homeowners' association for
maintenance of applicable restrictions.
I. Timing or phasing of the development.
J. Underground utilities.
K. Control of dust, smoke, odor and soil erosion.
L. Bonding as required to ensure that standards are met and plans are
implemented.
§ 260-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-92
1:411

ARTICLE XVIII
Planning Board
§ 260-93. Organization.
A. A Planning Board is hereby created, which shall be organized by the
Village Board of Trustees in accordance with New York State Village
Law § 7-718, as amended from time to time.
B. The Planning Board shall consist of five members appointed by the
Mayor subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, each to serve
for a term of five years. Vacancies for the unexpired term of any
member shall be filled for such unexpired period only. The appointment
of members to the Board shall be of terms so fixed that one member's
term shall expire at the end of each Village official year. At the
expiration of each member's appointment, the replacement member
shall be appointed for a term of five years.
C. The Mayor shall appoint a Chairperson, subject to the approval of the
Board of Trustees. In the absence of a Chairperson, the Planning Board
may designate a member to serve as Acting Chairperson. All meetings
of the Planning Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and/or
Acting Chairperson and at such other times as a majority of the Board
may determine.
D. Such Chairperson, or, in his absence, the Acting Chairperson, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
E. The Village office shall be the office of the Planning Board, and the
Deputy Village Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Planning Board.
F. All records of the Planning Board shall be public records and shall be
filed with the Village Clerk in the Village office. Such Board shall keep
minutes and records of its proceedings showing the vote of each
member in any question.
G. The Planning Board shall have such jurisdiction as is provided under
New York State Village Law Article 7 and over such subjects as may be
determined by the Village Board of Trustees by local law or by
resolution.
§ 260-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-93
1:413
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1973 Code to 2019 Code.
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1973 Code Location in 2019 Code
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Art. I, Adoption of Code NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. I
Ch. 4, Administration REP
Ch. 5, Alcoholic Beverages
Art. I, Consumption in Public; Open
Containers
Ch. Ch. 73, Art. I
Ch. 6, Animals at Large Ch. 80, Art. I
Ch. 7, Assessment Ch. 15, Art. I
Ch. 8, Bicycles REP
Ch. 10, Bingo Ch. 94
Ch. 12, Buildings, Unsafe and Collapsed
Structures
Ch. 103
Ch. 14, Code of Ethics Ch. 24
Ch. 15, Claims Against Village Ch. 110
Ch. 17, Dogs REP
Ch. 18, Domesticated Fowl Ch. 80, Art. II
Ch. 18A, Employee Residency Requirements
Art. I, Deputy Clerk Ch. 59, Art. I
Ch. 19, Environmental Quality Review REP
Ch. 20, Excavations Ch. 131
Ch. 21, Explosives REP
Ch. 22, Fire and Building Code Administration
and Enforcement
Ch. 117
Ch. 24, Fireworks and Firearms Ch. 144
Ch. 25, Flood Damage Prevention Ch. 151
§ 260-93 WALTON CODE § DT-1
1:414
Chapter/Title From 1973 Code Location in 2019 Code
Ch. 26, Games of Chance Ch. 158
Ch. 27, Hawkers, Peddlers and Auctioneers Ch. 165
Ch. 35, Littering and Disposal of Refuse Ch. 206, Art. I
Ch. 36, Local Laws, Adoption of REP
Ch. 38, Ordinances, Adoption of REP
Ch. 39, Peace and Good Order
Art. I, Disturbing Meetings; Congregating;
Profane Language
Ch. 176, Art. I
Art. II, Public Intoxication, Prostitution and
Vagrancy
Ch. 176, Art. II
Art. III, Houses of Ill Fame; Nudity;
Gambling Houses
Ch. 176, Art. III
Art. IV, Disorderly Conduct Ch. 176, Art. IV
Ch. 39A, Police Department
Art. I, Reimbursement of Criminal Defense
Costs
REP
Ch. 40, Public Records, Access to Ch. 52, Art. I
Ch. 40A, Records Management Ch. 52, Art. II
Ch. 40B, Rental Property and Agent
Registration
Ch. 185, Art. I
Ch. 41, Sewers Ch. 192
Ch. 42, Slaughterhouses REP
Ch. 43, Streets and Sidewalks
Art. I, Use Regulations Ch. 213, Art. I
Art. II, Signs and Awnings REP
Art. III, Laying Out Streets Ch. 213, Art. III
Ch. 44, Subdivision of Land Ch. 220
Ch. 45A, Tax Exemption for Disabled Persons
With Limited Income
Ch. 228, Art. IV
Ch. 46, Tax Exemption for Senior Citizens Ch. 228, Art. II
Ch. 46A, Taxation: Alternative Veterans
Exemption
Ch. 228, Art. III
Ch. 46AA, Tax Exemption for Cold War
Veterans
Ch. 228, Art. V
Ch. 46B, Taxicabs Ch. 234
Ch. 47, Tax on Utilities Ch. 228, Art. I
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:415
Chapter/Title From 1973 Code Location in 2019 Code
Ch. 49, Vehicle and Traffic Ch. 245
Ch. 51, Water Ch. 252, Art. I
Ch. 52, Water Cross Connections and
Backflow Protection
Ch. 252, Art. II
Ch. 53, Zoning Ch. 260
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2005 2-7-2005 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 245
1-2006 2-6-2006 Control of Dogs REP
2-2006 2-6-2006 Dangerous Dogs REP
3-2006 2-6-2006 Games of Chance Ch. 158
4-2006 4-3-2006 Zoning Ch. 260
5-2006 6-5-2006 Zoning Ch. 260
6-2006 8-7-2006 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 245
1-2007 4-2-2007 Construction Codes,
Uniform
Ch. 117
2-2007 5-7-2007 Water Amendment Ch. 252, Art. I
3-2007 8-6-2007 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 245
4-2007 10-1-2007 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 245
5-2007 10-1-2007 Fire Wardens Repealer Repealer only
6-2007 10-1-2007 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260
7-2007 11-5-2007 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260
8-2007 11-5-2007 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260
1-2008 6-2-2008 Tax Exemption for
Cold War Veterans
Ch. 228, Art. V
2-2008 7-7-2008 Sewers Amendment Ch. 192
§ DT-1 WALTON CODE § DL-1
1:416
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-2008 7-7-2008 Water Amendment Ch. 252, Art. I
4-2008 9-8-2008 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260
5-2008 9-8-2008 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 245
1-2009 2-2-2009 Repeal of Officers and
Employees Residency
Requirements,
Unnecessary Noise,
and Sunday Games
and Movies; Access to
Public Records
Amendment; Streets
and Sidewalks Use
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 52, Art. I; Ch.
213, Art. I
2-2009 4-6-2009 Claims Against Village Ch. 110
3-2009 6-1-2009 Construction Codes,
Uniform Amendment
Ch. 117
4-2009 6-1-2009 Streets and Sidewalks
Use Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 213, Art. I
5-2009 6-1-2009 Water Amendment Ch. 252, Art. I
6-2009 7-6-2009 Buildings, Unsafe
Amendment
Ch. 103
1-2010 4-5-2010 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 245
2-2010 7-12-2010 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260
1-2012 3-14-2012 Tax Levy Limit
Override 2012
NCM
2-2012 3-14-2012 Flood Damage
Prevention
Ch. 151
1-2013 4-23-2013 Tax Levy Limit
Override 2013
NCM
2-2013 7-1-2013 Animals: Domesticated
Fowl
Ch. 80, Art. II
3-2013 8-5-2013 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 245
4-2013 8-5-2013 Residency
Requirements: Deputy
Clerk
Ch. 59, Art. I
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:417
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-2013 9-9-2013 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 245
1-2014 3-3-2014 Rental property and
agent registration
Ch. 185, Art. I
2-2014 4-23-2014 Tax Levy Limit
Override 2014
NCM
3-2014 6-2-2014 Water: Water Use
Amendment
Ch. 252, Art. I
4-2014 6-2-2014 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 245
5-2014 6-2-2014 Sewers Amendment Ch. 192
6-2014 8-4-2014 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 245
1-2015 4-20-2015 Sewers Amendment Ch. 192
1-2016 5-2-2016 Flood Damage
Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 151
2-2016 5-2-2016 Zoning Amendment Ch. 260
1-2017 3-6-2017 Taxation: Tax
Delinquency
Enforcement
Ch. 228, Art. VI
2-2017 3-6-2017 Solid Waste: Littering
and Disposal of Refuse
Amendment
Ch. 206, Art. I
3-2017 9-11-2017 Water: Water Use
Amendment
Ch. 252, Art. I
4-2017 9-11-2017 Sewers Amendment Ch. 192
1-2018 6-4-2018 Construction Codes,
Uniform Amendment
Ch. 117
2-2018 7-9-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
3-2018 9-4-2018 Terms of Office:
Village Clerk-
Treasurer and Deputy
Clerk
Ch. 61, Art. I
1-2019 3-20-2019 Sewers Amendment Ch. 192
2-2019 3-29-2019 Tax Levy Limit
Override
NCM
§ DL-1 WALTON CODE § DL-1
1:418
Local Law
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-2019 6-3-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 245
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
4-2019 11-4-2019 Community Choice
Aggregation
Program
Ch. 115 2
1-2020 1-6-2020 General Provisions:
Adoption of Code
Ch. 1, Art. I 1
2-2020 3-3-2020 Water: Water Use
Amendment
Ch. 252, Art. I 2
3-2020 3-30-2020 Tax Levy Limit
Override
NCM 2
4-2020 4-6-2020 Water: Water Use
Amendment
Ch. 252, Art. I 2
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:419